
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 24;17(4). pii: E440. doi: 10.3390/ijms17040440.

Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Myelodysplastic Syndrome: Implications on
Targeted Therapy.

Gill H(1), Leung AY(2), Kwong YL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China. gillhsh@hku.hk.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
ayhleung@hku.hk. (3)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong,
China. ylkwong@hkucc.hku.hk.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a group of heterogeneous clonal hematopoietic
stem cell disorders characterized by cytopenia, ineffective hematopoiesis, and
progression to secondary acute myeloid leukemia in high-risk cases. Conventional 
prognostication relies on clinicopathological parameters supplemented by
cytogenetic information. However, recent studies have shown that genetic
aberrations also have critical impacts on treatment outcome. Moreover, these
genetic alterations may themselves be a target for treatment. The mutation
landscape in MDS is shaped by gene aberrations involved in DNA methylation (TET2,
DNMT3A, IDH1/2), histone modification (ASXL1, EZH2), the RNA splicing machinery
(SF3B1, SRSF2, ZRSR2, U2AF1/2), transcription (RUNX1, TP53, BCOR, PHF6, NCOR,
CEBPA, GATA2), tyrosine kinase receptor signaling (JAK2, MPL, FLT3, GNAS, KIT),
RAS pathways (KRAS, NRAS, CBL, NF1, PTPN11), DNA repair (ATM, BRCC3, DLRE1C,
FANCL), and cohesion complexes (STAG2, CTCF, SMC1A, RAD21). A detailed
understanding of the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to transformation is
critical for designing single-agent or combinatorial approaches in target therapy
of MDS.

PMID: 27023522  [PubMed - in process]


2. PeerJ. 2016 Mar 21;4:e1790. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1790. eCollection 2016.

Origin and evolution of GATA2a and GATA2b in teleosts: insights from tongue sole,
Cynoglossus semilaevis.

Liu J(1), Jiang J(1), Wang Z(1), He Y(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education, Ocean
University of China , Qingdao , China.

Background. Following the two rounds of whole-genome duplication that occurred
during deuterostome evolution, a third genome duplication occurred in the lineage
of teleost fish and is considered to be responsible for much of the biological
diversification within the lineage. GATA2, a member of GATA family of
transcription factors, is an important regulator of gene expression in
hematopoietic cell in mammals, yet the role of this gene or its putative paralogs
in ray-finned fishes remains relatively unknown. Methods. In this study, we
attempted to identify GATA2 sequences from the transcriptomes and genomes of
multiple teleosts using the bioinformatic tools MrBayes, MEME, and PAML.
Following identification, comparative analysis of genome structure, molecular
evolution rate, and expression by real-time qPCR were used to predict functional 
divergence of GATA2 paralogs and their relative transcription in organs of female
and male tongue soles (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Results. Two teleost GATA2 genes 
were identified in the transcriptomes of tongue sole and Japanese flounder
(Paralichthysolivaceus). Synteny and phylogenetic analysis confirmed that the two
genes likely originated from the teleost-specific genome duplication .
Additionally, selection pressure analysis predicted these gene duplicates to have
undergone purifying selection and possible divergent new functions. This was
supported by differential expression pattern of GATA2a and GATA2b observed in
organs of female and male tongue soles. Discussion. Our results indicate that two
GATA2 genes originating from the first teleost-specific genome duplication have
remained transcriptionally active in some fish species and have likely undergone 
neofunctionalization. This knowledge provides novel insights into the evolution
of the teleost GATA2 genes and constituted important groundwork for further
research on the GATA gene family.

PMCID: PMC4806627
PMID: 27019782  [PubMed]


3. Haematologica. 2016 Mar 24. pii: haematol.2015.137711. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of B cells and their precursors is the most constant feature of GATA-2
deficiency in childhood myelodysplastic syndrome.

Novakova M(1), Zaliova M(1), Sukova M(2), Wlodarski M(3), Janda A(3), Fronkova
E(1), Campr V(4), Lejhancova K(5), Zapletal O(6), Pospisilova D(7), Cerna Z(8),
Kuhn T(9), Svec P(10), Pelkova V(1), Zemanova Z(11), Kerndrup G(12), van den
Heuvel-Eibrink M(13), van der Velden V(14), Niemeyer C(3), Kalina T(1), Trka
J(1), Stary J(2), Hrusak O(1), Mejstrikova E(15).

Author information: 
(1)CLIP-Dept.of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, 2nd Fac.of Medicine, Prague;
(2)Dept.of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,University 
Hospital Motol, Prague; (3)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
University Medical Center, Freiburg; (4)Department of Pathology and Molecular
Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague; (5)Department of Pediatrics, Charles
University, University Hospital Hradec Kralove; (6)Department of Paediatric
Haematology, Children's University Hospital, Brno; (7)Department of Pediatrics,
Palacky University and University Hospital Olomouc; (8)Department of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital Pilsen; (9)Department of Pediatrics Ostrava, University
Hospital Ostrava; (10)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University
Hospital Bratislava; (11)Centre of Oncocytogenetics, Inst.of Clin.Biochemistry
and Lab.Diagnostics,1st Fac.of Medicine,Prague; (12)Department of Pathology,
Aarhus University Hospital; (13)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Princess Maxima
Centre for Paediatric Oncology, Utrecht; (14)Department of Immunology, Erasmus
MC, Rotterdam. (15)CLIP-Dept.of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, 2nd Fac.of
Medicine, Prague; ester.mejstrikova@lfmotol.cuni.cz.

GATA-2 deficiency was recently described as common cause of overlapping syndromes
of immunodeficiency, lymphedema, familiar myelodysplastic syndrome or acute
myeloid leukemia. The aim of our study was to analyze bone marrow and peripheral 
blood samples of children with myelodysplastic syndrome or aplastic anemia to
define prevalence of GATA2 mutation and to assess whether mutation in GATA-2
transcription factor exhibit specific immunophenotypic features. The prevalence
of a GATA2 mutation in a consecutively diagnosed cohort of children was 14% in
advanced forms of myelodysplastic syndrome (refractory anemia with excess blasts,
refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation and myelodysplasia-related
acute myeloid leukemia), 17% in refractory cytopenia of childhood and 0% in
aplastic anemia. In GATA-2-deficient cases we found the most profound B cell
lymphopenia including its progenitors in blood and bone marrow, which correlated 
with significantly diminished intronRSS-Kde recombination excision circles in
comparison to other myelodysplastic syndrome/aplastic anemia cases. The other
typical features of GATA-2 deficiency (monocytopenia and natural killer cell
lymphopenia) were less discriminative. In conclusion, we suggest screening for
GATA2 mutations in pediatric myelodysplastic syndrome, preferentially in patients
with impaired B cell homeostasis in bone marrow and peripheral blood (low number 
of progenitors, intronRSS-Kde recombination excision circles and naive cells).

Copyright © 2016, Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMID: 27013649  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1518. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-695775.

GATA2-related MDS.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 26989191  [PubMed - in process]


5. Allergol Int. 2016 Apr;65(2):127-134. doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2016.01.006. Epub 2016 
Mar 10.

Regulation of basophil and mast cell development by transcription factors.

Sasaki H(1), Kurotaki D(1), Tamura T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. (2)Department of Immunology, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address:
tamurat@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Basophils and mast cells play important roles in host defense against parasitic
infections and allergic responses. Several progenitor populations, either shared 
or specific, for basophils and/or mast cells have been identified, thus
elucidating the developmental pathways of these cells. Multiple transcription
factors essential for their development and the relationships between them have
been also revealed. For example, IRF8 induces GATA2 expression to promote the
generation of both basophils and mast cells. The STAT5-GATA2 axis induces C/EBPa 
and MITF expression, facilitating the differentiation into basophils and mast
cells, respectively. In addition, C/EBPa and MITF mutually suppress each other's 
expression. This review provides an overview of recent advances in our
understanding of how transcription factors regulate the development of basophils 
and mast cells.

Copyright © 2016 Japanese Society of Allergology. Production and hosting by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26972050  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150809.
eCollection 2016.

In Vivo Deletion of the Cebpa +37 kb Enhancer Markedly Reduces Cebpa mRNA in
Myeloid Progenitors but Not in Non-Hematopoietic Tissues to Impair
Granulopoiesis.

Guo H(1), Cooper S(1), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

The murine Cebpa gene contains a +37 kb, evolutionarily conserved 440 bp enhancer
that directs high-level expression to myeloid progenitors in transgenic mice. The
enhancer is bound and activated by Runx1, Scl, GATA2, C/EBPa, c-Myb, Pu.1, and
additional Ets factors in myeloid cells. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated replacement of the 
wild-type enhancer with a variant mutant in its seven Ets sites leads to 20-fold 
reduction of Cebpa mRNA in the 32Dcl3 myeloid cell line. To determine the effect 
of deleting the enhancer in vivo, we now characterize C57BL/6 mice in which loxP 
sites flank a 688 bp DNA segment containing the enhancer. CMV-Cre mediated
germline deletion resulted in diminution of the expected number of viable
Enh(f/f);CMV-Cre offspring, with 28-fold reduction in marrow Cebpa mRNA but
normal levels in liver, lung, adipose, intestine, muscle, and kidney.
Cre-transduction of lineage-negative marrow cells in vitro reduced Cebpa mRNA
12-fold, with impairment of granulocytic maturation, morphologic blast
accumulation, and IL-3 dependent myeloid colony replating for >12 generations.
Exposure of Enh(f/f);Mx1-Cre mice to pIpC led to 14-fold reduction of Cebpa mRNA 
in GMP or CMP, 30-fold reduction in LSK, and <2-fold reduction in the LSK/SLAM
subset. FACS analysis of marrow from these mice revealed 10-fold reduced
neutrophils, 3-fold decreased GMP, and 3-fold increased LSK cells. Progenitor
cell cycle progression was mildly impaired. Granulocyte and B lymphoid colony
forming units were reduced while monocytic and erythroid colonies were increased,
with reduced Pu.1 and Gfi1 and increased Egr1 and Klf4 in GMP. Finally,
competitive transplantation indicated preservation of functional long-term
hematopoietic stem cells upon enhancer deletion and confirmed marrow-intrinsic
impairment of granulopoiesis and B cell generation with LSK and monocyte lineage 
expansion. These findings demonstrate a critical role for the +37 kb Cebpa
enhancer for hematopoietic-specific Cebpa expression, with enhancer deletion
leading to impaired myelopoiesis and potentially preleukemic progenitor
expansion.

PMCID: PMC4777376
PMID: 26937964  [PubMed - in process]


7. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):368-82. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.008.
Epub 2016 Feb 18.

GATA Factor-G-Protein-Coupled Receptor Circuit Suppresses Hematopoiesis.

Gao X(1), Wu T(1), Johnson KD(1), Lahvic JL(2), Ranheim EA(3), Zon LI(2),
Bresnick EH(4).

Author information: 
(1)UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (2)Stem Cell Program and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Department, Harvard University, Boston, MA
02114, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (4)UW-Madison Blood Research 
Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA. Electronic address: ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) originate from hemogenic endothelium within the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region of the mammalian embryo. The relationship
between genetic circuits controlling stem cell genesis and multi-potency is not
understood. A Gata2 cis element (+9.5) enhances Gata2 expression in the AGM and
induces the endothelial to HSC transition. We demonstrated that GATA-2 rescued
hematopoiesis in +9.5(-/-) AGMs. As G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the
most common targets for FDA-approved drugs, we analyzed the GPCR gene ensemble to
identify GATA-2-regulated GPCRs. Of the 20 GATA-2-activated GPCR genes, four
were GATA-1-activated, and only Gpr65 expression resembled Gata2. Contrasting
with the paradigm in which GATA-2-activated genes promote hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cell genesis/function, our mouse and zebrafish studies indicated that 
GPR65 suppressed hematopoiesis. GPR65 established repressive chromatin at
the +9.5 site, restricted occupancy by the activator Scl/TAL1, and repressed
Gata2 transcription. Thus, a Gata2 cis element creates a GATA-2-GPCR circuit that
limits positive regulators that promote hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788764
PMID: 26905203  [PubMed - in process]


8. Phytomedicine. 2016 Jan 15;23(1):58-67. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.12.004. Epub
2015 Dec 21.

Cryptotanshinone, a compound of Salvia miltiorrhiza inhibits pre-adipocytes
differentiation by regulation of adipogenesis-related genes expression via STAT3 
signaling.

Rahman N(1), Jeon M(1), Song HY(1), Kim YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University,
Cheonan, Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang
University, Cheonan, Korea; Institute of Tissue Engineering, College of Medicine,
Soonchunhyang University, Cheonan, Korea. Electronic address:
yongsikkim@sch.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Cryptotanshinone (CT), a major tanshinone found in Salvia
miltiorrhiza Bunge (Lamiaceae), has various pharmacological effects such as
antitumor, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant properties. Despite its
well-documented benefits in a wide range of diseases, the effect of CT on
adipocyte differentiation has not been well characterized.
PURPOSE: The present study was designed to determine the in vitro anti-adipogenic
effect and underlying molecular mechanisms of CT using 3T3-L1 murine
pre-adipocytes.
METHODS: We measured the levels of intracellular triglyceride accumulation and
mRNA and protein expression of key adipogenic transcription factors and their
target genes.
RESULTS: Treatment with CT drastically reduced lipid accumulation in a dose- and 
time-dependent manner. Molecular assays showed that CT effectively suppressed the
expression of C/EBPß, C/EBPa, and PPAR<U+03B3> and of their target adipocyte-specific
genes aP2, adiponectin, and GLUT4 but activated the expression of anti-adipogenic
genes such as GATA2, CHOP10, and TNF-a. CT treatment also inhibited the
phosphorylation of STAT3 in the early phase of adipogenesis. A
small-interfering-RNA-mediated knock-down of STAT3 potentiated the
anti-adipogenic effect of CT.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the results suggest that CT may be a good
anti-adipogenic candidate because it regulates STAT3 during early adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26902408  [PubMed - in process]


9. Orv Hetil. 2016 Feb 21;157(8):283-9. doi: 10.1556/650.2016.30375.

[Clinical and genetic background of familial myelodysplasia and acute myeloid
leukemia].

[Article in Hungarian]

Király PA(1), Kállay K(2), Marosvári D(1), Benyó G(2), Szoke A(3), Csomor J(1),
Bödör C(1).

Author information: 
(1)MTA-SE Lendület Molekuláris Onkohematológia Munkacsoport, Semmelweis Egyetem, 
I. Patológiai és Kísérleti Rákkutató Intézet Budapest, Ülloi út 26., 1085.
(2)Gyermekhematológiai és Ossejttranszplantációs Osztály, Egyesített Szent István
és Szent László Kórház Budapest. (3)Belgyógyászati Klinika, Szegedi
Tudományegyetem, Általános Orvostudományi Kar Szeged.

Myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukaemia are mainly sporadic
diseases, however, rare familial cases exist. These disorders are considered
rare, but are likely to be more common than currently appreciated, and are
characterized by the autosomal dominant mutations of hematopoietic transcription 
factors. These syndromes have typical phenotypic features and are associated with
an increased risk for developing overt malignancy. Currently, four recognized
syndromes could be separated: familial acute myeloid leukemia with mutated CEBPA,
familial myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia with mutated GATA2,
familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy with RUNX1
mutations, and telomere biology disorders due to mutations of TERC or TERT.
Furthermore, there are new, emerging syndromes associated with germline mutations
in novel genes including ANKRD26, ETV6, SRP72 or DDX41. This review will discuss 
the current understanding of the genetic basis and clinical presentation of
familial leukemia and myelodysplasia.

PMID: 26876264  [PubMed - in process]


10. Exp Hematol. 2016 Feb 10. pii: S0301-472X(16)00040-0. doi:
10.1016/j.exphem.2016.02.001. [Epub ahead of print]

A network including TGFß/Smad4, Gata2, and p57 regulates proliferation of mouse
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Billing M(1), Rörby E(1), May G(2), Tipping AJ(2), Soneji S(3), Brown J(2),
Salminen M(4), Karlsson G(5), Enver T(2), Karlsson S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Stem Cell Group, University College London Cancer
Institute, London, United Kingdom. (3)Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund Stem
Cell Center, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (4)Department of Veterinary
Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Division of Molecular 
Hematology, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Electronic
address: Goran.Karlsson@med.lu.se.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) is a potent inhibitor of hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cell proliferation. However, the precise mechanism for this effect
is unknown. Here, we have identified the transcription factor Gata2, previously
described as an important regulator of hematopoietic stem cell function, as an
early and direct target gene for TGFß-induced Smad signaling in hematopoietic
progenitor cells. We also report that Gata2 is involved in mediating a
significant part of the TGFß response in primitive hematopoietic cells.
Interestingly, the cell cycle regulator and TGFß signaling effector molecule p57 
was found to be upregulated as a secondary response to TGFß. We observed Gata2
binding upstream of the p57 genomic locus, and importantly, loss of Gata2
abolished TGFß-stimulated induction of p57 as well as the resulting growth arrest
of hematopoietic progenitors. Our results connect key molecules involved in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and reveal a functionally relevant network, 
regulating proliferation of primitive hematopoietic cells.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Biomicrofluidics. 2016 Jan 13;10(1):014106. doi: 10.1063/1.4940041. eCollection
2016.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells derived endothelial cells mimicking vascular
inflammatory response under flow.

Wang L, Xiang M(1), Liu Y(1), Sun N(1), Lu M(1), Shi Y(2), Wang X(1), Meng D(1), 
Chen S(1), Qin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fudan University , Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.
(2)Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Dalian
116023, People's Republic of China.

Endothelial cells (ECs) have great potential in vascular diseases research and
regenerative medicine. Autologous human ECs are difficult to acquire in
sufficient numbers in vitro, and human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
offer unique opportunity to generate ECs for these purposes. In this work, we
present a new and efficient method to simply differentiate human iPSCs into
functional ECs, which can respond to physiological level of flow and inflammatory
stimulation on a fabricated microdevice. The endothelial-like cells were
differentiated from human iPSCs within only one week, according to the inducing
development principle. The expression of endothelial progenitor and endothelial
marker genes (GATA2, RUNX1, CD34, and CD31) increased on the second and fourth
days after the initial inducing process. The differentiated ECs exhibited strong 
expression of cells-specific markers (CD31 and von Willebrand factor antibody),
similar to that present in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. In addition,
the hiPSC derived ECs were able to form tubular structure and respond to
vascular-like flow generated on a microdevice. Furthermore, the human induced
pluripotent stem cell-endothelial cells (hiPSC-ECs) pretreated with tumor
necrosis factor (TNF-a) were susceptible to adhesion to human monocyte line U937 
under flow condition, indicating the feasibility of this hiPSCs derived
microsystem for mimicking the inflammatory response of endothelial cells under
physiological and pathological process.

PMCID: PMC4714980 [Available on 2017-01-13]
PMID: 26858818  [PubMed]


12. Genomics. 2016 Apr;107(4):155-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.02.001. Epub 2016 Feb
2.

Transcription factor gene GATA2: Association of leukemia and nonsynonymous to the
synonymous substitution rate across five mammals.

Mazumder TH(1), Uddin A(1), Chakraborty S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Assam University, Silchar 788011, Assam, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Assam University, Silchar 788011, Assam, India.
Electronic address: supriyoch_2008@rediffmail.com.

GATA2 gene encodes a member of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcription
factors that play a pivotal role during the transition of primitive blood forming
cells into white blood cells. Mutation in GATA2 results in the loss of function
or even gain of function, including abnormal proliferation of white blood cells
that may predispose to acute myeloid leukemia. Our results showed that the codon 
usage in GATA2 has been influenced by GC mutation bias where nature has highly
favored fourteen most over represented codons but disfavored the ATA codon across
five mammals. Purifying natural selection has affected GATA2 gene in human and
other mammals to maintain its protein function during the period of evolution.
Our findings report an insight into the codon usage patterns in gaining the clues
for codon optimization to alter the translational efficiency as well as for the
functional conservation of gene expression and the significance of nucleotide
composition in GATA2 gene within mammals.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850985  [PubMed - in process]


13. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):880-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.129254. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

The late and dual origin of cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons in the mouse
spinal cord.

Petracca YL(1), Sartoretti MM(1), Di Bella DJ(1), Marin-Burgin A(2), Carcagno
AL(1), Schinder AF(2), Lanuza GM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Lab, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias
Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina. (2)Neuronal Plasticity Lab,
Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina. 
(3)Developmental Neurobiology Lab, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias
Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina GLanuza@Leloir.org.ar.

Considerable progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms that control 
the production of specialized neuronal types. However, how the timing of
differentiation contributes to neuronal diversity in the developing spinal cord
is still a pending question. In this study, we show that cerebrospinal
fluid-contacting neurons (CSF-cNs), an anatomically discrete cell type of the
ependymal area, originate from surprisingly late neurogenic events in the ventral
spinal cord. CSF-cNs are identified by the expression of the transcription
factors Gata2 and Gata3, and the ionic channels Pkd2l1 and Pkd1l2. Contrasting
with Gata2/3(+) V2b interneurons, differentiation of CSF-cNs is independent of
Foxn4 and takes place during advanced developmental stages previously assumed to 
be exclusively gliogenic. CSF-cNs are produced from two distinct dorsoventral
regions of the mouse spinal cord. Most CSF-cNs derive from progenitors
circumscribed to the late-p2 and the oligodendrogenic (pOL) domains, whereas a
second subset of CSF-cNs arises from cells bordering the floor plate. The
development of these two subgroups of CSF-cNs is differentially controlled by
Pax6, they adopt separate locations around the postnatal central canal and they
display electrophysiological differences. Our results highlight that
spatiotemporal mechanisms are instrumental in creating neural cell diversity in
the ventral spinal cord to produce distinct classes of interneurons, motoneurons,
CSF-cNs, glial cells and ependymal cells.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26839365  [PubMed - in process]


14. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1426-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-10-673749. Epub 2016 
Feb 1.

Functional and molecular characterization of mouse Gata2-independent
hematopoietic progenitors.

Kaimakis P(1), de Pater E(2), Eich C(1), Solaimani Kartalaei P(1), Kauts ML(3),
Vink CS(3), van der Linden R(1), Jaegle M(1), Yokomizo T(1), Meijer D(4),
Dzierzak E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus Medical Center Stem Cell Institute, Departments of Cell Biology and
Genetics, and. (2)Erasmus Medical Center Stem Cell Institute, Departments of Cell
Biology and Genetics, and Department of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; and. (3)Erasmus Medical Center Stem Cell Institute,
Departments of Cell Biology and Genetics, and Centre for Inflammation Research,
Queens Medical Research Institute, and. (4)Erasmus Medical Center Stem Cell
Institute, Departments of Cell Biology and Genetics, and Centre for
NeuroRegeneration, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The Gata2 transcription factor is a pivotal regulator of hematopoietic cell
development and maintenance, highlighted by the fact that Gata2
haploinsufficiency has been identified as the cause of some familial cases of
acute myelogenous leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome and in MonoMac syndrome.
Genetic deletion in mice has shown that Gata2 is pivotal to the embryonic
generation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor cells 
(HPCs). It functions in the embryo during endothelial cell to hematopoietic cell 
transition to affect hematopoietic cluster, HPC, and HSC formation. Gata2
conditional deletion and overexpression studies show the importance of Gata2
levels in hematopoiesis, during all developmental stages. Although previous
studies of cell populations phenotypically enriched in HPCs and HSCs show
expression of Gata2, there has been no direct study of Gata2 expressing cells
during normal hematopoiesis. In this study, we generate a Gata2Venus reporter
mouse model with unperturbed Gata2 expression to examine the hematopoietic
function and transcriptome of Gata2 expressing and nonexpressing cells. We show
that all the HSCs are Gata2 expressing. However, not all HPCs in the aorta,
vitelline and umbilical arteries, and fetal liver require or express Gata2. These
Gata2-independent HPCs exhibit a different functional output and genetic program,
including Ras and cyclic AMP response element-binding protein pathways and other 
Gata factors, compared with Gata2-dependent HPCs. Our results, indicating that
Gata2 is of major importance in programming toward HSC fate but not in all cells 
with HPC fate, have implications for current reprogramming strategies.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4797020 [Available on 2017-03-17]
PMID: 26834239  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS Genet. 2016 Jan 28;12(1):e1005802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005802.
eCollection 2016.

Functional Investigation of a Non-coding Variant Associated with Adolescent
Idiopathic Scoliosis in Zebrafish: Elevated Expression of the Ladybird Homeobox
Gene Causes Body Axis Deformation.

Guo L(1), Yamashita H(2), Kou I(3), Takimoto A(1), Meguro-Horike M(4), Horike
S(4), Sakuma T(5), Miura S(1), Adachi T(6), Yamamoto T(5), Ikegawa S(3), Hiraki
Y(1), Shukunami C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and 
Biochemistry, Division of Basic Life Sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Bone and
Joint Diseases, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Functional Genomics, Advanced Science Research Center, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan. (5)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima,
Japan. (6)Department of Biomechanics, Research Center for Nano Medical
Engineering, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

Previously, we identified an adolescent idiopathic scoliosis susceptibility locus
near human ladybird homeobox 1 (LBX1) and FLJ41350 by a genome-wide association
study. Here, we characterized the associated non-coding variant and investigated 
the function of these genes. A chromosome conformation capture assay revealed
that the genome region with the most significantly associated single nucleotide
polymorphism (rs11190870) physically interacted with the promoter region of
LBX1-FLJ41350. The promoter in the direction of LBX1, combined with a 590-bp
region including rs11190870, had higher transcriptional activity with the risk
allele than that with the non-risk allele in HEK 293T cells. The ubiquitous
overexpression of human LBX1 or either of the zebrafish lbx genes (lbx1a, lbx1b, 
and lbx2), but not FLJ41350, in zebrafish embryos caused body curvature followed 
by death prior to vertebral column formation. Such body axis deformation was not 
observed in transcription activator-like effector nucleases mediated knockout
zebrafish of lbx1b or lbx2. Mosaic expression of lbx1b driven by the GATA2
minimal promoter and the lbx1b enhancer in zebrafish significantly alleviated the
embryonic lethal phenotype to allow observation of the later onset of the spinal 
curvature with or without vertebral malformation. Deformation of the embryonic
body axis by lbx1b overexpression was associated with defects in convergent
extension, which is a component of the main axis-elongation machinery in
gastrulating embryos. In embryos overexpressing lbx1b, wnt5b, a ligand of the
non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway, was significantly
downregulated. Injection of mRNA for wnt5b or RhoA, a key downstream effector of 
Wnt/PCP signaling, rescued the defective convergent extension phenotype and
attenuated the lbx1b-induced curvature of the body axis. Thus, our study presents
a novel pathological feature of LBX1 and its zebrafish homologs in body axis
deformation at various stages of embryonic and subsequent growth in zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC4731154
PMID: 26820155  [PubMed - in process]


16. Endocrinology. 2016 Mar;157(3):1021-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1827. Epub 2016 Jan
26.

Gata2 Is a Rheostat for Mesenchymal Stem Cell Fate in Male Mice.

Li X(1), Huynh H(1), Zuo H(1), Salminen M(1), Wan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology (X.L., H.H., H.Z., Y.W.), The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390; and Department of Veterinary
Biosciences (M.S.), University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.

Gata2 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is important in hematopoiesis
and neuronal development. However, the roles of Gata2 in the mesenchymal lineages
are poorly understood. In vitro studies suggest that Gata2 modulates adipocyte
differentiation and mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) proliferation. To systematically 
determine the in vivo functions of Gata2 in the MSC lineage commitment and
development, we have generated three mouse models in which Gata2 is specifically 
deleted in MSCs, adipocytes, or osteoblasts. During the MSC expansion stage,
Gata2 promotes proliferation and attenuates differentiation; thereby Gata2 loss
in MSCs results in enhanced differentiation of both adipocytes and osteoblasts.
During the differentiation stage, Gata2 also plays MSC-independent roles to
impede lineage commitment; hence, Gata2 loss in adipocyte or osteoblast lineages 
also augments adipogenesis and osteoblastogenesis, respectively. These findings
reveal Gata2 as a crucial rheostat of MSC fate to control osteoblast and
adipocyte lineage development.

PMCID: PMC4769372 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26812161  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Hepatol. 2016 Jan 23. pii: S0168-8278(16)00051-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.017. [Epub ahead of print]

Single-gene association between GATA-2 and autoimmune hepatitis: A novel genetic 
insight highlighting immunologic pathways to disease.

Webb G(1), Chen YY(1), Li KK(1), Neil D(2), Oo YH(1), Richter A(3), Bigley V(4), 
Collin M(4), Adams DH(1), Hirschfield GM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham and NIHR Birmingham Liver 
Biomedical Research Unit, Birmingham, UK. (2)Department of Pathology, Queen
Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK. (3)Department of Immunology, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham, UK. (4)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle, UK. (5)Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham
and NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit, Birmingham, UK. Electronic
address: g.hirschfield@bham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), an immune-mediated liver disease, 
originates as a consequence of interacting genetic and environmental risk
factors. Treatment remains non-specific and prone to side effects. Deficiencies
in regulatory T cell (Treg) function are hypothesized to contribute to the
pathogenesis of AIH.
METHODS: We describe an adult patient who presented with AIH in the context of
monocytopenia. The patient was characterized by GATA2 gene sequencing, flow
cytometry of peripheral blood for leucocyte subsets, ELISA for serum Flt-3
ligand, and immunohistochemistry of liver biopsy tissue.
RESULTS: Sequencing confirmed a GATA2 mutation. Peripheral Treg were absent in
the context of a preserved total T cell count. Immunostaining for the Treg
transcription factor FOXP3 was reduced in liver tissue as compared to a control
AIH specimen. There were marked deficiencies in multiple antigen-presenting cell 
subsets and Flt-3 ligand was elevated. These findings are consistent with
previous reports of GATA2 dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of a GATA2 mutation with AIH is previously
unrecognized. GATA2 encodes a hematopoietic cell transcription factor, and
mutations may manifest as monocytopenia, dendritic and B cell deficiencies,
myelodysplasia, and immunodeficiency. Tregs may be depleted as in this case. Our 
findings provide support for the role of Tregs in AIH, complement reports of
other deficiencies in T cell regulation causing AIH-like syndromes, and support
the rationale of attempting to modulate the Treg axis for the therapeutic benefit
of AIH patients.

Copyright © 2016 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26812071  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Feb;49:442-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.01.013. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Development and characterization of a cell line from tilapia head kidney with
melanomacrophage characteristics.

Wen CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National University of Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: wenchiumin@nuk.edu.tw.

A novel cell line THK, derived from the tilapia head kidney, was developed and
characterized. The THK cell line comprised fibroblastoid cells that markedly
proliferated in Leibovitz L-15 medium containing 2%-15% fetal bovine serum (FBS) 
at 20 °C-35 °C. Cell proliferation was dependent on the FBS concentration, and
the optimal temperature for proliferation ranged between 25 °C and 30 °C. THK
cells were characterized for the presence of phagocytic activity, acid
phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, a-naphthyl acetate esterase, lipofuscin, and
tyrosinase. Transcripts of CD33, CD53, CD82, CD205, macrophage colony stimulating
factor receptor, GATA2, and GATA3 that are specific for leucocytes or
monocytes/macrophages or both were detected in the THK cells through PCR.
However, THK cells lacked for CD83, a specific marker for dendritic cells. The
results indicated that the fibroblastoid THK cells were melanomacrophage-related 
progenitors. PCR revealed that the THK cells exhibited the transcripts of
toll-like receptor 1 (TLR1), TLR2, TLR3, and CD200, of which concern with
immunity as well as the transcripts of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3, angiomotin, and angiopoietin-like protein 2 that associate with
angiogenesis regulation and macrophage proliferation. THK cells were subcultured 
more than 90 times and can be useful for investigating the development and
functioning of the teleostean innate immune system.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806163  [PubMed - in process]


19. Korean J Intern Med. 2016 Jan;31(1):188-90. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2016.31.1.188. Epub
2015 Dec 28.

First Korean case of Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema with myelodysplasia)
with a novel GATA2 gene mutation.

Seo SK(1), Kim KY(1), Han SA(1), Yoon JS(1), Shin SY(2), Sohn SK(1), Moon JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of
Medicine, Daegu, Korea. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Genetics, Samsung 
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PMCID: PMC4712426
PMID: 26767875  [PubMed - in process]


20. Dev Cell. 2016 Jan 11;36(1):9-23. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.12.014.

Dynamic Control of Enhancer Repertoires Drives Lineage and Stage-Specific
Transcription during Hematopoiesis.

Huang J(1), Liu X(2), Li D(3), Shao Z(4), Cao H(2), Zhang Y(5), Trompouki E(6),
Bowman TV(6), Zon LI(7), Yuan GC(8), Orkin SH(9), Xu J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Children's Medical Center Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Harvard College, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (4)Key
Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (5)Children's Medical Center Research
Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG
Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (6)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (8)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu. (10)Children's 
Medical Center Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address:
jian.xu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Enhancers are the primary determinants of cell identity, but the regulatory
components controlling enhancer turnover during lineage commitment remain largely
unknown. Here we compare the enhancer landscape, transcriptional factor
occupancy, and transcriptomic changes in human fetal and adult hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells and committed erythroid progenitors. We find that enhancers
are modulated pervasively and direct lineage- and stage-specific transcription.
GATA2-to-GATA1 switch is prevalent at dynamic enhancers and drives erythroid
enhancer commissioning. Examination of lineage-specific enhancers identifies
transcription factors and their combinatorial patterns in enhancer turnover.
Importantly, by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genomic editing, we uncover functional
hierarchy of constituent enhancers within the SLC25A37 super-enhancer. Despite
indistinguishable chromatin features, we reveal through genomic editing the
functional diversity of several GATA switch enhancers in which enhancers with
opposing functions cooperate to coordinate transcription. Thus, genome-wide
enhancer profiling coupled with in situ enhancer editing provide critical
insights into the functional complexity of enhancers during development.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4714361 [Available on 2017-01-11]
PMID: 26766440  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.496. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXA1 acts upstream of GATA2 and AR in hormonal regulation of gene expression.

Zhao JC(1), Fong KW(1), Jin HJ(1), Yang YA(1), Kim J(1), Yu J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Hormonal regulation of gene expression by androgen receptor (AR) is tightly
controlled by many transcriptional cofactors, including pioneer factors FOXA1 and
GATA2, which, however, exhibit distinct expression patterns and functional roles 
in prostate cancer. Here, we examined how FOXA1, GATA2 and AR crosstalk and
regulate hormone-dependent gene expression in prostate cancer cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis revealed that FOXA1 reprograms both AR
and GATA2 cistrome by preferably recruiting them to FKHD-containing genomic
sites. By contrast, GATA2 is unable to shift AR or FOXA1 to GATA motifs. Rather, 
GATA2 co-occupancy enhances AR and FOXA1 binding to nearby ARE and FKHD sites,
respectively. Similarly, AR increases, but not reprograms, GATA2 and FOXA1
cistromes. Concordantly, GATA2 and AR strongly enhance the transcriptional
program of each other, whereas FOXA1 regulates GATA2- and AR-mediated gene
expression in a context-dependent manner due to its reprogramming effects. Taken 
together, our data delineated for the first time the distinct mechanisms by which
GATA2 and FOXA1 regulate AR cistrome and suggest that FOXA1 acts upstream of
GATA2 and AR in determining hormone-dependent gene expression in prostate
cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.496.

PMID: 26751772  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Pediatr Transplant. 2016 Mar;20(2):333-6. doi: 10.1111/petr.12667. Epub 2016 Jan 
8.

Successful reduced-intensity stem cell transplantation for GATA2 deficiency
before progression of advanced MDS.

Saida S(1), Umeda K(1), Yasumi T(1), Matsumoto A(1), Kato I(1), Hiramatsu H(1),
Ohara O(2), Heike T(1), Adachi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Human Genome Research, Kazusa DNA Research
Institute, Kisarazu, Japan. (3)Institute Department of Human Health Sciences,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

A 13-yr-old boy bearing lymphedema and congenital deafness had distinct
hematological abnormalities consisting of reduced monocytes, B cells, and
dendritic cells in the peripheral blood as well as MDS with normal karyotype in
the bone marrow. The patient was diagnosed with Emberger syndrome by sequencing
of GATA2 DNA, and underwent RIST from an HLA-matched unrelated donor. Prompt
engraftment and immunological reconstitution were observed without any severe
RRT. As most patients with GATA2 anomaly died due to the development of AML or
active infections, RIST could be a promising treatment option before progression 
of advanced MDS.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26748574  [PubMed - in process]


23. Haematologica. 2015 Dec 31. pii: haematol.2015.130799. [Epub ahead of print]

Whole-exome sequencing reveals a C-terminal germline variant in CEBPA-associated 
acute myeloid leukemia: 45-year follow-up of a large family.

Pathak A(1), Seipel K(2), Pemov A(3), Dewan R(3), Brown C(4), Ravichandran S(5), 
Luke BT(5), Malasky M(3), Suman S(3), Yeager M(3), Cancer GenomicsResearch
Laboratory ND(3), Cancer Sequencing Working Group ND(3), Parry DM(3), Gatti
RA(4), Caporaso NE(3), Mulvihill J(6), Goldin LR(3), Pabst T(2), McMaster ML(3), 
Stewart DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)NIH; pathaka@mail.nih.gov. (2)University Hospital and Unviersity of Berne;
(3)NCI; (4)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA; (5)Frederick National
Laboratory for Cancer Research; (6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics,
The University of Oklahoma College of Medicine.

Familial acute myeloid leukemia is rare and linked to germline mutations in
RUNX1, GATA2 or CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-a (CEBPA). We re-evaluated a large
family with acute myeloid leukemia originally seen at NIH in 1969. We utilized
whole-exome sequencing to study this family, and conducted in silico
bioinformatics analysis, protein structural modeling and laboratory experiments
to assess the impact of the identified CEBPA Q311P mutation. Unlike most
previously identified germline mutations in CEBPA, which were N-terminal
frameshift mutations, we identified a novel Q311P variant that was located in the
C-terminal bZip domain of C/EBPa. Protein structural modeling suggested that the 
Q311P mutation alters the ability of the CEBPA dimer to bind DNA. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays showed that the Q311P mutant had attenuated binding to DNA,
as predicted by the protein modeling. Consistent with these findings, we found
that the Q311P mutation has reduced transactivation, consistent with a
loss-of-function mutation. From 45 years of follow-up, we observed incomplete
penetrance (46%) of CEBPA Q311P. This study of a large multi-generational
pedigree reveals that a germline mutation in the C-terminal bZip domain can alter
the ability of C/EBP-a to bind DNA and reduces transactivation, leading to acute 
myeloid leukemia.

Copyright © 2015, Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMID: 26721895  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):516-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.129957. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Differentiation and molecular heterogeneity of inhibitory and excitatory neurons 
associated with midbrain dopaminergic nuclei.

Lahti L(1), Haugas M(1), Tikker L(1), Airavaara M(2), Voutilainen MH(2), Anttila 
J(2), Kumar S(1), Inkinen C(1), Salminen M(3), Partanen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56,
Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Department
of Veterinary Biosciences, P.O. Box 66, Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2, FIN-00014
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Biosciences, P.O.
Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
juha.m.partanen@helsinki.fi.

Local inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic neurons are important for
midbrain dopaminergic and hindbrain serotonergic pathways controlling motivation,
mood, and voluntary movements. Such neurons reside both within the dopaminergic
nuclei, and in adjacent brain structures, including the rostromedial and
laterodorsal tegmental nuclei. Compared with the monoaminergic neurons, the
development, heterogeneity, and molecular characteristics of these regulatory
neurons are poorly understood. We show here that different GABAergic and
glutamatergic subgroups associated with the monoaminergic nuclei express specific
transcription factors. These neurons share common origins in the ventrolateral
rhombomere 1, where the postmitotic selector genes Tal1, Gata2 and Gata3 control 
the balance between the generation of inhibitory and excitatory neurons. In the
absence of Tal1, or both Gata2 and Gata3, the GABAergic precursors adopt
glutamatergic fates and populate the glutamatergic nuclei in excessive numbers.
Together, our results uncover developmental regulatory mechanisms, molecular
characteristics, and heterogeneity of central regulators of monoaminergic
circuits.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26718003  [PubMed - in process]


25. Leuk Res Rep. 2015 Oct 17;4(2):72-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lrr.2015.10.001. eCollection 
2015.

Young woman with mild bone marrow dysplasia, GATA2 and ASXL1 mutation treated
with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Lübking A(1), Vosberg S(2), Konstandin NP(3), Dufour A(3), Graf A(4), Krebs S(4),
Blum H(5), Weber A(6), Lenhoff S(1), Ehinger M(7), Spiekermann K(2), Greif PA(2),
Cammenga J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Vascular Disorders, Skåne University Hospital,
22185 Lund, Sweden. (2)Department of Internal Medicine 3,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany ; German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany ; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
(LMU), Munich, Germany. (4)Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis at the Gene 
Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany. (5)Laboratory for 
Functional Genome Analysis at the Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
(LMU), Munich, Germany ; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany ;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Institut für
Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Giessen und Marburg/Standort Giessen, Germany.
(7)Department of Pathology, Skåne University Hospital, 22185 Lund, Sweden.
(8)Department of Hematology and Vascular Disorders, Skåne University Hospital,
22185 Lund, Sweden ; Department of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy,
Sölvegatan 17, BMC A12, Lund University, 22184 Lund, Sweden.

Heterozygous mutations in GATA2 underlie different syndromes, previously
described as monocytopenia and mycobacterial avium complex infection (MonoMAC);
dendritic cell, monocytes, B- and NK lymphocytes deficiency (DCML); lymphedema,
deafness and myelodysplasia (Emberger syndrome) and familiar myelodysplastic
syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia (MDS / AML). Onset and severity of clinical
symptoms vary and preceding cytopenias are not always present. We describe a case
of symptomatic DCML deficiency and rather discrete bone marrow findings due to
GATA2 mutation. Exome sequencing revealed a somatic ASXL1 mutation and the
patient underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation successfully.

PMCID: PMC4672090
PMID: 26716079  [PubMed]


26. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Dec 29;8:131. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0228-z.

Erratum: Heritable GATA2 mutations associated with familial AML-MDS: a case
report and review of literature.

Gao J(1), Gentzler RD(2), Timms AE(3,)(4), Horwitz MS(3), Frankfurt O(2), Altman 
JK(2), Peterson LC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Feinberg 7-209A, 251 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
j-gao@northwestern.edu. (2)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 251 E.
Huron Street, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. (4)Present address: Seattle Children's
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, 98101, USA. (5)Department of Pathology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Feinberg 7-209A, 251 E.
Huron Street, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.

Erratum for
    J Hematol Oncol. 2014;7:36.

PMCID: PMC4696212
PMID: 26715529  [PubMed]


27. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Dec 28. pii: jlb.5MA0815-388R. [Epub ahead of print]

Altered chemotactic response to CXCL12 in patients carrying GATA2 mutations.

Maciejewski-Duval A(1), Meuris F(1), Bignon A(1), Aknin ML(1), Balabanian K(1),
Faivre L(1), Pasquet M(1), Barlogis V(1), Fieschi C(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), 
Donadieu J(1), Schlecht-Louf G(1), Marin-Esteban V(2), Bachelerie F(2).

Author information: 
(1)*UMR996 - Inflammation, Chemokines and Immunopathology, Inserm, Univ
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Clamart, France; US31-UMS3679 - Plateforme
PLAIMMO, Institut Paris-Saclay d'Innovation Thérapeutique (IPSIT), INSERM, CNRS, 
Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Clamart, France; Génétique et
Anomalies du Développement, EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France and
FHU TRANSLAD, Département de Génétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France; Département
d'Hématologie du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Toulouse Purpan and INSERM,
CRCT, IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France; Service d'Hématologie Pédiatrique,
Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Marseille,
France; Département d'Immunologie Clinique, Hôpital Saint Louis and Université
Denis Diderot, Paris, France; #Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Paris, France; **Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Registre Français des
Neutropénies Chroniques Sévères, Centre de Référence des Déficits Immunitaires
Héréditaires, Service d'Hémato-oncologie Pédiatrique Hôpital Trousseau, Paris,
France. (2)*UMR996 - Inflammation, Chemokines and Immunopathology, Inserm, Univ
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Clamart, France; US31-UMS3679 - Plateforme
PLAIMMO, Institut Paris-Saclay d'Innovation Thérapeutique (IPSIT), INSERM, CNRS, 
Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Clamart, France; Génétique et
Anomalies du Développement, EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France and
FHU TRANSLAD, Département de Génétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France; Département
d'Hématologie du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Toulouse Purpan and INSERM,
CRCT, IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France; Service d'Hématologie Pédiatrique,
Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Marseille,
France; Département d'Immunologie Clinique, Hôpital Saint Louis and Université
Denis Diderot, Paris, France; #Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Paris, France; **Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Registre Français des
Neutropénies Chroniques Sévères, Centre de Référence des Déficits Immunitaires
Héréditaires, Service d'Hémato-oncologie Pédiatrique Hôpital Trousseau, Paris,
France Viviana.marin-esteban@u-psud.fr francoise.bachelerie@u-psud.fr.

GATA2 deficiency-formerly described as MonoMAC syndrome; dendritic cells,
monocytes, B cells, and natural killer cell deficiency; familial myelodysplastic 
syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia; or Emberger syndrome-encompasses a range of
hematologic and nonhematologic anomalies, mainly characterized by monocytopenia, 
B lymphopenia, natural killer cell cytopenia, neutropenia, immunodeficiency, and 
a high risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia. Herein, we present 7 patients
with GATA2 deficiency recruited into the French Severe Chronic Neutropenia
Registry, which enrolls patients with all kinds of congenital neutropenia. We
performed extended immunophenotyping of their whole blood lymphocyte populations,
together with the analysis of their chemotactic responses. Lymphopenia was
recorded for B and CD4(+) T cells in 6 patients. Although only 3 patients
displayed natural killer cell cytopenia, the CD56(bright) natural killer
subpopulation was nearly absent in all 7 patients. Natural killer cells from 6
patients showed decreased CXCL12/CXCR4-dependent chemotaxis, whereas other
lymphocytes, and most significantly B lymphocytes, displayed enhanced
CXCL12-induced chemotaxis compared with healthy volunteers. Surface expression of
CXCR4 was significantly diminished in the patients' natural killer cells,
although the total expression of the receptor was found to be equivalent to that 
of natural killer cells from healthy individual controls. Together, these data
reveal that GATA2 deficiency is associated with impaired membrane expression and 
chemotactic dysfunctions of CXCR4. These dysfunctions may contribute to the
physiopathology of this deficiency by affecting the normal distribution of
lymphocytes and thus potentially affecting the susceptibility of patients to
associated infections.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 26710799  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. J Vis Exp. 2015 Dec 3;(106). doi: 10.3791/52910.

Direct Induction of Hemogenic Endothelium and Blood by Overexpression of
Transcription Factors in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Elcheva I(1), Brok-Volchanskaya V(1), Slukvin I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health; islukvin@wisc.edu.

During development, hematopoietic cells arise from a specialized subset of
endothelial cells, hemogenic endothelium (HE). Modeling HE development in vitro
is essential for mechanistic studies of the endothelial-hematopoietic transition 
and hematopoietic specification. Here, we describe a method for the efficient
induction of HE from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) by way of
overexpression of different sets of transcription factors. The combination of
ETV2 and GATA1 or GATA2 TFs is used to induce HE with pan-myeloid potential,
while a combination of GATA2 and TAL1 transcription factors allows for the
production of HE with erythroid and megakaryocytic potential. The addition of
LMO2 to GATA2 and TAL1 combination substantially accelerates differentiation and 
increases erythroid and megakaryocytic cells production. This method provides an 
efficient and rapid means of HE induction from hPSCs and allows for the
observation of the endothelial-hematopoietic transition in a culture dish. The
protocol includes hPSCs transduction procedures and post-transduction analysis of
HE and blood progenitors.

PMID: 26710184  [PubMed - in process]


29. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1387-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-669937. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

Prevalence, clinical characteristics, and prognosis of GATA2-related
myelodysplastic syndromes in children and adolescents.

Wlodarski MW(1), Hirabayashi S(2), Pastor V(2), Starý J(3), Hasle H(4), Masetti
R(5), Dworzak M(6), Schmugge M(7), van den Heuvel-Eibrink M(8), Ussowicz M(9), De
Moerloose B(10), Catala A(11), Smith OP(12), Sedlacek P(3), Lankester AC(13),
Zecca M(14), Bordon V(10), Matthes-Martin S(6), Abrahamsson J(15), Kühl JS(16),
Sykora KW(17), Albert MH(18), Przychodzien B(19), Maciejewski JP(19), Schwarz
S(20), Göhring G(21), Schlegelberger B(21), Cseh A(2), Noellke P(2), Yoshimi
A(2), Locatelli F(22), Baumann I(23), Strahm B(2), Niemeyer CM(1); EWOG-MDS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer
Consortium, Freiburg, Germany, and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany; (2)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charles University and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic; (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark; (5)Department of Pediatric
Oncology and Hematology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; (6)St. Anna
Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University 
Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland; (8)Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
and Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands; (9)Department of 
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and BMT, Medical University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, 
Poland; (10)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; (11)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain;
(12)Paediatric Oncology and Haematology, Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, 
Dublin, Ireland; (13)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands; (14)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Fondazione Istituti
di ricovero e cura a carattere scientifico (IRCCS) Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia,
Italy; (15)Pediatric Oncology, Queen Silvias Children's Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden; (16)Pediatric Oncology, Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; (17)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; (18)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Dr.v.Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany; 
(19)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH; (20)Institute of
Pathology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany; (21)Institute of Human
Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; (22)Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy; and. (23)Department of Pathology, Clinical Center,
Böblingen, Germany.

Germline GATA2 mutations cause cellular deficiencies with high propensity for
myeloid disease. We investigated 426 children and adolescents with primary
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and 82 cases with secondary MDS enrolled in 2
consecutive prospective studies of the European Working Group of MDS in Childhood
(EWOG-MDS) conducted in Germany over a period of 15 years. Germline GATA2
mutations accounted for 15% of advanced and 7% of all primary MDS cases, but were
absent in children with MDS secondary to therapy or acquired aplastic anemia.
Mutation carriers were older at diagnosis and more likely to present with
monosomy 7 and advanced disease compared with wild-type cases. For stratified
analysis according to karyotype, 108 additional primary MDS patients registered
with EWOG-MDS were studied. Overall, we identified 57 MDS patients with germline 
GATA2 mutations. GATA2 mutations were highly prevalent among patients with
monosomy 7 (37%, all ages) reaching its peak in adolescence (72% of adolescents
with monosomy 7). Unexpectedly, monocytosis was more frequent in GATA2-mutated
patients. However, when adjusted for the selection bias from monosomy 7,
mutational status had no effect on the hematologic phenotype. Finally, overall
survival and outcome of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) were not
influenced by mutational status. This study identifies GATA2 mutations as the
most common germline defect predisposing to pediatric MDS with a very high
prevalence in adolescents with monosomy 7. GATA2 mutations do not confer poor
prognosis in childhood MDS. However, the high risk for progression to advanced
disease must guide decision-making toward timely HSCT.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26702063  [PubMed - in process]


30. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Mar;57(3):520-36. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1115041. Epub
2015 Dec 23.

Genetic predisposition to myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia in 
children and young adults.

Babushok DV(1,)(2), Bessler M(1,)(2), Olson TS(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine , Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA ; (2)b Comprehensive Bone
Marrow Failure Center, Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics ,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA , USA ; (3)c Blood and
Marrow Transplant Program, Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics ,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia
, PA , USA.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal blood disorder characterized by
ineffective hematopoiesis, cytopenias, dysplasia and an increased risk of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). With the growing availability of clinical genetic
testing, there is an increasing appreciation that a number of genetic
predisposition syndromes may underlie apparent de novo presentations of MDS/AML, 
particularly in children and young adults. Recent findings of clonal
hematopoiesis in acquired aplastic anemia add another facet to our understanding 
of the mechanisms of MDS/AML predisposition. As more predisposition syndromes are
recognized, it is becoming increasingly important for hematologists and
oncologists to have familiarity with the common as well as emerging syndromes,
and to have a systematic approach to diagnosis and screening of at risk patient
populations. Here, we provide a practical algorithm for approaching a patient
with a suspected MDS/AML predisposition, and provide an in-depth review of the
established and emerging familial MDS/AML syndromes caused by mutations in the
ANKRD26, CEBPA, DDX41, ETV6, GATA2, RUNX1, SRP72 genes. Finally, we discuss
recent data on the role of somatic mutations in malignant transformation in
acquired aplastic anemia, and review the practical aspects of MDS/AML management 
in patients and families with predisposition syndromes.

PMCID: PMC4798888 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26693794  [PubMed - in process]


31. Eur J Haematol. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12724. [Epub ahead of print]

Correlation of somatic mutations with outcome after FLAMSA-busulfan sequential
conditioning and allogeneic stem cell transplantation in patients with MDS.

Christopeit M(1), Badbaran A(1), Alawi M(2), Zabelina T(1), Zeck G(1), Wolschke
C(1), Ayuk F(1), Kröger N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Bioinformatics 
Service Facility, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52,
20246, Hamburg, Germany.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is a curative
treatment option for Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS). Little is known about the
prognostic impact of mutations e.g. in TP53 specifically after allo-HSCT. We here
describe the prognostic impact of mutations in a panel of 19 genes analyzed by
amplicon-based-next-generation-sequencing in a uniformly treated patient cohort. 
Sixty-two patients with a median age of 61 years suffered MDS with 0-20% bone
marrow blasts. IPSS was intermediate-1 (15%) and higher (79%). Conditioning
uniformly was performed using a sequential approach in which FLAMSA-chemotherapy 
was followed by Busulfan-based conditioning. Patients mostly were transplanted
from an unrelated donor (77%), 36% of patients received a graft from a mismatched
donor. Median number of mutations was 2 (, range 0-6). RUNX1, GATA2, TET2, and
CEBPA were the genes most frequently found mutated. TP53, a factor previously
reported to confer adverse prognostic impact after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation, was mutated in samples from eight patients, one of which showed 
a silent mutation. With an estimated 5-year-overall/ disease-free-survival of
48±7%/ 41±7%, none of the mutations analyzed showed a prognostic impact in this
analysis of the largest uniformly treated cohort thus far. This especially holds 
true for patients with a mutation in TP53. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26680262  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. BMC Cancer. 2015 Dec 16;15:970. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1961-y.

RUNX1-Evi-1 fusion gene inhibited differentiation and apoptosis in myelopoiesis: 
an in vivo study.

Shen L(1), Zhu J(2), Chen F(3), Lin W(4), Cai J(5), Zhong J(6), Zhong H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China. slj_tch@163.com. (2)Department of
Hematology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200127, China. zhujianyi910@163.com. (3)Department of Hematology, Ren
Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 160 Pujian Road, 
Shanghai, China. chenfangyuan62@163.com. (4)Department of Hematology, Ren Ji
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127,
China. linwjiemici@163.com. (5)Department of Hematology, Ren Ji Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China.
Caijiayi_0724@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Hematology, Ren Ji Hospital, School
of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China.
jhzhong28@163.com. (7)Department of Hematology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China. zhh_lj@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 1-Evi-1 is a chimeric gene generated by 
the t (3; 21) (q26; q22) translocation, which leads into malignant transformation
of hematopoietic stem cells by unclear mechanisms. This in vivo study aimed to
establish a stable line of zebrafish expressing the human RUNX1-Evi-1 fusion gene
under the control of a heat stress-inducible bidirectional promoter, and
investigate its roles in hematopoiesis and hematologic malignancies.
METHODS: We introduced human RUNX1-Evi-1 fusion gene into embryonic zebrafish
through a heat-shock promoter to establish Tg(RE:HSE:EGFP) zebrafish. Two males
and one female mosaic F0 zebrafish embryos (2.1%) were identified as stable
positive germline transgenic zebrafish.
RESULTS: The population of immature myeloid cells and hematopoietic blast cells
were accumulated in peripheral blood and single cell suspension from kidney of
adult Tg(RE:HSE:EGFP) zebrafish. RUNX1-Evi-1 presented an intensive influence on 
hematopoietic regulatory factors. Consequently, primitive hematopoiesis was
enhanced by upregulation of gata2 and scl, while erythropoiesis was downregulated
due to the suppression of gata1. Early stage of myelopoiesis was flourishing with
the high expression of pu.1, but it was inhibited along with the low expression
of mpo. Microarray analysis demonstrated that RUNX1-Evi-1 not only upregulated
proteasome, cell cycle, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, tyrosine metabolism, drug
metabolism, and PPAR pathway, but also suppressed transforming growth factor ß,
Jak-STAT, DNA replication, mismatch repair, p53 pathway, JNK signaling pathway,
and nucleotide excision repair. Interestingly, histone deacetylase 4 was
significantly up-regulated. Factors in cell proliferation were obviously
suppressed after 3-day treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitor, valproic
acid. Accordingly, higher proportion of G1 arrest and apoptosis were manifested
by the propidium iodide staining.
CONCLUSION: RUNX1-Evi-1 may promote proliferation and apoptosis resistance of
primitive hematopoietic cell, and inhibit the differentiation of myeloid cells
with the synergy of different pathways and factors. VPA may be a promising choice
in the molecular targeting therapy of RUNX1-Evi-1-related leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4682245
PMID: 26674644  [PubMed - in process]


33. Eur J Haematol. 2015 Dec 11. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12719. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of c-kit and bone marrow failure upon conditional removal of the GATA-2
C-terminal zinc finger domain in adult mice.

Li HS(1), Jin J(1), Liang X(1), Matatall KA(2), Ma Y(1), Zhang H(1), Ullrich
SE(1,)(3), King KY(2), Sun SC(1,)(3), Watowich SS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030. (2)Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and the Center for
Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030. (3)The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
TX 77030.

Heterozygous mutations in the transcriptional regulator GATA-2 associate with
multilineage immunodeficiency, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). The majority of these mutations localize in the zinc finger (ZnF)
domains, which mediate GATA-2 DNA binding. Deregulated hematopoiesis with GATA-2 
mutation frequently develops in adulthood, yet GATA-2 function in the bone marrow
remains unresolved. To investigate this, we conditionally deleted the GATA-2
C-terminal ZnF (C-ZnF) coding sequences in adult mice. Upon Gata2 C-ZnF deletion,
we observed rapid peripheral cytopenia, bone marrow failure and decreased c-Kit
expression on hematopoietic progenitors. Transplant studies indicated GATA-2 has 
a cell autonomous role in bone marrow hematopoiesis. Moreover, myeloid lineage
populations were particularly sensitive to Gata2 hemizygosity, while molecular
assays indicated GATA-2 regulates c-Kit expression in multilineage progenitor
cells. Enforced c-Kit expression in Gata2 C-ZnF-deficient hematopoietic
progenitors enhanced myeloid colony activity, suggesting GATA-2 sustains
myelopoiesis via a cell intrinsic role involving maintenance of c-Kit expression.
Our results provide insight into mechanisms regulating hematopoiesis in bone
marrow and may contribute to a better understanding of immunodeficiency and bone 
marrow failure associated with GATA-2 mutation. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26660446  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan;20(1):55-62. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.11.004. Epub
2015 Nov 26.

Expression pattern of bcar3, a downstream target of Gata2, and its binding
partner, bcar1, during Xenopus development.

Green YS(1), Kwon S(2), Christian JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Division of Hematology and Hematologic
Malignancies, University of Utah, School of Medicine, 20 North 1900 East, Salt
Lake City, UT 94132, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology
and Hematologic Malignancies, University of Utah, School of Medicine, 20 North
1900 East, Salt Lake City, UT 94132, USA. (2)Department of Cell, Developmental
and Cancer Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, School of Medicine,
3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA. (3)Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies,
University of Utah, School of Medicine, 20 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City, UT
94132, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and
Hematologic Malignancies, University of Utah, School of Medicine, 20 North 1900
East, Salt Lake City, UT 94132, USA. Electronic address:
jan.christian@neuro.utah.edu.

Primitive hematopoiesis generates red blood cells that deliver oxygen to the
developing embryo. Mesodermal cells commit to a primitive blood cell fate during 
gastrulation and, in order to do so the mesoderm must receive non-cell autonomous
signals transmitted from other germ layers. In Xenopus, the transcription factor 
Gata2 functions in ectodermal cells to generate or transmit the non-cell
autonomous signals. Here we have identified Breast Cancer Antiestrogen Resistance
3 (bcar3) as a gene that is induced in ectodermal cells downstream of Gata2.
Bcar3 and its binding partner Bcar1 function to transduce integrin signaling,
leading to changes in cellular morphology, motility and adhesion. We show that
gata2, bcar3 and bcar1 are co-expressed in ventral ectoderm from early gastrula
to early tailbud stages. At later stages of development, bcar3 and bcar1 are
co-expressed in the spinal cord, notochord, fin mesenchyme and pronephros but
each shows additional unique sites of expression. These co-expression and unique 
expression patterns suggest that Bcar3 and Bcar1 may function together but also
independently during Xenopus development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4733426 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26631802  [PubMed - in process]


35. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Dec 3;17(6):675-88. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.017. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

Leukemia-Associated Cohesin Mutants Dominantly Enforce Stem Cell Programs and
Impair Human Hematopoietic Progenitor Differentiation.

Mazumdar C(1), Shen Y(2), Xavy S(1), Zhao F(1), Reinisch A(1), Li R(2), Corces
MR(1), Flynn RA(2), Buenrostro JD(3), Chan SM(1), Thomas D(1), Koenig JL(1), Hong
WJ(1), Chang HY(2), Majeti R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Cancer Institute, and
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)Center for Personal Dynamic
Regulomes and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (3)Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes and
Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA; Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology,
Cancer Institute, and Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic
address: rmajeti@stanford.edu.

Recurrent mutations in cohesin complex proteins have been identified in
pre-leukemic hematopoietic stem cells and during the early development of acute
myeloid leukemia and other myeloid malignancies. Although cohesins are involved
in chromosome separation and DNA damage repair, cohesin complex functions during 
hematopoiesis and leukemic development are unclear. Here, we show that mutant
cohesin proteins block differentiation of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells (HSPCs) in vitro and in vivo and enforce stem cell programs. These effects 
are restricted to immature HSPC populations, where cohesin mutants show increased
chromatin accessibility and likelihood of transcription factor binding site
occupancy by HSPC regulators including ERG, GATA2, and RUNX1, as measured by
ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq. Epistasis experiments show that silencing these
transcription factors rescues the differentiation block caused by cohesin
mutants. Together, these results show that mutant cohesins impair HSPC
differentiation by controlling chromatin accessibility and transcription factor
activity, possibly contributing to leukemic disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4671831 [Available on 2016-12-03]
PMID: 26607380  [PubMed - in process]


36. Sci Adv. 2015 Sep 4;1(8):e1500503. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500503. eCollection 2015.

Cis-regulatory mechanisms governing stem and progenitor cell transitions.

Johnson KD(1), Kong G(2), Gao X(1), Chang YI(2), Hewitt KJ(1), Sanalkumar R(1),
Prathibha R(1), Ranheim EA(3), Dewey CN(4), Zhang J(2), Bresnick EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Carbone Cancer Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. ;
University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
(2)University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, WI 53705,
USA. ; McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 
53705, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (4)Department of
Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Cis-element encyclopedias provide information on phenotypic diversity and disease
mechanisms. Although cis-element polymorphisms and mutations are instructive,
deciphering function remains challenging. Mutation of an intronic GATA motif
(+9.5) in GATA2, encoding a master regulator of hematopoiesis, underlies an
immunodeficiency associated with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Whereas an inversion relocalizes another GATA2 cis-element (-77) 
to the proto-oncogene EVI1, inducing EVI1 expression and AML, whether this
reflects ectopic or physiological activity is unknown. We describe a mouse strain
that decouples -77 function from proto-oncogene deregulation. The -77(-/-) mice
exhibited a novel phenotypic constellation including late embryonic lethality and
anemia. The -77 established a vital sector of the myeloid progenitor
transcriptome, conferring multipotentiality. Unlike the +9.5(-/-) embryos,
hematopoietic stem cell genesis was unaffected in -77(-/-) embryos. These results
illustrate a paradigm in which cis-elements in a locus differentially control
stem and progenitor cell transitions, and therefore the individual cis-element
alterations cause unique and overlapping disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4643771
PMID: 26601269  [PubMed]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142400.
eCollection 2015.

Essential Role of GATA2 in the Negative Regulation of Type 2 Deiodinase Gene by
Liganded Thyroid Hormone Receptor ß2 in Thyrotroph.

Matsunaga H(1), Sasaki S(1), Suzuki S(1), Matsushita A(1), Nakamura H(2),
Nakamura HM(1), Hirahara N(1), Kuroda G(1), Iwaki H(3), Ohba K(4), Morita H(1),
Oki Y(5), Suda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan. 
(2)Kuma Hospital, 8-2-35 Shimoyamate-dori, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0011, Japan.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, 2-12-12
Sumiyoshi, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 430-0906, Japan. (4)Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School Singapore, No 8 College Road, Level 8th, 169857, Singapore.
(5)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.

The inhibition of thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormone; TSH) by thyroid
hormone (T3) and its receptor (TR) is the central mechanism of the
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. Two transcription factors, GATA2 and Pit-1, 
determine thyrotroph differentiation and maintain the expression of the ß subunit
of TSH (TSHß). We previously reported that T3-dependent repression of the TSHß
gene is mediated by GATA2 but not by the reported negative T3-responsive element 
(nTRE). In thyrotrophs, T3 also represses mRNA of the type-2 deiodinase (D2)
gene, where no nTRE has been identified. Here, the human D2 promoter fused to the
CAT or modified Renilla luciferase gene was co-transfected with Pit-1 and/or
GATA2 expression plasmids into cell lines including CV1 and thyrotroph-derived
TaT1. GATA2 but not Pit-1 activated the D2 promoter. Two GATA responsive elements
(GATA-REs) were identified close to cAMP responsive element. The protein kinase A
activator, forskolin, synergistically enhanced GATA2-dependent activity.
Gel-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with TaT1 cells indicated that
GATA2 binds to these GATA-REs. T3 repressed the GATA2-induced activity of the D2 
promoter in the presence of the pituitary-specific TR, TRß2. The inhibition by
T3-bound TRß2 was dominant over the synergism between GATA2 and forskolin. The D2
promoter is also stimulated by GATA4, the major GATA in cardiomyocytes, and this 
activity was repressed by T3 in the presence of TRa1. These data indicate that
the GATA-induced activity of the D2 promoter is suppressed by T3-bound TRs via a 
tethering mechanism, as in the case of the TSHß gene.

PMCID: PMC4646574
PMID: 26571013  [PubMed - in process]


38. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Oct;35(10):1422-7.

[Effect of simulated microgravity on erythroid differentiation of K562 cells and 
the mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu B(1), Zheng L, Hu XM, Gao Y, Yue CY, Hong JQ, Song J, Ping BH.

Author information: 
(1)Huiqiao Department, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China . E-mail: wb821814671@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of simulated microgravity on erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells and explore the possible mechanism.
METHODS: The fourth generation rotating cell culture system was used to generate 
the simulated microgravity environment. Benzidine staining was used to evaluate
the cell inhibition rate, and real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to
detect GATA-1, GATA-2, Ets-1, F-actin, ß-Tubulin and vimentin mRNA expressions.
The changes of cytoskeleton were observed by fluorescence microscopy, and Western
blotting was employed to assay F-actin, ß-tubulin and vimentin protein expression
levels.
RESULTS: Benzidine staining showed that simulated microgravity inhibited
erythroid differentiation of K562 cells. K562 cells treated with Hemin presented 
with increased mRNA expression of GATA-1 and reduced GATA-2 and Ets-1 mRNA
expressions. Simulated microgravity treatment of the cells resulted in
down-regulated GATA-1, F-actin, ß-tubulin and vimentin mRNA expressions and
up-regulated mRNA expressions of GATA-2 and Ets-1, and reduced F-actin, ß-tubulin
and vimentin protein expressions. Exposure to simulated microgravity caused
decreased fluorescence intensities of cytoskeletal filament F-actin, ß-tubulin
and vimentin in the cells.
CONCLUSION: Simulated microgravity inhibits erythroid differentiation of K562
cells possibly by causing cytoskeleton damages to result in down-regulation of
GATA-1 and up-regulation of GATA-2 and Ets-1 expressions.

PMID: 26547335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Ann Hematol. 2016 Jan;95(2):301-10. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2540-7. Epub 2015 Nov
4.

Normal karyotype acute myeloid leukemia patients with CEBPA double mutation have 
a favorable prognosis but no survival benefit from allogeneic stem cell
transplant.

Ahn JS(1), Kim JY(1), Kim HJ(2), Kim YK(1), Lee SS(1), Jung SH(1), Yang DH(1),
Lee JJ(1), Kim NY(3), Choi SH(3), Minden MD(4), Jung CW(5), Jang JH(5), Kim
HJ(6), Moon JH(7), Sohn SK(7), Won JH(8), Kim SH(9), Kim DD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, 322 Seoyangro, Hwasun, Jeollanamdo, 519-763, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, 322 Seoyangro, Hwasun, Jeollanamdo, 519-763, Republic of Korea.
hjoonk@chonnam.ac.kr. (3)Genomic Research Center for Hematopoietic Diseases,
Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (5)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea. (6)Department of
Hematology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, Colllege of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea. (7)Department of 
Hematology-Oncology, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, South Korea. 
(8)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Soon Chun Hyang University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea. (9)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Dong-A University College of
Medicine, Busan, South Korea.

Erratum in
    Ann Hematol. 2016 Jan;95(2):363.

Normal karyotype acute myeloid leukemia (NK-AML) with CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein a (CEBPA) mutations is known to have a more favorable prognosis. However,
direct comparison of the clinical significance according to consolidation therapy
has not been widely performed in patients with NK-AML. A total of 404 patients
with NK-AML who received intensive induction chemotherapy were included in the
present study. Diagnostic samples from the patients were evaluated for CEBPA
mutations by direct sequencing. CEBPA single (sm) or double mutation (dm) was
observed in 27 (6.7 %) and 51 (12.6 %) patients, respectively. CEBPA (dm) was
associated with GATA2 (mut), and it was less frequently associated with
FLT3-ITD(pos), NPM1 (mut), and DNMT3A (mut) in comparison with CEBPA (wild) or
CEBPA (sm) (all p values <0.05). On multivariate analysis, CEBPA (dm) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007,
OR 39.593) was an independent risk factor for achievement of complete remission
(CR). With a median follow-up of 40.1 months, CEBPA (dm) showed a favorable
overall survival (OS), event-free survival (EFS), and lower relapse incidence
(RI) in comparison with CEBPA (wild) (all p values <0.005). Comparison of
clinical outcome analyses (consolidation chemotherapy vs. allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)) demonstrated the role of consolidation 
treatment in patients with CEBPA (dm). Allogeneic HCT was associated with lower
EFS and RI and a trend of higher non-relapse mortality. However, there was no
statistically significant difference in OS. In conclusion, CEBPA (dm) was
associated with other molecular mutations. Consolidation chemotherapy alone may
overcome higher relapse rates by reducing the treatment mortality and increasing 
survival after relapse events in patients with CEBPA (dm) in NK-AML.

PMID: 26537612  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Nov 3;66(18):2005-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.07.081.

Development of Long Noncoding RNA-Based Strategies to Modulate Tissue
Vascularization.

Fiedler J(1), Breckwoldt K(2), Remmele CW(3), Hartmann D(4), Dittrich M(5),
Pfanne A(4), Just A(1), Xiao K(4), Kunz M(3), Müller T(3), Hansen A(2), Geffers
R(6), Dandekar T(3), Eschenhagen T(2), Thum T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Translational Therapeutic Strategies, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment Center
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of
Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical Center Hamburg,
Eppendorf, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner
Site, Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Germany. (3)Department of Bioinformatics, University
of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Molecular and Translational
Therapeutic Strategies, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (5)Department
of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; Institute of Human 
Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (6)Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (7)Institute of Molecular and
Translational Therapeutic Strategies, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany;
Integrated Research and Treatment Center Transplantation, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany; National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; REBIRTH Excellence Cluster, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: thum.thomas@mh-hannover.de.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Nov 3;66(18):2016-8.

BACKGROUND: Long noncoding ribonucleic acids (lncRNAs) are a subclass of
regulatory noncoding ribonucleic acids for which expression and function in human
endothelial cells and angiogenic processes is not well studied.
OBJECTIVES: The authors discovered hypoxia-sensitive human lncRNAs via
next-generation ribonucleic acid sequencing and microarray approaches. To address
their functional importance in angiogenic processes, several endothelial lncRNAs 
were characterized for their angiogenic characteristics in vitro and ex vivo.
METHODS: Ribonucleic acid sequencing and microarray-derived data showed specific 
endothelial lncRNA expression changes after hypoxia. Validation experiments
confirmed strong hypoxia-dependent activation of 2 intergenic lncRNAs: LINC00323 
and MIR503HG.
RESULTS: Silencing of these lncRNA transcripts led to angiogenic defects,
including repression of growth factor signaling and/or the key endothelial
transcription factor GATA2. Endothelial loss of these hypoxia-driven lncRNAs
impaired cell-cycle control and inhibited capillary formation. The potential
clinical importance of these endothelial lncRNAs to vascular structural integrity
was demonstrated in an ex vivo model of human induced pluripotent stem cell-based
engineered heart tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors report an expression atlas of human hypoxia-sensitive
lncRNAs and identified 2 lncRNAs with important functions to sustain endothelial 
cell biology. LncRNAs hold great promise to serve as important future therapeutic
targets of cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2015 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4631810
PMID: 26516004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):49-61. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.161. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Generation of functional human serotonergic neurons from fibroblasts.

Vadodaria KC(1), Mertens J(1), Paquola A(1), Bardy C(1), Li X(1,)(2), Jappelli
R(1), Fung L(1,)(2), Marchetto MC(1), Hamm M(3), Gorris M(1), Koch P(4), Gage
FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (2)University of California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The brain's serotonergic system centrally regulates several physiological
processes and its dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of
several neuropsychiatric disorders. While in the past our understanding of
serotonergic neurotransmission has come mainly from mouse models, the development
of pluripotent stem cell and induced fibroblast-to-neuron (iN)
transdifferentiation technologies has revolutionized our ability to generate
human neurons in vitro. Utilizing these techniques and a novel lentiviral
reporter for serotonergic neurons, we identified and overexpressed key
transcription factors to successfully generate human serotonergic neurons. We
found that overexpressing the transcription factors NKX2.2, FEV, GATA2 and LMX1B 
in combination with ASCL1 and NGN2 directly and efficiently generated
serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts. Induced serotonergic neurons (iSNs) 
showed increased expression of specific serotonergic genes that are known to be
expressed in raphe nuclei. iSNs displayed spontaneous action potentials, released
serotonin in vitro and functionally responded to selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs). Here, we demonstrate the efficient generation of functional
human serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts as a novel tool for studying
human serotonergic neurotransmission in health and disease.

PMID: 26503761  [PubMed - in process]


42. Blood. 2015 Nov 26;126(22):2484-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-641100. Epub 2015 
Oct 22.

Genomic analysis of germ line and somatic variants in familial
myelodysplasia/acute myeloid leukemia.

Churpek JE(1), Pyrtel K(2), Kanchi KL(3), Shao J(2), Koboldt D(4), Miller CA(3), 
Shen D(5), Fulton R(3), O'Laughlin M(3), Fronick C(3), Pusic I(6), Uy GL(6),
Braunstein EM(7), Levis M(7), Ross J(8), Elliott K(2), Heath S(2), Jiang A(6),
Westervelt P(9), DiPersio JF(9), Link DC(9), Walter MJ(9), Welch J(9), Wilson
R(10), Ley TJ(4), Godley LA(1), Graubert TA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL; (2)Siteman Cancer Center. (3)The Genome
Institute, and. (4)Siteman Cancer Center, The Genome Institute, and Division of
Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, MO;
(5)Medimmune/AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD; (6)Division of Oncology, Department
of Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, MO; (7)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD; (8)Department of Medicine, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN; and. (9)Siteman Cancer Center, Division of Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, MO; (10)Siteman Cancer
Center, The Genome Institute, and. (11)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Boston, MA.

Familial clustering of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) can be caused by inherited factors. We screened 59 individuals
from 17 families with 2 or more biological relatives with MDS/AML for variants in
12 genes with established roles in predisposition to MDS/AML, and identified a
pathogenic germ line variant in 5 families (29%). Extending the screen with a
panel of 264 genes that are recurrently mutated in de novo AML, we identified
rare, nonsynonymous germ line variants in 4 genes, each segregating with MDS/AML 
in 2 families. Somatic mutations are required for progression to MDS/AML in these
familial cases. Using a combination of targeted and exome sequencing of tumor and
matched normal samples from 26 familial MDS/AML cases and asymptomatic carriers, 
we identified recurrent frameshift mutations in the cohesin-associated factor
PDS5B, co-occurrence of somatic ASXL1 mutations with germ line GATA2 mutations,
and recurrent mutations in other known MDS/AML drivers. Mutations in genes that
are recurrently mutated in de novo AML were underrepresented in the familial
MDS/AML cases, although the total number of somatic mutations per exome was the
same. Lastly, clonal skewing of hematopoiesis was detected in 67% of young,
asymptomatic RUNX1 carriers, providing a potential biomarker that could be used
for surveillance in these high-risk families.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4661171 [Available on 2016-11-26]
PMID: 26492932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:241301. doi: 10.1155/2015/241301. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Identification of Novel Epigenetic Markers of Prostate Cancer by NotI-Microarray 
Analysis.

Dmitriev AA(1), Rosenberg EE(2), Krasnov GS(3), Gerashchenko GV(2), Gordiyuk
VV(2), Pavlova TV(4), Kudryavtseva AV(3), Beniaminov AD(3), Belova AA(3),
Bondarenko YN(5), Danilets RO(5), Glukhov AI(6), Kondratov AG(2), Alexeyenko
A(7), Alekseev BY(8), Klein G(4), Senchenko VN(3), Kashuba VI(9).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia ; P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (2)Institute of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev
03680, Ukraine. (3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow 119991, Russia. (4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell
Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Institute of Urology, 
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 04053, Ukraine.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Kurchatov NBIC Centre NRC "Kurchatov
Institute", Moscow 123182, Russia. (7)Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life
Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden. (8)P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of Healthcare
of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (9)Institute of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 03680,
Ukraine ; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

A significant need for reliable and accurate cancer diagnostics and prognosis
compels the search for novel biomarkers that would be able to discriminate
between indolent and aggressive tumors at the early stages of disease. The aim of
this work was identification of potential diagnostic biomarkers for
characterization of different types of prostate tumors. NotI-microarrays with 180
clones associated with chromosome 3 genes/loci were applied to determine genetic 
and epigenetic alterations in 33 prostate tumors. For 88 clones, aberrations were
detected in more than 10% of tumors. The major types of alterations were DNA
methylation and/or deletions. Frequent methylation of the discovered loci was
confirmed by bisulfite sequencing on selective sampling of genes: FGF12, GATA2,
and LMCD1. Three genes (BHLHE40, BCL6, and ITGA9) were tested for expression
level alterations using qPCR, and downregulation associated with hypermethylation
was shown in the majority of tumors. Based on these data, we proposed the set of 
potential biomarkers for detection of prostate cancer and discrimination between 
prostate tumors with different malignancy and aggressiveness: BHLHE40, FOXP1,
LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860,
LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY, and LRRC58. Moreover, we probabilistically
estimated putative functional relations between the genes within each set using
the network enrichment analysis.

PMCID: PMC4602334
PMID: 26491211  [PubMed - in process]


44. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):40112-26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5556.

Aberrant expression of homeobox gene SIX1 in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C(1), Kaufmann M(1), Drexler HG(1), MacLeod RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

In Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) we recently identified deregulated expression of
homeobox genes MSX1 and OTX2 which are physiologically involved in development of
the embryonal neural plate border region. Here, we examined in HL homeobox gene
SIX1 an additional regulator of this embryonal region mediating differentiation
of placodal precursors. SIX1 was aberrantly activated in 12 % of HL patient
samples in silico, indicating a pathological role in a subset of this B-cell
malignancy. In addition, SIX1 expression was detected in HL cell lines which were
used as models to reveal upstream factors and target genes of this basic
developmental regulator. We detected increased copy numbers of the SIX1 locus at 
chromosome 14q23 correlating with enhanced expression while chromosomal
translocations were absent. Moreover, comparative expression profiling data and
pertinent gene modulation experiments indicated that the WNT-signalling pathway
and transcription factor MEF2C regulate SIX1 expression. Genes encoding the
transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, MSX1 and SPIB - all basic lymphoid regulators
- were identified as targets of SIX1 in HL. In addition, cofactors EYA1 and TLE4,
respectively, contrastingly mediated activation and suppression of SIX1 target
gene expression. Thus, the protein domain interfaces may represent therapeutic
targets in SIX1-positive HL subsets. Collectively, our data reveal a gene
regulatory network with SIX1 centrally deregulating lymphoid differentiation and 
support concordance of lymphopoiesis/lymphomagenesis and developmental processes 
in the neural plate border region.

PMCID: PMC4741883
PMID: 26473286  [PubMed - in process]


45. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Dec;55(4):293-303. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.07.006.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Characterization of hematopoietic GATA transcription factor expression in mouse
and human dendritic cells.

Scheenstra MR(1), Salunkhe V(1), De Cuyper IM(1), Hoogenboezem M(2), Li E(1),
Kuijpers TW(3), van den Berg TK(1), Gutiérrez L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sanquin Research and
Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin
Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of
Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: l.gutierrez@sanquin.nl.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are key initiators and regulators of the immune response.
The development of the DC lineage and their subsets requires an orchestrated
regulation of their transcriptional program. Gata1, a transcription factor
expressed in several hematopoietic cell lineages, has been recently reported to
be required for mouse DC development and function. In humans, GATA1 is involved
in the lineage separation between monocyte-derived DCs and Langerhans cells (LC) 
and loss of GATA1 results in differentiation arrest at the monocyte stage. The
hematopoietic GATA factors (i.e. Gata1, Gata2, Gata3) are known to regulate each 
other's expression and to function consecutively throughout lineage commitment
(so-called GATA switch). In humans, mutations in GATA2 are causative of MonoMAC
disease, a human immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by loss of DCs,
monocytes, B and NK cells. However, additional data on the expression of
hematopoietic GATA factors in the DC lineage is missing. In this study, we have
characterized the expression of hematopoietic GATA factors in murine and human
DCs and their expression dynamics upon TLR stimulation. We found that all
hematopoietic GATA factors are expressed in DCs, but identified species-specific 
differences in the relative expression of each GATA factor, and how their
expression fluctuates upon stimulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26460250  [PubMed - in process]


46. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2015 Oct 6;4:28. doi: 10.1186/s40164-015-0024-z. eCollection
2015.

GATA family transcriptional factors: emerging suspects in hematologic disorders.

Gao J(1), Chen YH(1), Peterson LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
251 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611 USA.

GATA transcription factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that regulate
transcription during development and cell differentiation. The three important
GATA transcription factors GATA1, GATA2 and GATA3 play essential roles in the
development and maintenance of hematopoietic systems. GATA1 is required for the
erythroid and megakaryocytic commitment during hematopoiesis. GATA2 is crucial
for the proliferation and survival of early hematopoietic cells, and is also
involved in lineage specific transcriptional regulation as the dynamic partner of
GATA1. GATA3 plays an essential role in T lymphoid cell development and immune
regulation. As a result, mutations in genes encoding the GATA transcription
factors or alteration in the protein expression level or their function have been
linked to a variety of human hematologic disorders. In this review, we summarized
the current knowledge regarding the disrupted biologic function of GATA in
various hematologic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4594744
PMID: 26445707  [PubMed]


47. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;390(Pt 1):241-65. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_10.

Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with EBV Disease.

Cohen JI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, MSC 8007, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
jcohen@niaid.nih.gov.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects nearly all humans and usually is asymptomatic,
or in the case of adolescents and young adults, it can result in infectious
mononucleosis. EBV-infected B cells are controlled primarily by NK cells, iNKT
cells, CD4 T cells, and CD8 T cells. While mutations in proteins important for B 
cell function can affect EBV infection of these cells, these mutations do not
result in severe EBV infection. Some genetic disorders affecting T and NK cell
function result in failure to control EBV infection, but do not result in
increased susceptibility to other virus infections. These include mutations in
SH2D1A, BIRC4, ITK, CD27, MAGT1, CORO1A, and LRBA. Since EBV is the only virus
that induces proliferation of B cells, the study of these diseases has helped to 
identify proteins critical for interactions of T and/or NK cells with B cells.
Mutations in three genes associated with hemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis, PRF1,
STXBP2, and UNC13D, can also predispose to severe chronic active EBV disease.
Severe EBV infection can be associated with immunodeficiencies that also
predispose to other viral infections and in some cases other bacterial and fungal
infections. These include diseases due to mutations in PIK3CD, PIK3R1, CTPS1,
STK4, GATA2, MCM4, FCGR3A, CARD11, ATM, and WAS. In addition, patients with
severe combined immunodeficiency, which can be due to mutations in a number of
different genes, are at high risk for various infections as well as EBV B cell
lymphomas. Identification of proteins important for control of EBV may help to
identify new targets for immunosuppressive therapies.

PMID: 26424649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;137(2):638-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.07.043. 
Epub 2015 Sep 26.

GATA2 deficiency underlying severe blastomycosis and fatal herpes simplex
virus-associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Spinner MA(1), Ker JP(2), Stoudenmire CJ(3), Fadare O(3), Mace EM(4), Orange
JS(4), Hsu AP(5), Holland SM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, Calif.
(2)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tenn. (3)Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tenn. (4)Center for Human Immunobiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Tex. (5)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Md. (6)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md. Electronic address: smh@nih.gov.

PMCID: PMC4747814 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26395816  [PubMed - in process]


49. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 21;10(9):e0138621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138621.
eCollection 2015.

Embryonic Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells Reside in Muscle before Bone Marrow
Hematopoiesis.

Tanaka Y(1), Inoue-Yokoo T(2), Kulkeaw K(2), Yanagi-Mizuochi C(3), Shirasawa
S(3), Nakanishi Y(4), Sugiyama D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Medical Innovation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan;
Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka
Japan. (2)Department of Research and Development of Next Generation Medicine,
Kyushu University Faculty of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of
Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka Japan. (4)Center
for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka,
Japan. (5)Center for Advanced Medical Innovation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan; Department of Research and Development of Next Generation Medicine, Kyushu
University Faculty of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan; Center for Clinical and
Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

In mice, hematopoietic cells home to bone marrow from fetal liver prenatally. To 
elucidate mechanisms underlying homing, we performed immunohistochemistry with
the hematopoietic cell marker c-Kit, and observed c-Kit(+) cells localized inside
muscle surrounding bone after 14.5 days post coitum. Flow cytometric analysis
showed that CD45(+) c-Kit(+) hematopoietic cells were more abundant in muscle
than in bone marrow between 14.5 and 17.5 days post coitum, peaking at 16.5 days 
post coitum. CD45(+) c-Kit(+) cells in muscle at 16.5 days post coitum exhibited 
higher expression of Gata2, among several hematopoietic genes, than did fetal
liver or bone marrow cells. Colony formation assays revealed that muscle
hematopoietic cells possess hematopoietic progenitor activity. Furthermore, exo
utero transplantation revealed that fetal liver hematopoietic progenitor cells
home to muscle and then to BM. Our findings demonstrate that hematopoietic
progenitor cell homing occurs earlier than previously reported and that
hematopoietic progenitor cells reside in muscle tissue before bone marrow
hematopoiesis occurs during mouse embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4577119
PMID: 26389592  [PubMed - in process]


50. Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 1;407(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.012. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

GATA2 regulates Wnt signaling to promote primitive red blood cell fate.

Mimoto MS(1), Kwon S(1), Green YS(2), Goldman D(1), Christian JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology Oregon Health and Science
University, School of Medicine, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA. (2)Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy and Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and
Hematologic Malignancies University of Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, 
UT 94132, USA. (3)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy and Internal Medicine,
Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies University of Utah, School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 94132, USA. Electronic address:
jan.christian@neuro.utah.edu.

Primitive erythropoiesis is regulated in a non cell-autonomous fashion across
evolution from frogs to mammals. In Xenopus laevis, signals from the overlying
ectoderm are required to induce the mesoderm to adopt an erythroid fate. Previous
studies in our lab identified the transcription factor GATA2 as a key regulator
of this ectodermal signal. To identify GATA2 target genes in the ectoderm
required for red blood cell formation in the mesoderm, we used microarray
analysis to compare gene expression in ectoderm from GATA2 depleted and wild type
embryos. Our analysis identified components of the non-canonical and canonical
Wnt pathways as being reciprocally up- and down-regulated downstream of GATA2 in 
both mesoderm and ectoderm. We show that up-regulation of canonical Wnt signaling
during gastrulation blocks commitment to a hematopoietic fate while
down-regulation of non-canonical Wnt signaling impairs erythroid differentiation.
Our results are consistent with a model in which GATA2 contributes to inhibition 
of canonical Wnt signaling, thereby permitting progenitors to exit the cell cycle
and commit to a hematopoietic fate. Subsequently, activation of non-canonical Wnt
signaling plays a later role in enabling these progenitors to differentiate as
mature red blood cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4641806 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26365900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 11;10(9):e0137699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137699.
eCollection 2015.

PU.1 Suppresses Th2 Cytokine Expression via Silencing of GATA3 Transcription in
Dendritic Cells.

Yashiro T(1), Kubo M(2), Ogawa H(3), Okumura K(3), Nishiyama C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, Department of Biological
Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo
University of Science, 6-3-1 Niijuku, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-8585, Japan;
Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Cytokine Regulation,
Integrative Medical Science (IMS), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Kanagawa, Japan;
Division of Molecular Pathology, Research Institute for Biomedical Science, Tokyo
University of Science, 2669 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba, 278-0022, Japan. (3)Atopy
Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

The transcription factor PU.1 is predominantly expressed in dendritic cells (DCs)
and is essential for DC differentiation. Although there are several reports that 
PU.1 positively regulates the expression of DC-specific genes, whether PU.1 also 
has a suppressive effect on DCs is largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that PU.1
suppresses the expression of Th2 cytokines including IL-13 and IL-5 in bone
marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs), through repression of the expression of GATA3, which 
is a master regulator of Th2 differentiations. When PU.1 siRNA was introduced
into BMDCs, LPS-induced expression of IL-13 and IL-5 was increased along with
upregulation of the constitutive expression of GATA2 and GATA3. The additional
introduction of GATA3 siRNA but not of GATA2 siRNA abrogated PU.1 siRNA-mediated 
upregulation of IL-13 and IL-5. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that
PU.1 bound to Gata3 proximal promoter region, which is more dominant than the
distal promoter in driving GATA3 transcription in DCs. The degree of histone
acetylation at the Gata3 promoter was decreased in PU.1 siRNA-introduced DCs,
suggesting the involvement of PU.1 in chromatin modification of the Gata3
promoter. Treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A, 
increased the degree of histone H3 acetylation at the Gata3 promoter and induced 
the subsequent expression of GATA3. Experiments using HDAC inhibitors and siRNAs 
showed that HDAC3 suppressed GATA3 expression. The recruitment of HDAC3 to the
Gata3 promoter was decreased by PU.1 knockdown. LPS-induced IL-13 expression was 
dramatically reduced in BMDCs generated from mice lacking the conserved GATA3
response element, termed CGRE, which is an essential site for the binding of
GATA3 on the Il-13 promoter. The degree of H3K4me3 at CGRE was significantly
increased in PU.1 siRNA-transfected stimulated DCs. Our results indicate that
PU.1 plays pivotal roles in DC development and function, serving not only as a
transcriptional activator but also as a repressor.

PMCID: PMC4567381
PMID: 26361334  [PubMed - in process]


52. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3427-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402856. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

The Transcription Factor Ehf Is Involved in TGF-ß-Induced Suppression of FceRI
and c-Kit Expression and FceRI-Mediated Activation in Mast Cells.

Yamazaki S(1), Nakano N(2), Honjo A(1), Hara M(3), Maeda K(3), Nishiyama C(4),
Kitaura J(3), Ohtsuka Y(5), Okumura K(3), Ogawa H(3), Shimizu T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan;
and. (2)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; nbnakano@juntendo.ac.jp. (3)Atopy (Allergy)
Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421,
Japan; (4)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Biological Science and Technology,
Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo 
125-8585, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; and.

FceRI, which is composed of a, ß, and <U+03B3> subunits, plays an important role in
IgE-mediated allergic responses. TGF-ß1 has been reported to suppress FceRI and
stem cell factor receptor c-Kit expression on mast cell surfaces and to suppress 
mast cell activation induced by cross-linking of FceRI. However, the molecular
mechanism by which these expressions and activation are suppressed by TGF-ß1
remains unclear. In this study, we found that the expression of Ets homologous
factor (Ehf), a member of the Ets family transcriptional factors, is upregulated 
by TGF-ß/Smad signaling in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs). Forced
expression of Ehf in BMMCs repressed the transcription of genes encoding FceRIa, 
FceRIß, and c-Kit, resulting in a reduction in cell surface FceRI and c-Kit
expression. Additionally, forced expression of Ehf suppressed FceRI-mediated
degranulation and cytokine production. Ehf inhibited the promoter activity of
genes encoding FceRIa, FceRIß, and c-Kit by binding to these gene promoters.
Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Gata1, Gata2, and Stat5b were lower in BMMCs
stably expressing Ehf compared with control cells. Because GATA-1 and GATA-2 are 
positive regulators of FceRI and c-Kit expression, decreased expression of GATAs 
may be also involved in the reduction of FceRI and c-Kit expression. Decreased
expression of Stat5 may contribute to the suppression of cytokine production by
BMMCs. In part, mast cell response to TGF-ß1 was mimicked by forced expression of
Ehf, suggesting that TGF-ß1 suppresses FceRI and c-Kit expression and suppresses 
FceRI-mediated activation through upregulation of Ehf.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26297757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biol Res. 2015 Aug 22;48:47. doi: 10.1186/s40659-015-0038-3.

Integrated analyses of copy number variations and gene differential expression in
lung squamous-cell carcinoma.

Yang Z(1,)(2), Zhuan B(3), Yan Y(4), Jiang S(5), Wang T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang
Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China. zhaoyyd@163.com. (2)Department of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia People's Hospital, Yinchuan, 750011, China.
zhaoyyd@163.com. (3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia
People's Hospital, Yinchuan, 750011, China. bingzhuanan@126.com. (4)Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia People's Hospital, Yinchuan,
750011, China. yingyanand@yeah.net. (5)Department of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China.
siminjjj@126.com. (6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China. taowangtts@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Although numerous efforts have been made, the pathogenesis underlying
lung squamous-cell carcinoma (SCC) remains unclear. This study aimed to identify 
the CNV-driven genes by an integrated analysis of both the gene differential
expression and copy number variation (CNV).
RESULTS: A higher burden of the CNVs was found in 10-50 kb length. The 16
CNV-driven genes mainly located in chr 1 and chr 3 were enriched in immune
response [e.g. complement factor H (CFH) and Fc fragment of IgG, low affinity
IIIa, receptor (FCGR3A)], starch and sucrose metabolism [e.g. amylase alpha 2A
(AMY2A)]. Furthermore, 38 TFs were screened for the 9 CNV-driven genes and then
the regulatory network was constructed, in which the GATA-binding factor 1, 2,
and 3 (GATA1, GATA2, GATA3) jointly regulated the expression of TP63.
CONCLUSIONS: The above CNV-driven genes might be potential contributors to the
development of lung SCC.

PMCID: PMC4546326
PMID: 26297502  [PubMed - in process]


54. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 19;10(8):e0136020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136020.
eCollection 2015.

GATA2 rs2335052 Polymorphism Predicts the Survival of Patients with Colorectal
Cancer.

Liu X(1), Jiang B(2), Wang A(2), Di J(2), Wang Z(2), Chen L(2), Su X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Central Laboratory, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute,
Beijing, China. (2)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Department of Minimally Invasive Gastrointestinal
Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2) is a transcription factor that has
essential roles in hematologic malignancies and progression of various solid
tumors. Our previous studies suggested that high GATA2 expression is associated
with recurrence of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the influence of GATA2
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the survival of CRC remains unknown.
METHODS: We genotyped GATA2 SNP rs2335052 using Sanger sequencing after PCR
amplification, and determined GATA2 expression by immunohistochemistry in a
cohort of 180 CRC patients. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional
hazard regression were used to analyze the association between the GATA2
rs2335052 genotypes and the clinical outcome of CRC.
RESULTS: We found that there was no significant correlation between the rs2335052
genotypes and the expression of GATA2. However, the Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis suggested that the carriers of the A-allele of SNP rs2335052 were
significantly associated with increased risk of recurrence and reduced
disease-free survival (DFS), compared with those carrying the variant genotype of
GG in rs2335052 (P = 0.021). Moreover, univariate and multivariate Cox regression
analyses revealed that GATA2 SNP rs2335052 was an independent risk factor for the
DFS of CRC patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that GATA2 SNP rs2335052 is an independent
predictor for prognosis of CRC patients. This raised the possibility that SNP
rs2335052 may serve as a potential indicator for predicting recurrence of CRC
after curative colectomy.

PMCID: PMC4546112
PMID: 26287967  [PubMed - in process]


55. Genesis. 2015 Oct;53(10):640-51. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22884. Epub 2015 Sep 5.

BAC transgenic zebrafish reveal hypothalamic enhancer activity around obesity
associated SNP rs9939609 within the human FTO gene.

Rinkwitz S(1,)(2), Geng FS(1), Manning E(1), Suster M(3), Kawakami K(4), Becker
TS(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brain and Mind Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of Sydney,
Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia. (2)Department of Physiology, School of
Medicine, University of Sydney, Australia. (3)Neural Circuits and Behavior Group,
Uni Research AS, Bergen, Norway. (4)Division of Molecular and Developmental
Biology, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in FTO intron 1 have been associated with obesity
risk, leading to the hypothesis that FTO is the obesity-related gene. However,
other studies have shown that the FTO gene is part of the regulatory domain of
the neighboring IRX3 gene and that enhancers in FTO intron 1 regulate IRX3. While
Irx3 activity was shown to be necessary in the hypothalamus for the metabolic
function of Irx3 in mouse, no enhancers with hypothalamic activity have been
demonstrated in the risk-associated region within FTO. In order to identify
potential enhancers at the human FTO locus in vivo, we tested regulatory activity
in FTO intron 1 using BAC transgenesis in zebrafish. A minimal gata2 promoter-GFP
cassette was inserted 1.3 kb upstream of the obesity associated SNP rs9939609 in 
a human FTO BAC plasmid. In addition to the previously identified expression
domains in notochord and kidney, human FTO BAC:GFP transgenic zebrafish larvae
expressed GFP in the ventral posterior tuberculum, the posterior hypothalamus and
the anterior brainstem, which are also expression domains of zebrafish irx3a. In 
contrast, an in-frame insertion of a GFP cassette at the FTO start codon resulted
in weak ubiquitous GFP expression indicating that the promoter of FTO does likely
not react to enhancers located in the obesity risk-associated region.

© 2015 The Authors. genesis Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26271004  [PubMed - in process]


56. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Aug 12;15:87. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0083-2.

GATA2 deficiency in children and adults with severe pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis and hematologic disorders.

Griese M(1), Zarbock R(2), Costabel U(3), Hildebrandt J(4), Theegarten D(5),
Albert M(6), Thiel A(7), Schams A(8), Lange J(9), Krenke K(10), Wesselak T(11),
Schön C(12), Kappler M(13), Blum H(14), Krebs S(15), Jung A(16), Kröner C(17),
Klein C(18), Campo I(19), Luisetti M(19), Bonella F(20).

Author information: 
(1)Hauner Children's University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member
of the German Center for Lung Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
matthias.griese@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Hauner Children's University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany. ralf.zarbock@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(3)Interstitial and Rare Lung Disease Unit, Ruhrland Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. ulrich.costabel@ruhrlandklinik.uk-essen.de.
(4)Hauner Children's University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member
of the German Center for Lung Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
jenna.hildebrandt@med.uni-muenchen.de. (5)Institute for Pathology and
Neuropathology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
Dirk.Theegarten@uk-essen.de. (6)Hauner Children's University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany. michael.albert@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(7)Hauner Children's University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member
of the German Center for Lung Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
antonia.thiel@med.uni-muenchen.de. (8)Hauner Children's University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany. andrea.schams@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(9)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Allergy, University Hospital,
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. joanna_lange@wp.pl. (10)Department of
Pediatric Pneumology and Allergy, University Hospital, University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. katarzynakrenke@gmail.com. (11)Hauner Children's University
Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung
Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
traudl.wesselak@med.uni-muenchen.de. (12)Hauner Children's University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany. Carola.Schoen@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(13)Hauner Children's University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member 
of the German Center for Lung Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
matthias.kappler@med.uni-muenchen.de. (14)LAFUGA Genomics, Gene center,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. blum@lmb.uni-muenchen.de. 
(15)LAFUGA Genomics, Gene center, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich,
Germany. krebs-st@lmb.uni-muenchen.de. (16)Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany. andreas.jung@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(17)Hauner Children's University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member 
of the German Center for Lung Research, Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany.
carolin.kroener@med.uni-muenchen.de. (18)Hauner Children's University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Member of the German Center for Lung Research,
Lindwurmstr. 4, 80337, Munich, Germany. christoph.klein@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(19)Department of Molecular Medicine, Pneumology Unit, IRCCS San Matteo Hospital 
Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. i.campo@smatteo.pv.it.
(20)Interstitial and Rare Lung Disease Unit, Ruhrland Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. Francesco.Bonella@ruhrlandklinik.uk-essen.de.

BACKGROUND: The majority of cases with severe pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
(PAP) are caused by auto-antibodies against GM-CSF. A multitude of genetic and
exogenous causes are responsible for few other cases. Goal of this study was to
determine the prevalence of GATA2 deficiency in children and adults with PAP and 
hematologic disorders.
METHODS: Of 21 patients with GM-CSF-autoantibody negative PAP, 13 had no other
organ involvement and 8 had some form of hematologic disorder. The latter were
sequenced for GATA2.
RESULTS: Age at start of PAP ranged from 0.3 to 64 years, 4 patients were
children. In half of the subjects GATA2-sequence variations were found, two of
which were considered disease causing. Those two patients had the typical
phenotype of GATA2 deficiency, one of whom additionally showed a previously
undescribed feature - a cholesterol pneumonia. Hematologic disorders included
chronic myeloic leukemia, juvenile myelo-monocytic leukemia, lymphoblastic
leukemia, sideroblastic anemia and two cases of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). A
4 year old child with MDS and DiGeorge Syndrome Type 2 was rescued with
repetitive whole lung lavages and her PAP was cured with heterologous stem cell
transplant.
CONCLUSIONS: In children and adults with severe GM-CSF negative PAP a close
cooperation between pneumologists and hemato-oncologists is needed to diagnose
the underlying diseases, some of which are caused by mutations of transcription
factor GATA2. Treatment with whole lung lavages as well as stem cell transplant
may be successful.

PMCID: PMC4542098
PMID: 26264606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Tissue Cell. 2015 Oct;47(5):471-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2015.07.006. Epub 2015 Jul
29.

A simple method for differentiation of H9 cells into neuroectoderm.

Liu A(1), Zhang D(2), Liu L(3), Gong J(4), Liu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering & Department of Histology and
Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei,
Anhui 230032, China; School of Nursing, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui
230032, China. (2)Institute of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering & Department of
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China. (3)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China. (4)School of Nursing, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China. (5)Institute of Stem Cell and
Tissue Engineering & Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China; Central
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China. Electronic address:
chaol1974@ahmu.edu.cn.

Human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can form neuroectoderm (NE), providing a
platform for in vitro dissection of NE formation. However, human ESCs can
differentiate into all three germ layers. It thus is crucial to develop efficient
methods for differentiation of human ESCs into NE cells. Both plating cell
density and localized cell density (LCD) affect NE differentiation. Here, we
developed a cell cluster-based NE differentiation method, in which both plating
cell density and LCD are under control. Using our new method, high plating cell
densities promote expression of PAX6, a NE marker protein. Two SMAD signaling
blockers, SB431542 and NOGGIN, downregulate OCT4 and upregulate PAX6, while does 
not affect mRNA expression of GATA2 after 5 d of differentiation. Moreover, IB
analysis showed a time-dependent upregulation of PAX6 and beta-III-tubulin
together with a downregulation of OCT4 during the neural differentiation.
Coexpression of both TH and beta-III-tubulin in the H9-derived cells was also
detected, proving the NE cells have an ability to differentiate into one of the
specific neurons. Together, we established a simple method for generating NE
cells from H9 cells, which might contribute to develop high efficient method for 
neural differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26253416  [PubMed - in process]


58. Br J Dermatol. 2016 Jan;174(1):169-71. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14062. Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Merkel cell carcinoma in a patient with GATA2 deficiency: a novel association
with primary immunodeficiency.

Crall C(1), Morley KW(2), Rabinowits G(3), Schmidt B(4), Broyles AD(5), Huang
JT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, U.S.A. (2)Harvard Combined Dermatology
Program, Boston, MA, U.S.A. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, U.S.A. (4)Department of
Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115,
U.S.A. (5)Division of Allergy/Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, 300
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A. (6)Dermatology Program, Boston
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A.

A 55-year-old woman with GATA2 deficiency and neurofibromatosis 1 was diagnosed
with Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC). This polyomavirus-associated cutaneous
malignancy has previously been associated with immunosuppression and acquired
immunodeficiencies such as HIV/AIDS. However, MCC has not been previously
reported in the setting of underlying primary or inherited immunodeficiency.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 26252413  [PubMed - in process]


59. Cell Regen (Lond). 2015 Aug 5;4(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s13619-015-0018-7. eCollection
2015.

GATA2(-/-) human ESCs undergo attenuated endothelial to hematopoietic transition 
and thereafter granulocyte commitment.

Huang K(1), Du J(1), Ma N(1), Liu J(2), Wu P(1), Dong X(2), Meng M(1), Wang W(2),
Chen X(1), Shi X(1), Chen Q(1), Yang Z(1), Chen S(1), Zhang J(1), Li Y(3), Li
W(1), Zheng Y(1), Cai J(1), Li P(1), Sun X(4), Wang J(1), Pei D(1), Pan G(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530 China ; Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530 China. 
(2)Department of Hematology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510630 China.
(3)South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510641 China. (4)Key
Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, China ;
Key Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Hematopoiesis is a progressive process collectively controlled by an 
elaborate network of transcription factors (TFs). Among these TFs, GATA2 has been
implicated to be critical for regulating multiple steps of hematopoiesis in mouse
models. However, whether similar function of GATA2 is conserved in human
hematopoiesis, especially during early embryonic development stage, is largely
unknown.
RESULTS: To examine the role of GATA2 in human background, we generated
homozygous GATA2 knockout human embryonic stem cells (GATA2 (-/-) hESCs) and
analyzed their blood differentiation potential. Our results demonstrated that
GATA2 (-/-) hESCs displayed attenuated generation of CD34(+)CD43(+) hematopoietic
progenitor cells (HPCs), due to the impairment of endothelial to hematopoietic
transition (EHT). Interestingly, GATA2 (-/-) hESCs retained the potential to
generate erythroblasts and macrophages, but never granulocytes. We further
identified that SPI1 downregulation was partially responsible for the defects of 
GATA2 (-/-) hESCs in generation of CD34(+)CD43(+) HPCs and granulocytes.
Furthermore, we found that GATA2 (-/-) hESCs restored the granulocyte potential
in the presence of Notch signaling.
CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed the essential roles of GATA2 in EHT and
granulocyte development through regulating SPI1, and uncovered a role of Notch
signaling in granulocyte generation during hematopoiesis modeled by human ESCs.

PMCID: PMC4526303
PMID: 26246892  [PubMed]


60. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2016 Jan;22(1):61-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2015.07.030. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

DNMT3A R882 Mutation with FLT3-ITD Positivity Is an Extremely Poor Prognostic
Factor in Patients with Normal-Karyotype Acute Myeloid Leukemia after Allogeneic 
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.

Ahn JS(1), Kim HJ(2), Kim YK(1), Lee SS(1), Jung SH(1), Yang DH(1), Lee JJ(1),
Kim NY(3), Choi SH(3), Jung CW(4), Jang JH(4), Kim HJ(5), Moon JH(6), Sohn SK(6),
Won JH(7), Kim SH(8), Kim DD(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital,
Jeollanam-do, Korea. (2)Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Jeollanam-do, Korea. Electronic address: hjoonk@chonnam.ac.kr.
(3)Genomic Research Center for Hematopoietic Diseases, Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital, Jeollanam-do, Korea. (4)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of
Hematology, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of
Hematology-Oncology, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, Korea.
(7)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Soon Chun Hyang University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (8)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Dong-A University College of
Medicine, Busan, Korea. (9)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology,
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

The prognostic relevance of epigenetic modifying genes (DNMT3A, TET2, and IDH1/2)
in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has been investigated extensively. 
However, the prognostic implications of these mutations after allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) have not been evaluated comprehensively 
in patients with normal-karyotype (NK)-AML. A total of 115 patients who received 
allogeneic HCT for NK-AML were retrospectively evaluated for the FLT3-ITD, NPM1, 
CEBPA, DNMT3A, TET2, IDH1/2, WT1, NRAS, ASXL2, FAT1, DNAH11, and GATA2 mutations 
in diagnostic samples and analyzed for long-term outcomes after allogeneic HCT.
The prevalence rates for the mutations were as follows: FLT3-ITD positivity
(FLT3-ITD(pos)) (32.2%), NPM1 mutation (43.5%), CEBPA mutation (double) (24.6%), 
DNMT3A mutation (DNMT3A(mut)) (31.3%), DNMT3A R882(mut) (18.3%), TET2 mutation
(8.7%), and IDH1/2 mutation (16.5%). The 5-year overall survival (OS) and
event-free survival (EFS) rates were 57.3% and 58.1%, respectively. A
multivariate analysis revealed that FLT3-ITD(pos) (hazard ratio, [HR], 2.23;
P = .006) and DNMT3A R882(mut) (HR, 2.74; P = .002) were unfavorable prognostic
factors for OS. In addition, both mutations were significant risk factors for EFS
and relapse. People with DNMT3A R882(mut) accompanied by FLT3-ITD(pos) had worse 
OS and EFS, and higher relapse rates than those with the other mutations, which
were confirmed in a propensity score 1:2 matching analysis. These results suggest
that DNMT3A R882(mut), particularly when accompanied by FLT3-ITD(pos), is a
significant prognostic factor for inferior transplantation survival outcome by
increasing relapse risk, even after allogeneic HCT.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26234722  [PubMed - in process]


61. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2979-94. doi: 10.1172/JCI78888. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

GATA2 is required for lymphatic vessel valve development and maintenance.

Kazenwadel J, Betterman KL, Chong CE, Stokes PH, Lee YK, Secker GA, Agalarov Y,
Demir CS, Lawrence DM, Sutton DL, Tabruyn SP, Miura N, Salminen M, Petrova TV,
Matthews JM, Hahn CN, Scott HS, Harvey NL.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2924-6.

Heterozygous germline mutations in the zinc finger transcription factor GATA2
have recently been shown to underlie a range of clinical phenotypes, including
Emberger syndrome, a disorder characterized by lymphedema and predisposition to
myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia (MDS/AML). Despite well-defined
roles in hematopoiesis, the functions of GATA2 in the lymphatic vasculature and
the mechanisms by which GATA2 mutations result in lymphedema have not been
characterized. Here, we have provided a molecular explanation for lymphedema
predisposition in a subset of patients with germline GATA2 mutations.
Specifically, we demonstrated that Emberger-associated GATA2 missense mutations
result in complete loss of GATA2 function, with respect to the capacity to
regulate the transcription of genes that are important for lymphatic vessel valve
development. We identified a putative enhancer element upstream of the key
lymphatic transcriptional regulator PROX1 that is bound by GATA2, and the
transcription factors FOXC2 and NFATC1. Emberger GATA2 missense mutants had a
profoundly reduced capacity to bind this element. Conditional Gata2 deletion in
mice revealed that GATA2 is required for both development and maintenance of
lymphovenous and lymphatic vessel valves. Together, our data unveil essential
roles for GATA2 in the lymphatic vasculature and explain why a select catalogue
of human GATA2 mutations results in lymphedema.

PMCID: PMC4563742
PMID: 26214525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2995-3007. doi: 10.1172/JCI79386. Epub 2015 Jul 
27.

Lymph flow regulates collecting lymphatic vessel maturation in vivo.

Sweet DT, Jiménez JM, Chang J, Hess PR, Mericko-Ishizuka P, Fu J, Xia L, Davies
PF, Kahn ML.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2924-6.

Fluid shear forces have established roles in blood vascular development and
function, but whether such forces similarly influence the low-flow lymphatic
system is unknown. It has been difficult to test the contribution of fluid forces
in vivo because mechanical or genetic perturbations that alter flow often have
direct effects on vessel growth. Here, we investigated the functional role of
flow in lymphatic vessel development using mice deficient for the
platelet-specific receptor C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC2) as blood
backfills the lymphatic network and blocks lymph flow in these animals.
CLEC2-deficient animals exhibited normal growth of the primary mesenteric
lymphatic plexus but failed to form valves in these vessels or remodel them into 
a structured, hierarchical network. Smooth muscle cell coverage (SMC coverage) of
CLEC2-deficient lymphatic vessels was both premature and excessive, a phenotype
identical to that observed with loss of the lymphatic endothelial transcription
factor FOXC2. In vitro evaluation of lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) revealed 
that low, reversing shear stress is sufficient to induce expression of genes
required for lymphatic valve development and identified GATA2 as an upstream
transcriptional regulator of FOXC2 and the lymphatic valve genetic program. These
studies reveal that lymph flow initiates and regulates many of the key steps in
collecting lymphatic vessel maturation and development.

PMCID: PMC4563745
PMID: 26214523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2924-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI83189. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Lymphatic vessel development: fluid flow and valve-forming cells.

Kume T.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2995-3007.
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2979-94.

Hemodynamic forces regulate many aspects of blood vessel disease and development,
including susceptibility to atherosclerosis and remodeling of primary blood
vessels into a mature vascular network. Vessels of the lymphatic circulatory
system are also subjected to fluid flow-associated forces, but the molecular and 
cellular mechanisms by which these forces regulate the formation and maintenance 
of lymphatic vessels remain largely uncharacterized. This issue of the JCI
includes two articles that begin to address how fluid flow influences lymphatic
vessel development and function. Sweet et al. demonstrate that lymph flow is
essential for the remodeling of primary lymphatic vessels, for ensuring the
proper distribution of smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and for the development and
maturation of lymphatic valves. Kazenwadel et al. show that flow-induced
lymphatic valve development is initiated by the upregulation of GATA2, which has 
been linked to lymphedema in patients with Emberger syndrome. Together, these
observations and future studies inspired by these results have potential to lead 
to the development of strategies for the treatment of lymphatic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4563766 [Available on 2016-08-03]
PMID: 26214518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 23;6:7739. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8739.

Repression of arterial genes in hemogenic endothelium is sufficient for
haematopoietic fate acquisition.

Lizama CO(1), Hawkins JS(1), Schmitt CE(1), Bos FL(1), Zape JP(1), Cautivo KM(2),
Borges Pinto H(3), Rhyner AM(4), Yu H(1), Donohoe ME(3), Wythe JD(4), Zovein
AC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California 94158, USA. (2)Department of Nutrition, Diabetes, and
Metabolism, School of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago 8331150, Chile. (3)1] Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains,
New York 10605, USA. [2] Department of Neuroscience, Brain and Mind Research
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA. [3]
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York 10065, USA. (4)1] Department of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. [2]
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (5)1] Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, USA. [2] Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Changes in cell fate and identity are essential for endothelial-to-haematopoietic
transition (EHT), an embryonic process that generates the first adult populations
of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from hemogenic endothelial cells. Dissecting 
EHT regulation is a critical step towards the production of in vitro derived
HSCs. Yet, we do not know how distinct endothelial and haematopoietic fates are
parsed during the transition. Here we show that genes required for arterial
identity function later to repress haematopoietic fate. Tissue-specific,
temporally controlled, genetic loss of arterial genes (Sox17 and Notch1) during
EHT results in increased production of haematopoietic cells due to loss of
Sox17-mediated repression of haematopoietic transcription factors (Runx1 and
Gata2). However, the increase in EHT can be abrogated by increased Notch
signalling. These findings demonstrate that the endothelial haematopoietic fate
switch is actively repressed in a population of endothelial cells, and that
derepression of these programs augments haematopoietic output.

PMCID: PMC4519987
PMID: 26204127  [PubMed - in process]


65. Elife. 2015 Jul 20;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.07839.

Functional evidence implicating chromosome 7q22 haploinsufficiency in
myelodysplastic syndrome pathogenesis.

Wong JC(1), Weinfurtner KM(1), Alzamora Mdel P(1), Kogan SC(2), Burgess MR(3),
Zhang Y(4), Nakitandwe J(5), Ma J(5), Cheng J(5), Chen SC(5), Ho TT(6), Flach
J(6), Reynaud D(6), Passegué E(6), Downing JR(5), Shannon K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States. (3)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
United States. (4)Unit of Hematopoietic Stem Cell and Transgenic Animal Models,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
United States. (6)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem
Cell Research, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, United States.

Chromosome 7 deletions are highly prevalent in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
likely contribute to aberrant growth through haploinsufficiency. We generated
mice with a heterozygous germ line deletion of a 2-Mb interval of chromosome band
5A3 syntenic to a commonly deleted segment of human 7q22 and show that mutant
hematopoietic cells exhibit cardinal features of MDS. Specifically, the long-term
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) compartment is expanded in 5A3(+/del) mice, and the
distribution of myeloid progenitors is altered. 5A3(+/del) HSCs are defective for
lymphoid repopulating potential and show a myeloid lineage output bias. These
cell autonomous abnormalities are exacerbated by physiologic aging and upon
serial transplantation. The 5A3 deletion partially rescues defective repopulation
in Gata2 mutant mice. 5A3(+/del) hematopoietic cells exhibit decreased expression
of oxidative phosphorylation genes, increased levels of reactive oxygen species, 
and perturbed oxygen consumption. These studies provide the first functional data
linking 7q22 deletions to MDS pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4569895
PMID: 26193121  [PubMed - in process]


66. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0132375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132375.
eCollection 2015.

Residual Disease in a Novel Xenograft Model of RUNX1-Mutated, Cytogenetically
Normal Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Sivagnanalingam U(1), Balys M(1), Eberhardt A(1), Wang N(2), Myers JR(3), Ashton 
JM(4), Becker MW(1), Calvi LM(1), Mendler JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America. (3)Genomics Research
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United
States of America. (4)Genomics Research Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America; Department of Microbiology
& Immunology, James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.

Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML) patients harboring RUNX1
mutations have a dismal prognosis with anthracycline/cytarabine-based
chemotherapy. We aimed to develop an in vivo model of RUNX1-mutated, CN-AML in
which the nature of residual disease in this molecular disease subset could be
explored. We utilized a well-characterized patient-derived, RUNX1-mutated CN-AML 
line (CG-SH). Tail vein injection of CG-SH into NOD scid gamma mice led to
leukemic engraftment in the bone marrow, spleen, and peripheral blood within 6
weeks. Treatment of leukemic mice with anthracycline/cytarabine-based
chemotherapy resulted in clearance of disease from the spleen and peripheral
blood, but persistence of disease in the bone marrow as assessed by flow
cytometry and secondary transplantation. Whole exome sequencing of CG-SH revealed
mutations in ASXL1, CEBPA, GATA2, and SETBP1, not previously reported. We
conclude that CG-SH xenografts are a robust, reproducible in vivo model of CN-AML
in which to explore mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance and novel therapeutic
approaches.

PMCID: PMC4503761
PMID: 26177509  [PubMed - in process]


67. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0131577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131577.
eCollection 2015.

The LMO2 -25 Region Harbours GATA2-Dependent Myeloid Enhancer and RUNX-Dependent 
T-Lymphoid Repressor Activity.

Bonadies N(1), Göttgens B(1), Calero-Nieto FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge University,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Lim domain only 2 (LMO2) is a transcriptional co-factor required for angiogenesis
and the specification of haematopoietic cells during development. LMO2 is widely 
expressed within haematopoiesis with the exception of T-cells. Failure to
downregulate LMO2 during T-cell maturation leads to leukaemia, thus underlining
the critical nature of context-dependent regulation of LMO2 expression. We
previously identified a distal regulatory element of LMO2 (element -25) that
cooperates with the proximal promoter in directing haematopoietic expression.
Here we dissected the functional activity of element -25 and showed it to consist
of two modules that conferred independent and cell-type specific activities: a 3'
myeloid enhancer and a 5' T-cell repressor. The myeloid enhancer was bound by
GATA2 in progenitors and its activity depended on a highly conserved GATA motif, 
whereas the T-cell repressor moiety of element -25 was bound by the Core Binding 
Factor in T-cells and its repressive activity depended on a highly conserved RUNT
motif. Since the myeloid enhancer and nearby downstream region is recurrently
involved in oncogenic translocations, our data suggest that the -25 enhancer
region provides an open chromatin environment prone to translocations, which in
turn cause aberrant LMO2 expression in T-cells due to the removal of the adjacent
T-cell repressor.

PMCID: PMC4498896
PMID: 26161748  [PubMed - in process]


68. Dev Genes Evol. 2015 Jul;225(4):253-7. doi: 10.1007/s00427-015-0511-6. Epub 2015 
Jul 11.

A GATA2/3 gene potentially involved in larval shell formation of the Pacific
oyster Crassostrea gigas.

Liu G(1), Huan P, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao, 266071, China.

Shells are one of the most notable features of the majority of mollusks. In
addition, the shell is also considered a key characteristic during molluscan
evolution and development. However, although the morphological changes during
larval shell formation have been well described, the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, we focused on the potential
involvement of a GATA gene in shell formation because GATA genes are often
downstream genes of BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) signaling pathways, which
have been suggested to participate in molluscan shell formation. In the Pacific
oyster Crassostrea gigas, we observed that the expression of a GATA2/3 homolog
(cgi-gata2/3) was clearly restricted to the edge of the shell field in early
larval stages (trochophore and D-veliger). This expression pattern supports the
notion that cgi-gata2/3 gene plays conserved roles in bilaterian ectodermal
development. It is possible that cgi-gata2/3 is one shell-formation gene under
the regulation of BMP signaling pathways. In addition, cgi-gata2/3 was also
detected in the ventral side of embryos. The expression of cgi-gata2/3 away from 
the shell field may be involved in hematopoiesis. Our results provide fundamental
support for studies into the molecular mechanisms of larval shell formation and
the functions of molluscan GATA genes.

PMID: 26159670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Med. 2015 Oct;128(10):e41-2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.06.008. Epub 2015
Jul 4.

Disseminated mycobacterial infection and scabies infestation.

Brondfield S(1), Reid M(2), Patel K(3), Ten R(4), Dhaliwal G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco. Electronic
address: sam.brondfield@ucsf.edu. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases, University of California, San Francisco. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco. (4)Department of Medicine,
Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco. (5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco.

PMID: 26149672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.261. [Epub ahead of print]

The oncofusion protein FUS-ERG targets key hematopoietic regulators and modulates
the all-trans retinoic acid signaling pathway in t(16;21) acute myeloid leukemia.

Sotoca AM(1), Prange KH(1), Reijnders B(1), Mandoli A(1), Nguyen LN(1),
Stunnenberg HG(1), Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The ETS transcription factor ERG has been implicated as a major regulator of both
normal and aberrant hematopoiesis. In acute myeloid leukemias harboring t(16;21),
ERG function is deregulated due to a fusion with FUS/TLS resulting in the
expression of a FUS-ERG oncofusion protein. How this oncofusion protein
deregulates the normal ERG transcription program is unclear. Here, we show that
FUS-ERG acts in the context of a heptad of proteins (ERG, FLI1, GATA2, LYL1,
LMO2, RUNX1 and TAL1) central to proper expression of genes involved in
maintaining a stem cell hematopoietic phenotype. Moreover, in t(16;21) FUS-ERG
co-occupies genomic regions bound by the nuclear receptor heterodimer RXR:RARA
inhibiting target gene expression and interfering with hematopoietic
differentiation. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of t(16;21) cells as well as
FUS-ERG knockdown alleviate the myeloid-differentiation block. Together, the
results suggest that FUS-ERG acts as a transcriptional repressor of the retinoic 
acid signaling pathway.Oncogene advance online publication, 6 July 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.261.

PMID: 26148230  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


71. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Jun 19;9:3153-62. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S81911. eCollection
2015.

Histone demethylase LSD1-mediated repression of GATA-2 is critical for erythroid 
differentiation.

Guo Y(1), Fu X(2), Jin Y(1), Sun J(1), Liu Y(1), Huo B(1), Li X(1), Hu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of
China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic
of China ; Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China. (3)School of 
Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China ; Key
Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China ; National Engineering
Laboratory of AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA-2 is predominantly expressed in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and counteracts the erythroid-specific
transcription factor GATA-1, to modulate the proliferation and differentiation of
hematopoietic cells. During hematopoietic cell differentiation, GATA-2 exhibits
dynamic expression patterns, which are regulated by multiple transcription
factors.
METHODS: Stable LSD1-knockdown cell lines were established by growing murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) or mouse embryonic stem cells together with virus
particles, in the presence of Polybrene(®) at 4 µg/mL, for 24-48 hours followed
by puromycin selection (1 µg/mL) for 2 weeks. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis was used
to test whether the TAL1 transcription factor is bound to 1S promoter in the
GATA-2 locus or whether LSD1 colocalizes with TAL1 at the 1S promoter. The
sequential ChIP assay was utilized to confirm the role of LSD1 in the regulation 
of H3K4me2 at the GATA-2 locus during erythroid differentiation. Western blot
analysis was employed to detect the protein expression. The alamarBlue(®) assay
was used to examine the proliferation of the cells, and the absorbance was
monitored at optical density (OD) 570 nm and OD 600 nm.
RESULTS: In this study, we showed that LSD1 regulates the expression of GATA-2
during erythroid differentiation. Knockdown of LSD1 results in increased GATA-2
expression and inhibits the differentiation of MEL and embryonic stem cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that LSD1 binds to the 1S promoter of the GATA-2
locus and suppresses GATA-2 expression, via histone demethylation.
CONCLUSION: Our data revealed that LSD1 mediates erythroid differentiation, via
epigenetic modification of the GATA-2 locus.

PMCID: PMC4482369
PMID: 26124638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2015 Aug 6;126(6):790-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-633404. Epub 2015 Jun 
29.

Correlation of mutation profile and response in patients with myelofibrosis
treated with ruxolitinib.

Patel KP(1), Newberry KJ(2), Luthra R(1), Jabbour E(2), Pierce S(2), Cortes J(2),
Singh R(1), Mehrotra M(1), Routbort MJ(1), Luthra M(1), Manshouri T(2), Santos
FP(3), Kantarjian H(2), Verstovsek S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematopathology and. (2)Leukemia, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; and. (3)Hematology and Oncology Center,
Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Although most patients with myelofibrosis (MF) derive benefit from ruxolitinib,
some are refractory, have a suboptimal response, or quickly lose their response. 
To identify genes that may predict response to ruxolitinib, we performed targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS) of a panel of 28 genes recurrently mutated in
hematologic malignancies in a cohort of patients with MF who were treated with
ruxolitinib in a phase 1/2 study. We also tested for CALR deletions by standard
polymerase chain reaction methods. Ninety-eight percent of patients had a
mutation in =1 gene. Seventy-nine (82.1%) patients had the JAK2(V617F) mutation, 
9 (9.5%) had CALR mutations (7 type 1, 2 type 2), 3 (3.1%) had MPL mutations, and
4 (4.2%) were negative for all 3. ASXL1/JAK2 and TET2/JAK2 were the most
frequently comutated genes. Mutations in NRAS, KRAS, PTPN11, GATA2, TP53, and
RUNX1 were found in <5% of patients. Spleen response (=50% reduction in palpable 
spleen size) was inversely correlated with the number of mutations; patients with
=2 mutations had ninefold higher odds of a spleen response than those with =3
mutations (odds ratio = 9.37; 95% confidence interval, 1.86-47.2). Patients with 
=3 mutations also had a shorter time to treatment discontinuation and shorter
overall survival than those with fewer mutations. In multivariable analysis, only
number of mutations and spleen response remained associated with time to
treatment discontinuation. Patients with =3 mutations had the worst outcomes,
suggesting that multigene profiling may be useful for therapeutic planning for
MF.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4528066 [Available on 2016-08-06]
PMID: 26124496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;33(11):3304-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.2086. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

The Corepressor Rcor1 Is Essential for Normal Myeloerythroid Lineage
Differentiation.

Yao H(1), Goldman DC(2,)(3,)(4), Fan G(5), Mandel G(1,)(6), Fleming
WH(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
Oregon, USA. (3)Oregon Stem Cell Center, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon, USA. (4)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA. (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Portland, Oregon, USA.

Based on its physical interactions with histone-modifying enzymes, the
transcriptional corepressor Rcor1 has been implicated in the epigenetic
regulation blood cell development. Previously, we have demonstrated that Rcor1 is
essential for the maturation of definitive erythroid cells and fetal survival. To
determine the functional role of Rcor1 in steady-state hematopoiesis in the
adult, we used a conditional knockout approach. Here, we show that the loss of
Rcor1 expression results in the rapid onset of severe anemia due to a complete,
cell autonomous block in the maturation of committed erythroid progenitors. By
contrast, both the frequency of megakaryocyte progenitors and their capacity to
produce platelets were normal. Although the frequency of common lymphoid
progenitors and T cells was not altered, B cells were significantly reduced and
showed increased apoptosis. However, Rcor1-deficient bone marrow sustained normal
levels of B-cells following transplantation, indicating a non-cell autonomous
requirement for Rcor1 in B-cell survival. Evaluation of the myelomonocytic
lineage revealed an absence of mature neutrophils and a significant increase in
the absolute number of monocytic cells. Rcor1-deficient monocytes were less
apoptotic and showed ~100-fold more colony-forming activity than their normal
counterparts, but did not give rise to leukemia. Moreover, Rcor1(-/-) monocytes
exhibited extensive, cytokine-dependent self-renewal and overexpressed genes
associated with hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell expansion including Gata2,
Meis1, and Hoxa9. Taken together, these data demonstrate that Rcor1 is essential 
for the normal differentiation of myeloerythroid progenitors and for
appropriately regulating self-renewal activity in the monocyte lineage.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26119982  [PubMed - in process]


74. Exp Hematol. 2015 Nov;43(11):930-935.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.06.005. Epub 
2015 Jun 26.

Inactivation of Eed impedes MLL-AF9-mediated leukemogenesis through
Cdkn2a-dependent and Cdkn2a-independent mechanisms in a murine model.

Danis E(1), Yamauchi T(1), Echanique K(1), Haladyna J(1), Kalkur R(1), Riedel
S(1), Zhu N(2), Xie H(3), Bernt KM(1), Orkin SH(3), Armstrong SA(2), Neff T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora,
CO, USA; Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, Zuckerman Research Center, New York, NY, USA; Leukemia Service,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Zuckerman
Research Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; Section of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address:
Tobias.Neff@ucdenver.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a chromatin regulator with central roles 
in development and cancer. The canonical function of PRC2 is the trimethylation
of histone 3 on lysine residue 27. This epigenetic modification is associated
with gene silencing. Both tumor suppressor and oncogenic functions have been
reported for PRC2, depending on cellular context. In leukemia mediated by the
leukemogenic fusion MLL-AF9, complete ablation of canonical PRC2 function by
genetic inactivation of the core component embryonic ectoderm development (Eed)
or by combined pharmacologic inhibition of the PRC2 methyltransferases EZH2 and
EZH1 has a strong anti-leukemic effect, and this effect has been linked to
de-repression of the PRC2 target locus Cdkn2a. We asked whether inactivation of
Cdkn2a is sufficient to restore leukemic activity of Eed-inactivated MLL-AF9
leukemia cells, using combined genetic inactivation of Cdkn2a and Eed. We found
that Cdkn2a inactivation partially rescues in vitro and in vivo growth of
Eed-inactivated MLL-AF9 cells. However, the growth of Eed-null Cdkn2a-null
MLL-AF9 cells in the absence of Cdkn2a remained severely compromised in vitro and
in vivo, compared with that of their Eed-floxed Cdkn2a-null counterparts. RNA
sequencing analysis revealed that several genes previously implicated in
inefficient growth of MLL-AF9-transformed cells, including Gata2, Egr1, and
Cdkn2b were de-repressed as a consequence of Eed inactivation. Furthermore, we
found that direct binding targets of MLL fusion proteins are negatively enriched 
in Eed-inactivated Cdkn2a-null MLL-AF9-transformed cells. Our data indicate that 
interference with PRC2 function affects MLL-AF9-mediated leukemogenesis by both
Cdkn2a-dependent and Cdkn2a-independent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4630114 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26118502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e80. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467568.33831.3e.

6C.04: INTEGRATED SNP ANALYSIS AND METABOLOMIC PROFILES OF METABOLIC SYNDROME.

Marrachelli V(1), Monleon D, Morales JM, Rentero P, Martínez F, Chaves FJ,
Martin-Escudero JC, Redon J.

Author information: 
(1)1Metabolomic and Molecular Image Lab, Health Research Institute, INCLIVA,
Valencia, SPAIN 2Universitat de Valencia, UCIM, Valencia, SPAIN 3Genotyping and
Genetic Diagnosis Unit, Health Research Institute, INCLIVA, Valencia, SPAIN
4CIBERObn, Health Institute Carlos III, Madrid, and, Hypertension Unit, Internal 
Medicine, Hospital Clinico, Valencia, SPAIN 5Internal Medicine, Hospital Rio
Hortega, Valladolid, SPAIN.

OBJECTIVE: Metabolic syndrome (MS) has become a health and financial burden
worldwide. Susceptibility of genetically determined metabotype of MS has not yet 
been investigated. We aimed to identify a distinctive metabolic profile of blood 
serum which might correlates to the early detection of the development of MS
associated to genetic polymorphism.
DESIGN AND METHOD: We applied high resolution NMR spectroscopy to profile blood
serum from patients without MS (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>945) or with (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>291). Principal component
analysis (PCA) and projection to latent structures for discriminant analysis
(PLS-DA) were applied to NMR spectral datasets. Results were cross-validated
using the Venetian Blinds approach. Additionally, five SNPs previously associated
with MS were genotyped with SNPlex and tested for associations between the
metabolic profiles and the genetic variants. Statistical analysis was performed
using in-house MATLAB scripts and the PLS Toolbox statistical multivariate
analysis library.
RESULTS: Our analysis provided a PLS-DA Metabolic Syndrome discrimination model
based on NMR metabolic profile (AUC<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.86) with 84% of sensitivity and 72%
specificity. The model identified 11 metabolites differentially regulated in
patients with MS. Among others, fatty acids, glucose, alanine,
hydroxyisovalerate, acetone, trimethylamine, 2-phenylpropionate, isobutyrate and 
valine, significantly contributed to the model. The combined analysis of
metabolomics and SNP data revealed an association between the metabolic profile
of MS and genes polymorphism involved in the adiposity regulation and fatty acids
metabolism: rs2272903_TT (TFAP2B), rs3803_TT (GATA2), rs174589_CC (FADS2) and
rs174577_AA (FADS2). In addition, individuals with the rs2272903-TT genotype seem
to develop MS earlier than general population.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides new insights on the metabolic alterations
associated with a MS high-risk genotype. These results could help in future
development of risk assessment and predictive models for subclinical
cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 26102937  [PubMed]


76. Mol Cell. 2015 Jul 2;59(1):62-74. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.05.020. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Hematopoietic Signaling Mechanism Revealed from a Stem/Progenitor Cell Cistrome.

Hewitt KJ(1), Kim DH(2), Devadas P(1), Prathibha R(1), Zuo C(3), Sanalkumar R(1),
Johnson KD(1), Kang YA(1), Kim JS(2), Dewey CN(3), Keles S(4), Bresnick EH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA;
UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (2)Institute for Basic
Science, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, South 
Korea; Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro,
Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, South Korea. (3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical
Informatics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI 53705, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA. Electronic address: keles@stat.wisc.edu. (5)Department of Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA; UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Thousands of cis-elements in genomes are predicted to have vital functions.
Although conservation, activity in surrogate assays, polymorphisms, and disease
mutations provide functional clues, deletion from endogenous loci constitutes the
gold-standard test. A GATA-2-binding, Gata2 intronic cis-element (+9.5) required 
for hematopoietic stem cell genesis in mice is mutated in a human
immunodeficiency syndrome. Because +9.5 is the only cis-element known to mediate 
stem cell genesis, we devised a strategy to identify functionally comparable
enhancers ("+9.5-like") genome-wide. Gene editing revealed +9.5-like activity to 
mediate GATA-2 occupancy, chromatin opening, and transcriptional activation. A
+9.5-like element resided in Samd14, which encodes a protein of unknown function.
Samd14 increased hematopoietic progenitor levels/activity and promoted signaling 
by a pathway vital for hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell regulation (stem cell
factor/c-Kit), and c-Kit rescued Samd14 loss-of-function phenotypes. Thus, the
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell cistrome revealed a mediator of a signaling
pathway that has broad importance for stem/progenitor cell biology.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4499333 [Available on 2016-07-02]
PMID: 26073540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):2280-96. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0013. Epub 2015 
Jul 20.

Fibroblast-Negative CD34-Negative Cells from Human Adipose Tissue Contain
Mesodermal Precursors for Endothelial and Mesenchymal Cells.

Navarro A(1), Marín S(2), Riol N(3), Carbonell-Uberos F(3), Miñana MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Fundación Hospital General Universitario ,
Valencia, Spain . (2)2 Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Consorcio Hospital General Universitario , Valencia, Spain . (3)3
Immunohematology Service , Centro de Transfusiones, Valencia, Spain .

There is considerable evidence that stem/progenitor cells reside in the
vasculature during the prenatal and postnatal stages. The stromal vascular
fraction (SVF) of human adipose tissue is markedly rich in blood vessels, and it 
is a source of mesenchymal/stromal cells (MSCs). Therefore, we hypothesized that,
in addition to MSCs, the SVF may contain other mesodermal precursors. However,
the SVF has a high content of CD34(+) cells with high proliferative capacity,
which can prevent the growth of the most quiescent cells. By using an
antifibroblast (FIB) antibody coupled to microbeads, we show that ~ 90%-95% of
the nonhematopoietic CD34(+) cells were retained in the CD45(-)FIB(+) fraction.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that the
CD45(-)FIB(-)CD34(-) cell fraction expressed higher mRNA levels of KDR and GATA2 
than its complementary CD45(-)FIB(-)CD34(+) cell fraction, which contained the
SVF endothelial cells. Surprisingly, when CD45(-)FIB(-)CD34(-) cells were
cultured in endothelial growth medium, they gave rise to endothelial colonies and
mesenchymal colonies. Moreover, when CD45(-)FIB(-)CD34(-) cells were cultured in 
embryonic stem cell expansion medium, they gave rise to cells exhibiting the full
range of phenotypes observed in the freshly isolated SVF, including CD34(+) and
CD31(+) cells. Together, these results suggest that the CD45(-)FIB(-)CD34(-)
cells within the SVF of human adipose tissue function as mesodermal precursors of
mesenchymal and endothelial cells.

PMID: 26068131  [PubMed - in process]


78. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):1081-98. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1040970.

MYBL2 guides autophagy suppressor VDAC2 in the developing ovary to inhibit
autophagy through a complex of VDAC2-BECN1-BCL2L1 in mammals.

Yuan J(1), Zhang Y, Sheng Y, Fu X, Cheng H, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Genetics; College of Life Sciences; Wuhan University ; Wuhan ,
China.

Oogenesis is essential for female gamete production in mammals. The total number 
of ovarian follicles is determined early in life and production of ovarian
oocytes is thought to stop during the lifetime. However, the molecular mechanisms
underling oogenesis, particularly autophagy regulation in the ovary, remain
largely unknown. Here, we reveal an important MYBL2-VDAC2-BECN1-BCL2L1 pathway
linking autophagy suppression in the developing ovary. The transcription factors 
GATA1 and MYBL2 can bind to and activate the Vdac2 promoter. MYBL2 regulates the 
spatiotemporal expression of VDAC2 in the developing ovary. Strikingly, in the
VDAC2 transgenic pigs (Sus scrofa/Ss), VDAC2 exerts its function by inhibiting
autophagy in the ovary. In contrast, Vdac2 knockout promotes autophagy. Moreover,
VDAC2-mediated autophagy suppression is dependent on its interactions with both
BECN1 and BCL2L1 to stabilize the BECN1 and BCL2L1 complex, suggesting VDAC2 as
an autophagy suppressor in the pathway. Our findings provide a functional
connection among the VDAC2, MYBL2, the BECN1-BCL2L1 pathway and autophagy
suppression in the developing ovary, which is implicated in improving female
fecundity.

PMCID: PMC4590641
PMID: 26060891  [PubMed - in process]


79. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 16;11(10):1503-10. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.016. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Single-Cell Network Analysis Identifies DDIT3 as a Nodal Lineage Regulator in
Hematopoiesis.

Pina C(1), Teles J(2), Fugazza C(1), May G(1), Wang D(1), Guo Y(1), Soneji S(1), 
Brown J(1), Edén P(3), Ohlsson M(3), Peterson C(3), Enver T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London 
W1CE 6BT, UK. (2)Stem Cell Laboratory, UCL Cancer Institute, University College
London, London W1CE 6BT, UK; Computational Biology and Biological Physics,
Department of Astronomy and Theoretical Physics, Lund University, 223 62 Lund,
Sweden. (3)Computational Biology and Biological Physics, Department of Astronomy 
and Theoretical Physics, Lund University, 223 62 Lund, Sweden. (4)Stem Cell
Laboratory, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London W1CE 6BT, UK.
Electronic address: t.enver@ucl.ac.uk.

We explore cell heterogeneity during spontaneous and transcription-factor-driven 
commitment for network inference in hematopoiesis. Since individual genes display
discrete OFF states or a distribution of ON levels, we compute and combine
pairwise gene associations from binary and continuous components of gene
expression in single cells. Ddit3 emerges as a regulatory node with positive
linkage to erythroid regulators and negative association with myeloid
determinants. Ddit3 loss impairs erythroid colony output from multipotent cells, 
while forcing Ddit3 in granulo-monocytic progenitors (GMPs) enhances self-renewal
and impedes differentiation. Network analysis of Ddit3-transduced GMPs reveals
uncoupling of myeloid networks and strengthening of erythroid linkages. RNA
sequencing suggests that Ddit3 acts through development or stabilization of a
precursor upstream of GMPs with inherent Meg-E potential. The enrichment of Gata2
target genes in Ddit3-dependent transcriptional responses suggests that Ddit3
functions in an erythroid transcriptional network nucleated by Gata2.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4528262
PMID: 26051941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Aug;15(8):968-80. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00089-4.
Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Host susceptibility to non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections.

Wu UI(1), Holland SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunopathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: smh@nih.gov.

Non-tuberculous mycobacteria cause a broad range of clinical disorders, from
cutaneous infections, such as cervical or intrathoracic lymphadenitis in
children, to disseminated infections at all ages. Recognition of the underlying
immune defect is crucial for rational treatment, preventive care, family
screening, and, in some cases, transplantation. So far, at least seven autosomal 
mutations (in IL12B, IL12RB1, ISG15, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, STAT1, and IRF8) and two
X-linked mutations (in IKBKG and CYBB), mostly presenting in childhood, have been
reported to confer susceptibility to disseminated non-tuberculous mycobacterial
infection. GATA2 deficiency and anti-interferon <U+03B3> autoantibodies also give rise
to disseminated infection, typically in late childhood or adulthood. Furthermore,
isolated pulmonary non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection has been increasing in
prevalence in people without recognised immune dysfunction. In this Review, we
discuss how to detect and differentiate host susceptibility factors underlying
localised and systemic non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Haematologica. 2015 Oct;100(10):e398-401. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.127092. Epub
2015 May 28.

GATA2 and secondary mutations in familial myelodysplastic syndromes and pediatric
myeloid malignancies.

Wang X(1), Muramatsu H(1), Okuno Y(1), Sakaguchi H(1), Yoshida K(2), Kawashima
N(1), Xu Y(1), Shiraishi Y(3), Chiba K(3), Tanaka H(3), Saito S(4), Nakazawa
Y(4), Masunari T(5), Hirose T(6), Elmahdi S(1), Narita A(1), Doisaki S(1), Ismael
O(1), Makishima H(7), Hama A(1), Miyano S(8), Takahashi Y(1), Ogawa S(2), Kojima 
S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan. (3)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis,
Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. (5)Department of Hematology, Chugoku Central Hospital,
Fukuyama, Japan. (6)Department of Hematology, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama,
Japan. (7)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(8)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, 
Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Japan. (9)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan kojimas@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

PMCID: PMC4591774
PMID: 26022708  [PubMed - in process]


82. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jul 10;599:140-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.029. Epub
2015 May 19.

Transcriptional regulation of the a-synuclein gene in human brain tissue.

Brenner S(1), Wersinger C(2), Gasser T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department of Neurodegenerative 
diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
brenner.steffen@googlemail.com. (2)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany.

The transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding a-synuclein (SNCA) is thought
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD), as
common genetic variability in this gene is associated with an elevated risk of
developing PD. However, the relevant mechanisms are still poorly understood. So
far, only few proteins have been identified as transcription factors (TFs) of
SNCA in cellular models. Here we show that two of these TFs bind to the DNA in
human brain tissue: the zinc finger protein ZSCAN21 occupies a region within SNCA
intron 1, as described before, while GATA2 occupies a specific region within
intron 2, where we have identified a new binding site within the complex
structure of the 5'-promoter region of SNCA. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays confirmed these binding sites. Genetic investigations revealed no
polymorphisms or mutations within these sites. A better understanding of TF-DNA
interactions within SNCA may allow to develop novel therapies designed to reduce 
a-synuclein levels.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26002080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015 May 8. doi: 10.1111/jdv.13183. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Severe disseminated primary herpes simplex infection as skin manifestation of
GATA2 deficiency.

Delgado-Márquez AM(1), Zarco C(1), Ruiz R(2), Simarro A(3), Vanaclocha F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Immunology, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (3)Department
of Internal Medicine, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 25955867  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


84. Transplantation. 2014 Dec 27;98(12):e95-6. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000520.

Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation for GATA2 Deficiency in a Patient
With Disseminated Human Papillomavirus Disease.

Maeurer M(1), Magalhaes I, Andersson J, Ljungman P, Sandholm E, Uhlin M, Mattsson
J, Ringdén O.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Therapeutic Immunology and Centre for Allogeneic Stem Cell
Transplantation, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital,
Huddinge, Sweden. 2 Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska Institutet and 
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden. 3 Department of Haematology,
Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden. 4
Department of Infectious Diseases, Karlstads Hospital, Sweden 5 Address
correspondence to: Olle Ringdén, M.D., Ph.D., Division of Therapeutic Immunology,
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, F79, SE-141 86
Stockholm, Sweden.

PMID: 25955344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0126385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126385.
eCollection 2015.

The +37 kb Cebpa Enhancer Is Critical for Cebpa Myeloid Gene Expression and
Contains Functional Sites that Bind SCL, GATA2, C/EBPa, PU.1, and Additional Ets 
Factors.

Cooper S(1), Guo H(1), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

The murine Cebpa gene contains an evolutionarily conserved 453 bp enhancer
located at +37 kb that, together with its promoter, directs expression to myeloid
progenitors and to long-term hematopoietic stem cells in transgenic mice. In
human acute myeloid leukemia cases, the enhancer lacks point mutations but binds 
the RUNX1-ETO oncoprotein. The enhancer contains the H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac histone 
modifications, denoting an active enhancer, at progressively increasing levels as
long-term hematopoietic stem cells transition to granulocyte-monocyte
progenitors. We previously identified four enhancer sites that bind RUNX1 and
demonstrated that their integrity is required for maximal enhancer activity in
32Dcl3 myeloid cells. The +37 kb Cebpa enhancer also contains C/EBP, Ets factor, 
Myb, GATA, and E-box consensus sites conserved in the human +42 kb CEBPA
enhancer. Mutation of the two C/EBP, seven Ets, one Myb, two GATA, or two E-box
sites reduces activity of an enhancer-promoter reporter in 32Dcl3 cells. In 293T 
gel shift assays, exogenous C/EBPa binds both C/EBP sites, c-Myb binds the Myb
site, PU.1 binds the second Ets site, PU.1, Fli-1, ERG, and Ets1 bind the sixth
Ets site, GATA2 binds both GATA sites, and SCL binds the second E-box. Endogenous
hematopoietic RUNX1, PU.1, Fli-1, ERG, C/EBPa, GATA2, and SCL were previously
shown to bind the enhancer, and we find that endogenous PU.1 binds the second Ets
site in 32Dcl3 cells. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we developed 32Dcl3 lines in which the
wild-type enhancer alleles are replaced with a variant mutant in the seven Ets
sites. These lines have 20-fold reduced Cebpa mRNA when cultured in IL-3 or
G-CSF, demonstrating a critical requirement for enhancer integrity for optimal
Cebpa expression. In addition, these results indicate that the +37 kb Cebpa
enhancer is the focus of multiple regulatory transcriptional pathways that impact
its expression during normal hematopoiesis and potentially during myeloid
transformation.

PMCID: PMC4418761
PMID: 25938608  [PubMed - in process]


86. Leuk Res. 2015 Jul;39(7):709-18. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.03.017. Epub 2015
Apr 6.

Whole genome and transcriptome analysis of a novel AML cell line with a normal
karyotype.

Gosse G(1), Celton M(2), Lamontagne V(2), Forest A(2), Wilhelm BT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory for High Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC,
Canada; The Leucegene Project, Canada. (2)Institute for Research in Immunology
and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory for High
Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)Institute for Research in
Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory
for High Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC, Canada; The Leucegene Project,
Canada. Electronic address: brian.wilhelm@umontreal.ca.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) occurs when hematopoietic progenitor cells acquire
genetic defects blocking the regulation of normal growth and differentiation.
Although recurrent translocations have been identified in AML, almost half of
adult AML patients present with a normal karyotype (NK-AML). While cell line
models exist to study AML, they frequently have abnormal/unstable karyotypes,
while primary cells from NK-AML patients are difficult to maintain in vitro. Here
we provide a thorough molecular characterization of a recently established cell
line, CG-SH, which has normal cytogenetics, representing a useful new model for
NK-AML. Using high-throughput DNA sequencing, we first defined the genetic
background of this cell line. In addition to identifying potentially deleterious 
SNVs in genes relevant to AML, we also found insertions in both GATA2 and EZH2,
two genes previously linked to AML. We further characterized the growth of this
model system in vitro with a cytokine mix that promotes faster cell growth. We
assessed gene expression changes after the addition of cytokines to the culture
media and found differential expression in genes implicated in proliferation,
apoptosis and differentiation. Our results provide a detailed molecular
characterization of genetic defects in this cell line derived from an NK-AML
patient.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Exp Hematol. 2015 Jul;43(7):565-77.e1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.04.002. Epub
2015 Apr 20.

Low-level GATA2 overexpression promotes myeloid progenitor self-renewal and
blocks lymphoid differentiation in mice.

Nandakumar SK(1), Johnson K(2), Throm SL(2), Pestina TI(2), Neale G(3), Persons
DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: Satish-kumar.nandakumar@stjude.org.
(2)Department of Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. (3)Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

The transcription factor GATA2 is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells
and is downregulated during lineage maturation. Gain of function mutations, loss 
of function mutations, and overexpression of GATA2 have been reported in acute
myeloid leukemia. In previous studies, we and others showed that GATA2
overexpression at high levels, similar to that seen in hematopoietic stem cells, 
blocked differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors. To better
understand the effects of GATA2, we designed a Tamoxifen-inducible GATA2-estrogen
receptor (ERT) vector. In the absence of Tamoxifen, small amounts of GATA2-ERT
were still able to enter the nucleus in mouse bone marrow (BM) cells, providing
us with a tool to test the effects of low-level GATA2 overexpression. We observed
that this low-level GATA2 overexpression enhanced self-renewal of myeloid
progenitors in vitro and resulted in immortalization of BM cells to myeloid cell 
lines. Continuous GATA2-ERT expression was required for the proliferation of
these immortalized lines. Myeloid expansion and a block in T and B lineage
differentiation were observed in mice transplanted with GATA2-ERT-expressing BM
cells. Myeloid expansion occurred after the granulocyte monocyte progenitor
stage, and lymphoid block was distal to the common lymphoid progenitor in
transgenic mice. GATA2 appeared to induce growth via downstream activation of
Nmyc and Hoxa9. Our results demonstrate that GATA2 overexpression at low level
confers self-renewal capacity to myeloid progenitors and is relevant to myeloid
leukemia development.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Feb 10;15:8. doi: 10.1186/s12890-015-0006-2.

Diffuse parenchymal lung disease as first clinical manifestation of GATA-2
deficiency in childhood.

Svobodova T(1), Mejstrikova E(2), Salzer U(3), Sukova M(4), Hubacek P(5,)(6),
Matej R(7), Vasakova M(8), Hornofova L(9), Dvorakova M(10), Fronkova E(11),
Votava F(12), Freiberger T(13,)(14), Pohunek P(15), Stary J(16), Janda
A(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
tamara.svobodova@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. ester.mejstrikova@lfmotol.cuni.cz.
(3)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), University Medical Center and
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
ulrich.salzer@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. martina.sukova@fnmotol.cz. (5)Department 
of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University
in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
petr.hubacek@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (6)Department of Medical Microbiology, 2nd Faculty 
of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, 
Czech Republic. petr.hubacek@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (7)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Thomayer's University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
radoslav.matej@ftn.cz. (8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Thomayer's
University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. martina.vasakova@ftn.cz.
(9)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic. hornofova@centrum.cz. (10)Department of Radiology, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague,
Czech Republic. marcela.dvorakova@fnmotol.cz. (11)Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague
and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
eva.fronkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (12)Department of Pediatrics, 3rd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Kralovske
Vinohrady, Prague, Czech Republic. felix.votava@fnkv.cz. (13)Molecular Genetics
Lab, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic.
tomas.freiberger@cktch.cz. (14)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergology,
Medical Faculty, Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
tomas.freiberger@cktch.cz. (15)Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic. petr.pohunek@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (16)Department of Pediatric Hematology
and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. jan.stary@lfmotol.cuni.cz.
(17)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), University Medical Center and
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
ales.janda@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (18)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
and Rheumatology, Center of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University
Medical Center and University of Freiburg, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106, Freiburg im
Breisgau, Germany. ales.janda@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

BACKGROUND: GATA-2 transcription factor deficiency has recently been described in
patients with a propensity towards myeloid malignancy associated with other
highly variable phenotypic features: chronic leukocytopenias (dendritic cell-,
monocyto-, granulocyto-, lymphocytopenia), increased susceptibility to
infections, lymphatic vasculature abnormalities, and sensorineural deafness.
Patients often suffer from opportunistic respiratory infections; chronic
pulmonary changes have been found in advanced disease.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case of a 17-year-old previously healthy
Caucasian male who was admitted to the hospital with fever, malaise, headache,
cough and dyspnea. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral interstitial infiltrates and 
pneumonia was diagnosed. Despite prompt clinical improvement under antibiotic
therapy, interstitial changes remained stable. A high resolution computer
tomography showed severe diffuse parenchymal lung disease, while the patient's
pulmonary function tests were normal and he was asymptomatic. Lung tissue biopsy 
revealed chronic reparative and resorptive reaction with organizing vasculitis.
At the time of the initial presentation to the hospital, serological signs of
acute infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were present; EBV viremia with
atypical serological response persisted during two-year follow up. No other
infectious agents were found. Marked monocytopenia combined with B-cell
lymphopenia led to a suspicion of GATA-2 deficiency. Diagnosis was confirmed by
detection of the previously published heterozygous mutation in GATA2 (c.1081
C<U+2009>><U+2009>T, p.R361C). The patient's brother and father were both carriers of the same 
genetic defect. The brother had no clinically relevant ailments despite leukocyte
changes similar to the index patient. The father suffered from spondylarthritis, 
and apart from B-cell lymphopenia, no other changes within the leukocyte pool
were seen.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that a diagnosis of GATA-2 deficiency should be
considered in all patients with diffuse parenchymal lung disease presenting
together with leukocytopenia, namely monocyto-, dendritic cell- and
B-lymphopenia, irrespective of severity of the clinical phenotype. Genetic
counseling and screening for GATA2 mutations within the patient's family should
be provided as the phenotype is highly variable and carriers without apparent
immunodeficiency are still in danger of developing myeloid malignancy. A prompt
recognition of this rare condition helps to direct clinical treatment strategies 
and follow-up procedures.

PMCID: PMC4340788
PMID: 25879889  [PubMed - in process]


89. Cancer Cell. 2015 Apr 13;27(4):502-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.03.009.

Mutational cooperativity linked to combinatorial epigenetic gain of function in
acute myeloid leukemia.

Shih AH(1), Jiang Y(2), Meydan C(3), Shank K(4), Pandey S(4), Barreyro L(5),
Antony-Debre I(5), Viale A(6), Socci N(7), Sun Y(8), Robertson A(8), Cavatore
M(6), de Stanchina E(9), Hricik T(4), Rapaport F(4), Woods B(4), Wei C(4), Hatlen
M(4), Baljevic M(4), Nimer SD(10), Tallman M(11), Paietta E(12), Cimmino L(13),
Aifantis I(13), Steidl U(5), Mason C(3), Melnick A(14), Levine RL(15).

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, 
USA; Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Institute for Computational Biomedicine and
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY 10065, USA; Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology and Department of
Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Institute for Computational Biomedicine and Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (5)Department of Cell Biology and Division of Hematologic
Malignancies, Department of Medicine (Oncology), Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, New York, NY 10461, USA. (6)Genomics Core, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (7)Bioinformatics Core, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (8)Life Technologies, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (9)Antitumor Assessment Core, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (10)Sylvester Cancer Center, University
of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA. (11)Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (12)Department of Oncology, Montefiore
Hospital, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. (13)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology and Department of Pharmacology,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Weill Cornell Medical
College, Cornell University, 413 E 69th Street, BB-1462, New York, NY 10021, USA.
Electronic address: amm2014@med.cornell.edu. (15)Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA;
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, Box 20, New York, NY
10065, USA. Electronic address: leviner@mskcc.org.

Specific combinations of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) disease alleles, including 
FLT3 and TET2 mutations, confer distinct biologic features and adverse outcome.
We generated mice with mutations in Tet2 and Flt3, which resulted in fully
penetrant, lethal AML. Multipotent Tet2(-/-);Flt3(ITD) progenitors (LSK
CD48(+)CD150(-)) propagate disease in secondary recipients and were refractory to
standard AML chemotherapy and FLT3-targeted therapy. Flt3(ITD) mutations and Tet2
loss cooperatively remodeled DNA methylation and gene expression to an extent not
seen with either mutant allele alone, including at the Gata2 locus. Re-expression
of Gata2 induced differentiation in AML stem cells and attenuated leukemogenesis.
TET2 and FLT3 mutations cooperatively induce AML, with a defined leukemia stem
cell population characterized by site-specific changes in DNA methylation and
gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4518555 [Available on 2016-04-13]
PMID: 25873173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2165-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00239-15. Epub 2015 Apr 
13.

SMAD1 and SMAD5 Expression Is Coordinately Regulated by FLI1 and GATA2 during
Endothelial Development.

Marks-Bluth J(1), Khanna A(2), Chandrakanthan V(2), Thoms J(2), Bee T(2), Eich
C(3), Kang YC(2), Knezevic K(2), Qiao Q(2), Fitch S(4), Oxburgh L(5), Ottersbach 
K(4), Dzierzak E(6), de Bruijn MF(7), Pimanda JE(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia The Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Lowy Cancer 
Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (3)Erasmus MC Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. (4)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom Cambridge Stem Cell 
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (5)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Scarborough, Maine, 
USA. (6)Erasmus MC Stem Cell Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands The Queen's Medical Research
Institute, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom. (7)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom marella.debruijn@imm.ox.ac.uk jpimanda@unsw.edu.au.
(8)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia Department of Haematology, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia marella.debruijn@imm.ox.ac.uk
jpimanda@unsw.edu.au.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/SMAD signaling pathway is a critical
regulator of angiogenic sprouting and is involved in vascular development in the 
embryo. SMAD1 and SMAD5, the core mediators of BMP signaling, are vital for this 
activity, yet little is known about their transcriptional regulation in
endothelial cells. Here, we have integrated multispecies sequence conservation,
tissue-specific chromatin, in vitro reporter assay, and in vivo transgenic data
to identify and validate Smad1+63 and the Smad5 promoter as tissue-specific
cis-regulatory elements that are active in the developing endothelium. The
activity of these elements in the endothelium was dependent on highly conserved
ETS, GATA, and E-box motifs, and chromatin immunoprecipitation showed high levels
of enrichment of FLI1, GATA2, and SCL at these sites in endothelial cell lines
and E11 dorsal aortas in vivo. Knockdown of FLI1 and GATA2 but not SCL reduced
the expression of SMAD1 and SMAD5 in endothelial cells in vitro. In contrast,
CD31(+) cKit(-) endothelial cells harvested from embryonic day 9 (E9)
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) regions of GATA2 null embryos showed reduced Smad1 
but not Smad5 transcript levels. This is suggestive of a degree of in vivo
selection where, in the case of reduced SMAD1 levels, endothelial cells with more
robust SMAD5 expression have a selective advantage.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438244
PMID: 25870111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Jun;9(3):337-49. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1035259. 
Epub 2015 Apr 12.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: time to shift?

Papiris SA(1), Tsirigotis P, Kolilekas L, Papadaki G, Papaioannou AI,
Triantafillidou C, Papaporfyriou A, Karakatsani A, Kagouridis K, Griese M, Manali
ED.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Pulmonary Department, 'Attikon' University Hospital, Athens Medical
School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is categorized into hereditary, secondary
and autoimmune PAP (aPAP) types. The common pathogenesis is the ability of the
alveolar macrophages to catabolize phagocytized surfactant is affected.
Hereditary PAP is caused by mutations involving the GM-CSF signaling,
particularly in genes for the GM-CSF receptor and sometimes by GATA2 mutations.
Secondary PAP occurs in hematologic malignancies, other hematologic disorders,
miscellaneous malignancies, fume and dust inhalation, drugs, autoimmune disorders
and immunodeficiencies. aPAP is related to the production of GM-CSF
autoantibodies. PAP is characterized morphologically by the inappropriate and
progressive 'occupation' of the alveolar spaces by an excessive amount of
unprocessed surfactant, limiting gas exchange and gradually exhausting the
respiratory reserve. Myeloid cells' immunity deteriorates, increasing the risk of
infections. Treatment of PAP is based on its etiology. In aPAP, recent
therapeutic advances might shift the treatment option from the whole lung lavage 
procedure under general anesthesia to the inhalation of GM-CSF 'as needed'.

PMID: 25864717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2073-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01422-14. Epub 2015 Apr 
8.

Epigenetic Determinants of Erythropoiesis: Role of the Histone Methyltransferase 
SetD8 in Promoting Erythroid Cell Maturation and Survival.

DeVilbiss AW(1), Sanalkumar R(1), Hall BD(1), Katsumura KR(1), de Andrade IF(1), 
Bresnick EH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Regenerative
Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Erythropoiesis, in which committed progenitor cells generate millions of
erythrocytes daily, involves dramatic changes in the chromatin structure and
transcriptome of erythroblasts, prior to their enucleation. While the involvement
of the master-regulatory transcription factors GATA binding protein 1 (GATA-1)
and GATA-2 in this process is established, the mechanistic contributions of many 
chromatin-modifying/remodeling enzymes in red cell biology remain enigmatic. We
demonstrated that SetD8, a histone methyltransferase that catalyzes
monomethylation of histone H4 at lysine 20 (H4K20me1), is a context-dependent
GATA-1 corepressor in erythroid cells. To determine whether SetD8 controls
erythroid maturation and/or function, we used a small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-based
loss-of-function strategy in a primary murine erythroblast culture system. In
this system, SetD8 promoted erythroblast maturation and survival, and this did
not involve upregulation of the established regulator of erythroblast survival
Bcl-x(L). SetD8 catalyzed H4K20me1 at a critical Gata2 cis element and restricted
occupancy by an enhancer of Gata2 transcription, Scl/TAL1, thereby repressing
Gata2 transcription. Elevating GATA-2 levels in erythroid precursors yielded a
maturation block comparable to that induced by SetD8 downregulation. As lowering 
GATA-2 expression in the context of SetD8 knockdown did not rescue erythroid
maturation, we propose that SetD8 regulation of erythroid maturation involves
multiple target genes. These results establish SetD8 as a determinant of
erythroid cell maturation and provide a framework for understanding how a broadly
expressed histone-modifying enzyme mediates cell-type-specific GATA factor
function.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438249
PMID: 25855754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 2015 May 21;125(21):3306-15. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-612465. Epub 2015 
Apr 8.

GATA2 is critical for the maintenance of cellular identity in differentiated mast
cells derived from mouse bone marrow.

Ohmori S(1), Moriguchi T(2), Noguchi Y(1), Ikeda M(1), Kobayashi K(1), Tomaru
N(1), Ishijima Y(1), Ohneda O(3), Yamamoto M(2), Ohneda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, Takasaki, Japan; (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; and. (3)Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, Laboratory of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Biology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

GATA2 plays a crucial role for the mast cell fate decision. We herein demonstrate
that GATA2 is also required for the maintenance of the cellular identity in
committed mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow (BMMCs). The deletion of the 
GATA2 DNA binding domain (GATA2<U+0394>CF) in BMMCs resulted in a loss of the mast cell 
phenotype and an increase in the number of CD11b- and/or Ly6G/C-positive cells.
These cells showed the ability to differentiate into macrophage- and
neutrophil-like cells but not into eosinophils. Although the mRNA levels of
basophil-specific genes were elevated, CD49b, a representative basophil marker,
never appeared on these cells. GATA2 ablation led to a significant upregulation
of C/EBPa, and forced expression of C/EBPa in wild-type BMMCs phenocopied the
GATA2<U+0394>CF cells. Interestingly, simultaneous deletion of the Gata2 and Cebpa genes
in BMMCs restored the aberrant increases of CD11b and Ly6G/C while retaining the 
reduced c-Kit expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that
GATA2 directly binds to the +37-kb region of the Cebpa gene and thereby inhibits 
the RUNX1 and PU.1 binding to the neighboring region. Upregulation of C/EBPa
following the loss of GATA2 was not observed in cultured mast cells derived from 
peritoneal fluid, whereas the repression of c-Kit and other mast cell-specific
genes were observed in these cells. Collectively, these results indicate that
GATA2 maintains cellular identity by preventing Cebpa gene activation in a
subpopulation of mast cells, whereas it plays a fundamental role as a positive
regulator of mast cell-specific genes throughout development of this cell
lineage.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25855601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2059-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01413-14. Epub 2015 Apr 
6.

Histone methyltransferase Setd8 represses Gata2 expression and regulates
erythroid maturation.

Malik J(1), Getman M(1), Steiner LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Center for
Pediatric Biomedical Research, Rochester, New York, USA. (2)University of
Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric
Biomedical Research, Rochester, New York, USA Laurie_Steiner@urmc.rochester.edu.

Setd8 is the sole histone methyltransferase in mammals capable of monomethylating
histone H4 lysine 20 (H4K20me1). Setd8 is expressed at significantly higher
levels in erythroid cells than any other cell or tissue type, suggesting that
Setd8 has an erythroid-cell-specific function. To test this hypothesis, stable
Setd8 knockdown was established in extensively self-renewing erythroblasts
(ESREs), a well-characterized, nontransformed model of erythroid maturation.
Knockdown of Setd8 resulted in impaired erythroid maturation characterized by a
delay in hemoglobin accumulation, larger mean cell area, persistent ckit
expression, incomplete nuclear condensation, and lower rates of enucleation.
Setd8 knockdown did not alter ESRE proliferation or viability or result in
accumulation of DNA damage. Global gene expression analyses following Setd8
knockdown demonstrated that in erythroid cells, Setd8 functions primarily as a
repressor. Most notably, Gata2 expression was significantly higher in knockdown
cells than in control cells and Gata2 knockdown rescued some of the maturation
impairments associated with Setd8 disruption. Setd8 occupies critical regulatory 
elements in the Gata2 locus, and knockdown of Setd8 resulted in loss of H4K20me1 
and gain of H4 acetylation at the Gata2 1S promoter. These results suggest that
Setd8 is an important regulator of erythroid maturation that works in part
through repression of Gata2 expression.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438238
PMID: 25848090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Apr;17(2):141-50. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0077.

Buffalo embryos produced by handmade cloning from oocytes selected using
brilliant cresyl blue staining have better developmental competence and quality
and are closer to embryos produced by in vitro fertilization in terms of their
epigenetic status and gene expression pattern.

Mohapatra SK(1), Sandhu A, Neerukattu VS, Singh KP, Selokar NL, Singla SK,
Chauhan MS, Manik RS, Palta P.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research
Institute , Karnal-132001, Haryana, India .

We compared handmade cloned (HMC) buffalo blastocysts produced from oocytes
stained with Brilliant Cresyl Blue (BCB) and classified into those with blue
(BCB+) or colorless cytoplasm (BCB-). The blastocyst rate was higher (p<0.001)
for BCB+ than for BCB- oocytes (43.41 ± 2.54 vs. 22.74 ± 1.76%). BCB+ blastocysts
had inner cell mass (ICM) cell number, ICM-to-trophectoderm ratio, global level
of H3K18ac, apoptotic index, and expression level of BCL-XL, but not that of
CASPASE-3, similar to that of blastocysts produced through in vitro fertilization
(IVF), which was higher (p<0.05) than that of BCB- blastocysts. The global level 
of H3K9me2, which was similar in BCB+ and BCB- blastocysts, was higher (p<0.01)
than that in IVF blastocysts. The expression level of OCT4 and SOX2 was higher
(p<0.05) and that of GATA2 was lower (p<0.05) in BCB+ than that in BCB-
blastocysts, whereas that of DNMT1, DNMT3a, NANOG, and CDX2 was not significantly
different between the two groups. The expression level of DNMT1, OCT4, NANOG, and
SOX2 was lower (p<0.05) and that of CDX2 was higher (p<0.05) in BCB+ than in IVF 
blastocysts. In conclusion, because BCB+ blastocysts have better developmental
competence and are closer to IVF blastocysts in terms of quality, epigenetic
status, and gene expression than BCB- blastocysts, BCB staining can be used
effectively for selection of developmentally competent oocytes for HMC.

PMCID: PMC4378879
PMID: 25826727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Nov;230(11):2776-87. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25004.

Hyperosmolarity-Induced Down-Regulation of Claudin-2 Mediated by Decrease in
PKCß-Dependent GATA-2 in MDCK Cells.

Ikari A(1,)(2), Fujii N(1), Hahakabe S(2), Hayashi H(3), Yamaguchi M(2), Yamazaki
Y(2), Endo S(1), Matsunaga T(1), Sugatani J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Gifu
Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-nishi, Gifu, Japan. (2)School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan. (3)School of
Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan.

Hyperosmolarity decreases claudin-2 expression in renal tubular epithelial cells,
but the molecular mechanism remains undefined. Here, we found that the
hyperosmolarity-induced decrease in claudin-2 expression is inhibited by Go6983, 
a non-selective protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor, and PKCß specific inhibitor in 
Madin-Darby canine kidney II cells. Hyperosmolarity increased intracellular free 
Ca(2+) concentration and phosphorylated PKCß level, which were inhibited by
RN-1734, an antagonist of transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 channel.
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, a PKC activator, decreased claudin-2 expression.
These results indicate hyperosmolarity decreases claudin-2 expression mediated by
the activation of RN-1734-sensitive channel and PKCß. Hyperosmolarity decreased
promoter activity of claudin-2, which was inhibited by Go6983 and PKCß inhibitor 
similar to those in real-time PCR and Western blotting. The effect of
hyperosmolarity on promoter activity was not observed in the construct of
-469/-6, a deletion mutant. Claudin-2 has hyperosmolarity-sensitive region in its
promoter, which includes GATA binding site. Hyperosmolarity decreased the nuclear
level of GATA-2, which was inhibited by Go6983 and PKCß inhibitor. Mutation of
GATA binding site decreased the basal promoter activity and inhibited the effect 
of hyperosmolarity. In contrast, the hyperosmolarity-induced decrease in reporter
activity and claudin-2 expression were rescued by over-expression of wild type
GATA-2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that GATA-2 bound to promoter 
region of claudin-2. These results suggest that hyperosmolarity decreases the
expression level of claudin-2 via a decrease in PKCß-dependent GATA-2
transcriptional activity in renal tubular epithelial cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25825272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neurochem. 2015 Jul;134(1):21-38. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13099. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

Molecular mechanism of monoamine oxidase A gene regulation under inflammation and
ischemia-like conditions: key roles of the transcription factors GATA2, Sp1 and
TBP.

Gupta V(1), Khan AA(1), Sasi BK(1), Mahapatra NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and
Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai, India.

Monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) plays important roles in the pathogenesis of several
neurological and cardiovascular disorders. The mechanism of transcriptional
regulation of MAOA under basal and pathological conditions, however, remains
incompletely understood. Here, we report systematic identification and
characterization of cis elements and transcription factors that govern the
expression of MAOA gene. Extensive computational analysis of MAOA promoter,
followed by 5'-promoter deletion/reporter assays, revealed that the -71/-40 bp
domain was sufficient for its basal transcription. Gel-shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays provided evidence of interactions of the transcription
factors GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2), Sp1 and TATA-binding protein (TBP) with
this proximal promoter region. Consistently, over-expression of GATA2, Sp1 and
TBP augmented MAOA promoter activity in a coordinated manner. In corroboration,
siRNA-mediated down-regulation of GATA2/Sp1/TBP repressed the endogenous MAOA
expression as well as transfected MAOA promoter activity. Tumor necrosis factor-a
and forskolin activated MAOA transcription that was reversed by Sp1 siRNA; in
support, tumor necrosis factor-a- and forskolin-induced activities were enhanced 
by ectopic over-expression of Sp1. On the other hand, MAOA transcription was
diminished upon exposure of neuroblasts or cardiac myoblasts to ischemia-like
conditions because of reduced binding of GATA2/Sp1/TBP with MAOA promoter. In
conclusion, this study revealed previously unknown roles of GATA2, Sp1 and TBP in
modulating MAOA expression under basal as well as pathophysiological conditions
such as inflammation and ischemia, thus providing new insights into the molecular
basis of aberrant MAOA expression in neuronal/cardiovascular disease states.
Dysregulation of monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) have been implicated in several
behavioral and neuronal disease states. Here, we identified three crucial
transcription factors (GATA2, Sp1 and TBP) that regulate MAOA gene expression in 
a coordinated manner. Aberrant MAOA expression under pathophysiological
conditions including inflammation and ischemia is mediated by altered binding of 
GATA2/Sp1/TBP with MAOA proximal promoter. Thus, these findings provide new
insights into pathogenesis of several common diseases. GATA2, GATA-binding
protein 2; Sp1, specificity protein 1; TBP, TATA-binding protein.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 25810277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood. 2015 May 7;125(19):2985-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-613703. Epub 2015
Mar 24.

Downregulation of the Wnt inhibitor CXXC5 predicts a better prognosis in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Kühnl A(1), Valk PJ(2), Sanders MA(2), Ivey A(3), Hills RK(4), Mills KI(5), Gale 
RE(6), Kaiser MF(7), Dillon R(3), Joannides M(3), Gilkes A(4), Haferlach T(8),
Schnittger S(8), Duprez E(9), Linch DC(6), Delwel R(2), Löwenberg B(2), Baldus
CD(7), Solomon E(3), Burnett AK(4), Grimwade D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, Faculty
of Life Sciences and Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Department of Hematology
and Oncology, Charité University Hospital Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Berlin, Germany; (2)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics,
King's College London, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, London, United
Kingdom; (4)Department of Haematology, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Cardiff, United Kingdom; (5)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's 
University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom; (6)Department of Haematology,
University College London, London, United Kingdom; (7)Department of Hematology
and Oncology, Charité University Hospital Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Berlin, Germany; (8)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany; and.
(9)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, INSERM U1068, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR7258, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix
Marseille University, Marseille, France.

The gene CXXC5 on 5q31 is frequently deleted in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with
del(5q), suggesting that inactivation of CXXC5 might play a role in
leukemogenesis. Here, we investigated the functional and prognostic implications 
of CXXC5 expression in AML. CXXC5 mRNA was downregulated in AML with MLL
rearrangements, t(8;21) and GATA2 mutations. As a mechanism of CXXC5
inactivation, we found evidence for epigenetic silencing by promoter methylation.
Patients with CXXC5 expression below the median level had a lower relapse rate
(45% vs 59%; P = .007) and a better overall survival (OS, 46% vs 28%; P < .001)
and event-free survival (EFS, 36% vs 21%; P < .001) at 5 years, independent of
cytogenetic risk groups and known molecular risk factors. In gene-expression
profiling, lower CXXC5 expression was associated with upregulation of
cell-cycling genes and co-downregulation of genes implicated in leukemogenesis
(WT1, GATA2, MLL, DNMT3B, RUNX1). Functional analyses demonstrated CXXC5 to
inhibit leukemic cell proliferation and Wnt signaling and to affect the
p53-dependent DNA damage response. In conclusion, our data suggest a tumor
suppressor function of CXXC5 in AML. Inactivation of CXXC5 is associated with
different leukemic pathways and defines an AML subgroup with better outcome.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4463809
PMID: 25805812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Immunol. 2015 May 1;194(9):4328-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500018. Epub 2015
Mar 23.

The STAT5-GATA2 pathway is critical in basophil and mast cell differentiation and
maintenance.

Li Y(1), Qi X(1), Liu B(2), Huang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206;
(2)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206;
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
Hubei 430071, China; and. (3)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO 80206; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO 80206 huangh@njhealth.org.

Transcription factor GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2) plays critical roles in
hematopoietic stem cell survival and proliferation, granulocyte-monocyte
progenitor differentiation, and basophil and mast cell differentiation. However, 
precise roles of GATA2 in basophil and mast cell differentiation and maintenance 
have not been delineated. We have identified GATA2 as an essential transcription 
factor in differentiation of newly identified common basophil and mast cell
progenitors into basophils and mast cells. We observed Gata2 haploinsufficiency
for mast cell differentiation, but not for basophil differentiation. We examined 
the precise role of GATA2 in maintaining the expression of a wide range of genes 
that are important for performing basophil or mast cell functions. The effects of
GATA2 on gene expression were broadly based. We demonstrated that GATA2 was
required for maintaining Fcer1a mRNA and FceRIa protein expression on both
basophils and mast cells, as well as for maintaining Kit mRNA and c-Kit protein
expression on mast cells. GATA2 was required for histamine synthesis and was also
critical for Il4 mRNA expression in basophils and Il13 mRNA expression in mast
cells. We demonstrate a STAT5-GATA2 connection, showing that the STAT5
transcription factor directly bound to the promoter and an intronic region of the
Gata2 gene. Overexpression of the Gata2 gene was sufficient to direct basophil
and mast cell differentiation in the absence of the Stat5 gene. Our study reveals
that the STAT5-GATA2 pathway is critical for basophil and mast cell
differentiation and maintenance.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4405376 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25801432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PeerJ. 2015 Mar 12;3:e830. doi: 10.7717/peerj.830. eCollection 2015.

The effect of listening to music on human transcriptome.

Kanduri C(1), Raijas P(2), Ahvenainen M(1), Philips AK(1), Ukkola-Vuoti L(1),
Lähdesmäki H(3), Järvelä I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki , Finland. (2)DocMus
Department, University of the Arts Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland. (3)Department
of Information and Computer Science, Aalto University , AALTO , Finland.

Although brain imaging studies have demonstrated that listening to music alters
human brain structure and function, the molecular mechanisms mediating those
effects remain unknown. With the advent of genomics and bioinformatics
approaches, these effects of music can now be studied in a more detailed fashion.
To verify whether listening to classical music has any effect on human
transcriptome, we performed genome-wide transcriptional profiling from the
peripheral blood of participants after listening to classical music (n = 48), and
after a control study without music exposure (n = 15). As musical experience is
known to influence the responses to music, we compared the transcriptional
responses of musically experienced and inexperienced participants separately with
those of the controls. Comparisons were made based on two subphenotypes of
musical experience: musical aptitude and music education. In musically experiencd
participants, we observed the differential expression of 45 genes (27 up- and 18 
down-regulated) and 97 genes (75 up- and 22 down-regulated) respectively based on
subphenotype comparisons (rank product non-parametric statistics, pfp 0.05,
>1.2-fold change over time across conditions). Gene ontological
overrepresentation analysis (hypergeometric test, FDR < 0.05) revealed that the
up-regulated genes are primarily known to be involved in the secretion and
transport of dopamine, neuron projection, protein sumoylation, long-term
potentiation and dephosphorylation. Down-regulated genes are known to be involved
in ATP synthase-coupled proton transport, cytolysis, and positive regulation of
caspase, peptidase and endopeptidase activities. One of the most up-regulated
genes, alpha-synuclein (SNCA), is located in the best linkage region of musical
aptitude on chromosome 4q22.1 and is regulated by GATA2, which is known to be
associated with musical aptitude. Several genes reported to regulate song
perception and production in songbirds displayed altered activities, suggesting a
possible evolutionary conservation of sound perception between species. We
observed no significant findings in musically inexperienced participants.

PMCID: PMC4362302
PMID: 25789207  [PubMed]


101. Endocr J. 2015;62(5):431-40. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ14-0427. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

A high concentration of triiodothyronine attenuates the stimulatory effect on
hemin-induced erythroid differentiation of human erythroleukemia K562 cells.

Shiraishi M(1), Yamamoto Y, Hirooka N, Obuchi Y, Tachibana S, Makishima M, Tanaka
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa
359-8513, Japan.

Although thyroid hormone is a known stimulator of erythropoietic differentiation,
severe anemia is sometimes observed in patients with hyperthyroidism and this
mechanism is not fully understood. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effect of triiodothyronine (T3) on hemin-induced erythropoiesis. Human
erythroleukemia K562 cells were used as an erythroid differentiation model. Cell 
differentiation was induced by hemin and the effect of pre-incubation with T3
(0.1 to 100 nM) was analyzed by measuring the benzidine-positive rate, hemoglobin
content, CD71 expression (transferrin receptor), and mRNA expression for
transcription factors related to erythropoiesis and thyroid hormone receptors
(TRs). Hemin, a promoter of erythroid differentiation, increased the levels of
mRNAs for TRa, TRß, and retinoid X receptor a (RXRa), as well as those for
nuclear factor-erythroid 2 (NFE2), GATA-binding protein 1 (GATA1) and
GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2). Lower concentrations of T3 had a stimulatory
effect on hemin-induced hemoglobin production (1 and 10 nM), CD71 expression (0.1
nM), and a-globin mRNA expression (1 nM), while a higher concentration of T3 (100
nM) abrogated the stimulatory effect on these parameters. T3 at 100 nM did not
affect cell viability and proliferation, suggesting that the abrogation of
erythropoiesis enhancement was not due to toxicity. T3 at 100 nM also
significantly inhibited expression of GATA2 and RXRa mRNA, compared to 1 nM T3.
We conclude that a high concentration of T3 attenuates the classical stimulatory 
effect on erythropoiesis exerted by a low concentration of T3 in hemin-induced
K562 cells.

PMID: 25787723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 24;290(17):10764-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.630053. Epub
2015 Mar 17.

Carrageenan Inhibits Insulin Signaling through GRB10-mediated Decrease in
Tyr(P)-IRS1 and through Inflammation-induced Increase in Ser(P)307-IRS1.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Feferman L(1), Tobacman JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago and the
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612. (2)From the
Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago and the Jesse Brown
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612 jkt@uic.edu.

Inflammation induced by exposure to the common food additive carrageenan leads to
insulin resistance by increase in Ser(P)(307)-insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1)
and subsequent decline in the insulin-stimulated increase in Ser(P)(473)-AKT.
Inhibition of carrageenan-induced inflammation reversed the increase in
Ser(P)(307)-IRS1 but did not completely reverse the carrageenan-induced decline
in Ser(P)(473)-AKT. To identify the additional mechanism responsible for the
decrease in Ser(P)(473)-AKT, studies were performed in human HepG2 cells and in
C57BL/6J mice. Following carrageenan, expression of GRB10 (growth factor
receptor-bound 10 protein), an adaptor protein that binds to the insulin receptor
and inhibits insulin signaling, increased significantly. GRB10 silencing blocked 
the carrageenan-induced reduction of the insulin-stimulated increase in
Tyr(P)-IRS1 and partially reversed the decline in Ser(P)(473)-AKT. The
combination of GRB10 silencing with BCL10 silencing and the reactive oxygen
species inhibitor Tempol completely reversed the decline in Ser(P)(473)-AKT.
After carrageenan, GRB10 promoter activity was enhanced because of activation by 
GATA2. A direct correlation between Ser(P)(473)-AKT and Ser(P)(401)-GATA2 was
evident, and inhibition of AKT phosphorylation by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
blocked Ser(401)-GATA2 phosphorylation and the increase in GRB10 expression.
Studies indicated that carrageenan inhibited insulin signaling by two mechanisms:
through the inflammation-mediated increase in Ser(P)(307)-IRS1, a negative
regulator of insulin signaling, and through a transcriptional mechanism leading
to increase in GRB10 expression and GRB10-inhibition of Tyr(P)-IRS1, a positive
regulator of insulin signaling. These mechanisms converge to inhibit the
insulin-induced increase in Ser(P)(473)-AKT. They provide internal feedback,
mediated by Ser(P)(473)-AKT, Ser(P)(401)-GATA2, and nuclear GATA2, which links
the opposing effects of serine and tyrosine phosphorylations of IRS1 and can
modulate insulin responsiveness.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4409242 [Available on 2016-04-24]
PMID: 25784556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 15;24(12):3481-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv099. Epub 2015 Mar
17.

Neuronal identity genes regulated by super-enhancers are preferentially
down-regulated in the striatum of Huntington's disease mice.

Achour M(1), Le Gras S(2), Keime C(2), Parmentier F(3), Lejeune FX(3), Boutillier
AL(4), Néri C(3), Davidson I(5), Merienne K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics and Translational Medicine Department. (2)Microarray and
Sequencing Platform and. (3)CNRS, UMR 8256, Laboratory of Neuronal Cell Biology
and Pathology, Institute of Biology Paris-Seine, 9 quai Saint Bernard, Paris
75005, France, Sorbonnes Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, F-75005 Paris,
France and. (4)Laboratory of Cognitive and Adaptive Neuroscience, CNRS/University
of Strasbourg, UMR 7364, 12 rue Goethe, 67000 Strasbourg, France. (5)Functional
Genomics and Cancer Department, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire 
et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS/INSERM/University of Strasbourg, UMR 7104, 1 rue
Laurent Fries, Illkirch 67404, France. (6)Neurogenetics and Translational
Medicine Department, Laboratory of Cognitive and Adaptive Neuroscience,
CNRS/University of Strasbourg, UMR 7364, 12 rue Goethe, 67000 Strasbourg, France 
karine.merienne@unistra.fr.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disease associated with
extensive down-regulation of genes controlling neuronal function, particularly in
the striatum. Whether altered epigenetic regulation underlies transcriptional
defects in HD is unclear. Integrating RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-seq), we show that down-regulated genes in HD mouse striatum associate with
selective decrease in H3K27ac, a mark of active enhancers, and RNA Polymerase II 
(RNAPII). In addition, we reveal that decreased genes in HD mouse striatum
display a specific epigenetic signature, characterized by high levels and broad
patterns of H3K27ac and RNAPII. Our results indicate that this signature is that 
of super-enhancers, a category of broad enhancers regulating genes defining
tissue identity and function. Specifically, we reveal that striatal
super-enhancers display extensive H3K27 acetylation within gene bodies, drive
transcription characterized by low levels of paused RNAPII, regulate neuronal
function genes and are enriched in binding motifs for Gata transcription factors,
such as Gata2 regulating striatal identity genes. Together, our results provide
evidence for preferential down-regulation of genes controlled by super-enhancers 
in HD striatum and indicate that enhancer topography is a major parameter
determining the propensity of a gene to be deregulated in a neurodegenerative
disease.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25784504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2015 Jun;204(3):421-9. doi: 10.1007/s00430-015-0401-6.
Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Sleepless latency of human cytomegalovirus.

Poole E(1), Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Box 157, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Level 5 Laboratories Block, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK,
elp27@cam.ac.uk.

As with all human herpesviruses, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) persists for the
lifetime of the host by establishing a latent infection, which is broken by
periodic reactivation events. One site of HCMV latency is in the progenitor cells
of the myeloid lineage such as CD34+ cells and their CD14+ derivatives. The
development of experimental techniques to isolate and culture these primary cells
in vitro is enabling detailed analysis of the events that occur during virus
latency and reactivation. Ex vivo differentiation of latently infected primary
myeloid cells to dendritic cells and macrophages results in the reactivation of
latent virus and provides model systems in which to analyse the viral and
cellular functions involved in latent carriage and reactivation. Such analyses
have shown that, in contrast to primary lytic infection or reactivation which is 
characterised by a regulated cascade of expression of all viral genes, latent
infection is associated with a much more restricted viral transcription programme
with expression of only a small number of viral genes. Additionally, concomitant 
changes in the expression of cellular miRNAs and cellular proteins occur, and
this includes changes in the expression of a number of secreted cellular proteins
and intracellular anti-apoptotic proteins, which all have profound effects on the
latently infected cells. In this review, we concentrate on the effects of one of 
the latency-associated viral proteins, LAcmvIL-10, and describe how it causes a
decrease in the cellular miRNA, hsa-miR-92a, and a concomitant upregulation of
the GATA2 myeloid transcription factor, which, in turn, drives the expression of 
cellular IL-10. Taken together, we argue that HCMV latency, rather than a period 
of viral quiescence, is associated with the virally driven manipulation of host
cell functions, perhaps every bit as complex as lytic infection. A full
understanding of these changes in cellular and viral gene expression during
latent infection could have far-reaching implications for therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4439429
PMID: 25772624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1050-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.119180.

Gata2b is a restricted early regulator of hemogenic endothelium in the zebrafish 
embryo.

Butko E(1), Distel M(1), Pouget C(1), Weijts B(1), Kobayashi I(1), Ng K(1),
Mosimann C(2), Poulain FE(3), McPherson A(3), Ni CW(4), Stachura DL(1), Del Cid
N(1), Espín-Palazón R(1), Lawson ND(4), Dorsky R(3), Clements WK(5), Traver D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (2)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences,
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Neurobiology and
Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (4)University of
Massachusetts at Worcester, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (5)Department of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA Department of Hematology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA Section of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA dtraver@ucsd.edu.

The adult blood system is established by hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which
arise during development from an endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition of cells
comprising the floor of the dorsal aorta. Expression of aortic runx1 has served
as an early marker of HSC commitment in the zebrafish embryo, but recent studies 
have suggested that HSC specification begins during the convergence of posterior 
lateral plate mesoderm (PLM), well before aorta formation and runx1
transcription. Further understanding of the earliest stages of HSC specification 
necessitates an earlier marker of hemogenic endothelium. Studies in mice have
suggested that GATA2 might function at early stages within hemogenic endothelium.
Two orthologs of Gata2 exist in zebrafish: gata2a and gata2b. Here, we report
that gata2b expression initiates during the convergence of PLM, becoming
restricted to emerging HSCs. We observe Notch-dependent gata2b expression within 
the hemogenic subcompartment of the dorsal aorta that is in turn required to
initiate runx1 expression. Our results indicate that Gata2b functions within
hemogenic endothelium from an early stage, whereas Gata2a functions more broadly 
throughout the vascular system.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360177
PMID: 25758220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2015 Apr 16;125(16):2553-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-608042. Epub 2015
Mar 9.

Elucidation of the EP defect in Diamond-Blackfan anemia by characterization and
prospective isolation of human EPs.

Iskander D(1), Psaila B(1), Gerrard G(2), Chaidos A(1), En Foong H(2), Harrington
Y(3), Karnik LC(3), Roberts I(4), de la Fuente J(3), Karadimitris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Department of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom; (2)Centre for Haematology, Department of 
Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 
Imperial Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Imperial College Healthcare National
Health Service Trust and Academic Health Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom; (3)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Imperial College Healthcare National Health Service Trust,
London, United Kingdom; and. (4)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Hospital
and Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University and John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a disorder characterized by a selective defect
in erythropoiesis. Delineation of the precise defect is hampered by a lack of
markers that define cells giving rise to erythroid burst- and erythroid
colony-forming unit (BFU-E and CFU-E) colonies, the clonogenic assays that
quantify early and late erythroid progenitor (EEP and LEP) potential,
respectively. By combining flow cytometry, cell-sorting, and single-cell
clonogenic assays, we identified
Lin(-)CD34(+)CD38(+)CD45RA(-)CD123(-)CD71(+)CD41a(-)CD105(-)CD36(-) bone marrow
cells as EEP giving rise to BFU-E, and
Lin(-)CD34(+/-)CD38(+)CD45RA(-)CD123(-)CD71(+)CD41a(-)CD105(+)CD36(+) cells as
LEP giving rise to CFU-E, in a hierarchical fashion. We then applied these
definitions to DBA and identified that, compared with controls, frequency, and
clonogenicity of DBA, EEP and LEP are significantly decreased in
transfusion-dependent but restored in corticosteroid-responsive patients. Thus,
both quantitative and qualitative defects in erythroid progenitor (EP) contribute
to defective erythropoiesis in DBA. Prospective isolation of defined EPs will
facilitate more incisive study of normal and aberrant erythropoiesis.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25755292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Mar;50(3):388-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.08.005. Epub 
2014 Oct 1.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: focus on abnormal muscle formation.

Alaggio R(1), Midrio P(2), Sgrò A(3), Piovan G(2), Guzzardo V(1), Donato R(4),
Sorci G(4), Lago P(5), Gamba PG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine Department DIMED, Pathology Unit, University of Padua. (2)Pediatric
Surgery, University of Padua. (3)Pediatric Surgery, University of Padua.
Electronic address: albertosgro@gmail.com. (4)Section of Anatomy, Dept. Exp. Med.
& Biochem. Sci., University of Perugia. (5)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit,
University of Padua.

BACKGROUND: CDH is a major birth defect, characterized by high mortality. How the
initial defective mesenchymal substructures affects muscle malformation is
unclear. Defects of genes involved in diaphragmatic development, such as
friend-of-GATA2 (Fog2), may play an important role in its pathogenesis. We
investigated the expression of Fog2 and proteins of myogenesis in a series of CDH
and in diaphragms at different fetal ages, in order to clarify the role of
muscular components during diaphragmatic development in cases with CDH.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Specimen were obtained from seven diaphragms of CDH cases
undergoing surgery, 3 entire diaphragms from non repaired CDH, 5 control
diaphragms at different gestational ages (16, 17, 22, 32, and 40g.w.), and 3
biopsy samples of normal voluntary muscle. The thickness of diaphragms at the
edge of the defect in CDH and in developing diaphragms was measured. All samples 
were processed for HE staining and immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemical
expression of MyoD, Myf4, Pax7, Mib1 and Fog2 was evaluated.
RESULTS: Mean thickness at the edge of the defect was 4.14mm. Contralateral
hemi-diaphragm in 3 autopsies and in controls at 32 and 40weeks measured 2.25mm; 
histology showed a higher density of desmin-positive muscular cells at the edge
of defect. CDH displayed scattered Myf4-positive cells (range 0%-10%, mean 2.4%),
numerous Pax7-positive cells (range 0%-24%, mean 12.1%) and less than 1%
Mib1-positive cells. Controls showed a reduction of positive cell with the
progression of gestational age for Myf4 (30% at 16 weeks, 20% at 17 weeks, 5% at 
22 weeks, 1% at 32 and 40 weeks), Pax7 (85% at 16 weeks and 17 weeks, 35% at 22
weeks, 11% at 32 weeks) and Mib1 (20% at 16 weeks, 8% at 17 weeks, 7% at 22weeks,
2% at 32 weeks). Fog-2 was diffusely positive in mesenchymal, mesothelial and
muscular cells, in diaphragms from 16 to 22 weeks, decreasing to 20% of positive 
muscular cells in 32-week diaphragm. In CDH only mesothelial and mesenchymal
cells were positive. Stem cell markers were negative in cases and controls.
COMMENT: CDH shows a thick muscular border, with high number of mature muscle
cells and significant increase of quiescent satellite cells (PAX7+, Mib1-).
Abnormal architecture may affect the normal process of myogenesis and thus
signaling and cell-cell interactions of myocytes. The expression of Fog2 in
mesothelial and mesenchymal cells in CDH demonstrates the absence of a genetic
defect involving Fog2 in our cases. Being Fog2 expressed in muscle cells at early
stage supports the hypothesis that the altered diaphragmatic genesis may
undermine also the muscular component instead of the only mesenchymal one.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25746694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Clin Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;34(9):1643-5. doi: 10.1007/s10067-015-2905-2. Epub 2015 
Mar 5.

Rheumatologic manifestations of the "MonoMAC" syndrome. a systematic review.

Johnson JA(1), Yu SS, Elist M, Arkfeld D, Panush RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
Jennifer.johnson@med.usc.edu.

MonoMAC syndrome is characterized by monocytopenia with susceptibility to
nontuberculous mycobacterial infections. First recognized in 2011, it is caused
by GATA2 mutations and can manifest as disseminated mycobacterial, fungal, and
viral infections. While mortality rates for this disorder have been high, it has 
recently been successfully treated with haploidentical allogeneic stem cell
transplant. Since approximately one third of patients may have rheumatologic
symptoms, such as erythema nodosum, panniculitis, or arthralgias, rheumatologists
may expect to encounter this newly described entity with increasing frequency.

PMID: 25739845  [PubMed - in process]


109. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 3;10(8):1398-409. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.062. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Cell-type phylogenetics and the origin of endometrial stromal cells.

Kin K(1), Nnamani MC(1), Lynch VJ(2), Michaelides E(3), Wagner GP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516,
USA. (2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven,
CT 06516, USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. 
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516,
USA. Electronic address: gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

A challenge of genome annotation is the identification of genes performing
specific biological functions. Here, we propose a phylogenetic approach that
utilizes RNA-seq data to infer the historical relationships among cell types and 
to trace the pattern of gene-expression changes on the tree. The hypothesis is
that gene-expression changes coincidental with the origin of a cell type will be 
important for the function of the derived cell type. We apply this approach to
the endometrial stromal cells (ESCs), which are critical for the initiation and
maintenance of pregnancy. Our approach identified well-known regulators of ESCs, 
PGR and FOXO1, as well as genes not yet implicated in female fertility, including
GATA2 and TFAP2C. Knockdown analysis confirmed that they are essential for ESC
differentiation. We conclude that phylogenetic analysis of cell transcriptomes is
a powerful tool for discovery of genes performing cell-type-specific functions.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25732829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Med Oncol. 2015 Apr;32(4):87. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0522-1. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

GATA2 promotes glioma progression through EGFR/ERK/Elk-1 pathway.

Wang Z(1), Yuan H, Sun C, Xu L, Chen Y, Zhu Q, Zhao H, Huang Q, Dong J, Lan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004, China.

Among the gliomas, glioblastoma (GBM) is the highest grade and the most malignant
glioma tumor. GATA2 is a hematopoietic factor that has been intensely studied in 
hematopoietic malignancies. Recently, the functions of GATA2 as an oncogene in
other types of human cancer have been reported. However, no role for GATA2 in the
development and progression of glioma has been reported to date. In the present
study, we found that the expression level of GATA2 is upregulated in GBM and is
correlated with GBM outcome. Ectopic expression of GATA2 or RNAi-mediated
knockdown of GATA2 significantly enhanced or inhibited proliferation, migration
and invasion of glioma cells. Moreover, we found that epidermal growth factor
receptor and extracellular signal-regulated kinase, as upstream components of the
signaling pathway, upregulate GATA2 expression; moreover, GATA2 promotes Elk-1
expression. Therefore, a genetic approach or pharmacological intervention
targeting GATA2 could potentially serve as an effective strategy for treating
glioma patients.

PMID: 25707769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Br J Haematol. 2015 Apr;169(2):173-87. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13317. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Haematopoietic and immune defects associated with GATA2 mutation.

Collin M(1), Dickinson R, Bigley V.

Author information: 
(1)Human Dendritic Cell Laboratory, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Heterozygous familial or sporadic GATA2 mutations cause a multifaceted disorder, 
encompassing susceptibility to infection, pulmonary dysfunction, autoimmunity,
lymphoedema and malignancy. Although often healthy in childhood, carriers of
defective GATA2 alleles develop progressive loss of mononuclear cells (dendritic 
cells, monocytes, B and Natural Killer lymphocytes), elevated FLT3 ligand, and a 
90% risk of clinical complications, including progression to myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) by 60 years of age. Premature death may occur from childhood due
to infection, pulmonary dysfunction, solid malignancy and MDS/acute myeloid
leukaemia. GATA2 mutations include frameshifts, amino acid substitutions,
insertions and deletions scattered throughout the gene but concentrated in the
region encoding the two zinc finger domains. Mutations appear to cause
haplo-insufficiency, which is known to impair haematopoietic stem cell survival
in animal models. Management includes genetic counselling, prevention of
infection, cancer surveillance, haematopoietic monitoring and, ultimately, stem
cell transplantation upon the development of MDS or another life-threatening
complication.

© 2015 The Authors. British Journal of Haematology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4409096
PMID: 25707267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Commun. 2015 Feb 17;6:6252. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7252.

Mutation within the hinge region of the transcription factor Nr2f2 attenuates
salt-sensitive hypertension.

Kumarasamy S(1), Waghulde H(1), Gopalakrishnan K(1), Mell B(1), Morgan E(2), Joe 
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Hypertension and Personalized Medicine, University of Toledo
College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, Ohio 43614-2598, USA [2]
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of
Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, Ohio 43614-2598, USA. (2)1] Center for
Hypertension and Personalized Medicine, University of Toledo College of Medicine 
and Life Sciences, Toledo, Ohio 43614-2598, USA [2] Department of Physiology and 
Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo,
Ohio 43614-2598, USA [3] Center for Diabetes and Endocrine Research, University
of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, Ohio 43614-2598, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have prioritized a transcription factor,
nuclear receptor 2 family 2 (NR2F2), as being associated with essential
hypertension in humans. Here we provide evidence that validates this association 
and indicates that Nr2f2 is a genetic determinant of blood pressure (BP). Using
the zinc-finger nuclease technology, the generation of a targeted Nr2f2-edited
rat model is reported. The resulting gene-edited rats have a 15 bp deletion in
exon 2 leading to a five-amino-acid deletion in the hinge region of the mutant
Nr2f2 protein. Both systolic and diastolic blood pressures of the Nr2f2(mutant)
rats are significantly lower than controls. Because the hinge region of Nr2f2 is 
required for interaction with Friend of Gata2 (Fog2), protein-protein interaction
is examined. Interaction of Nr2f2(mutant) protein with Fog2 is greater than that 
with the wild-type Nr2f2, indicating that the extent of interaction between these
two transcription factors critically influences BP.

PMCID: PMC4486351
PMID: 25687237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Leukemia. 2015 Aug;29(8):1795-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.40. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Characterisation of a compound in-cis GATA2 germline mutation in a pedigree
presenting with myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia with concurrent
thrombocytopenia.

Hahn CN(1), Brautigan PJ(2), Chong CE(2), Janssan A(3), Venugopal P(3), Lee Y(4),
Tims AE(5), Horwitz MS(6), Klingler-Hoffmann M(3), Scott HS(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia [2] Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [3] School of
Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (2)1]
Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [2] Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (3)1]
Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [2] Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [3] School of
Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (4)1] Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [2] Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology 
and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [3]
School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences, University 
of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (5)1] Department of
Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA [2]
Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Department of
Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (7)1]
Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [2] Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [3] School of
Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [4] School
of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia [5] School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Division of Health
Sciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [6]
ACRF Cancer Genomics Facility, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia.

PMID: 25676417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10368-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.613018. Epub
2015 Feb 10.

Regulation of GATA-binding protein 2 levels via ubiquitin-dependent degradation
by Fbw7: involvement of cyclin B-cyclin-dependent kinase 1-mediated
phosphorylation of THR176 in GATA-binding protein 2.

Nakajima T(1), Kitagawa K(2), Ohhata T(2), Sakai S(2), Uchida C(3), Shibata K(3),
Minegishi N(4), Yumimoto K(5), Nakayama KI(5), Masumoto K(6), Katou F(6), Niida
H(2), Kitagawa M(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Molecular Biology and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
and. (2)From the Departments of Molecular Biology and. (3)the Research Equipment 
Center, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan. (4)the Department of Biobank Life Science,
Tohoku University School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi
980-8573, Japan, and. (5)the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (6)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and.
(7)From the Departments of Molecular Biology and kitamasa@hama-med.ac.jp.

A GATA family transcription factor, GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2), participates 
in cell growth and differentiation of various cells, such as hematopoietic stem
cells. Although its expression level is controlled by transcriptional induction
and proteolytic degradation, the responsible E3 ligase has not been identified.
Here, we demonstrate that F-box/WD repeat-containing protein 7 (Fbw7/Fbxw7), a
component of Skp1, Cullin 1, F-box-containing complex (SCF)-type E3 ligase, is an
E3 ligase for GATA2. GATA2 contains a cell division control protein 4 (Cdc4)
phosphodegron (CPD), a consensus motif for ubiquitylation by Fbw7, which includes
Thr(176). Ectopic expression of Fbw7 destabilized GATA2 and promoted its
proteasomal degradation. Substitution of threonine 176 to alanine in GATA2
inhibited binding with Fbw7, and the ubiquitylation and degradation of GATA2 by
Fbw7 was suppressed. The CPD kinase, which mediates the phosphorylation of
Thr(176), was cyclin B-cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Moreover, depletion of
endogenous Fbw7 stabilized endogenous GATA2 in K562 cells. Conditional Fbw7
depletion in mice increased GATA2 levels in hematopoietic stem cells and myeloid 
progenitors at the early stage. Increased GATA2 levels in Fbw7-conditional
knock-out mice were correlated with a decrease in a c-Kit high expressing
population of myeloid progenitor cells. Our results suggest that Fbw7 is a bona
fide E3 ubiquitin ligase for GATA2 in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4400347 [Available on 2016-04-17]
PMID: 25670854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):223-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.013.

A targetable GATA2-IGF2 axis confers aggressiveness in lethal prostate cancer.

Vidal SJ(1), Rodriguez-Bravo V(2), Quinn SA(3), Rodriguez-Barrueco R(4), Lujambio
A(5), Williams E(4), Sun X(6), de la Iglesia-Vicente J(4), Lee A(7), Readhead
B(8), Chen X(6), Galsky M(6), Esteve B(4), Petrylak DP(9), Dudley JT(8), Rabadan 
R(7), Silva JM(4), Hoshida Y(6), Lowe SW(5), Cordon-Cardo C(10), Domingo-Domenech
J(11).

Author information: 
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA. (2)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 10032, USA. (4)Department of Pathology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (5)Cancer
Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA. (6)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Center
for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10031, USA. (8)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (9)Yale Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. (10)Department of
Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
Electronic address: carlos.cordon-cardo@mssm.edu. (11)Department of Pathology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic
address: josep.domingo-domenech@mssm.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):158-9.

Elucidating the determinants of aggressiveness in lethal prostate cancer may
stimulate therapeutic strategies that improve clinical outcomes. We used
experimental models and clinical databases to identify GATA2 as a regulator of
chemotherapy resistance and tumorigenicity in this context. Mechanistically,
direct upregulation of the growth hormone IGF2 emerged as a mediator of the
aggressive properties regulated by GATA2. IGF2 in turn activated IGF1R and INSR
as well as a downstream polykinase program. The characterization of this axis
prompted a combination strategy whereby dual IGF1R/INSR inhibition restored the
efficacy of chemotherapy and improved survival in preclinical models. These
studies reveal a GATA2-IGF2 aggressiveness axis in lethal prostate cancer and
identify a therapeutic opportunity in this challenging disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4356948
PMID: 25670080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):158-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.01.008.

Taxane resistance in prostate cancer mediated by AR-independent GATA2 regulation 
of IGF2.

Plymate SR(1), Bhatt RS(2), Balk SP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington and GRECC-VAPSHCS, Seattle,
WA 98104, USA. (2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Electronic address: sbalk@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):223-39.

GATA2 has been well-characterized as a critical pioneer transcription factor for 
androgen receptor (AR) in prostate cancer. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Vidal
and colleagues identify increased GATA2 and its AR-independent transactivation of
IGF2 as a mechanism that can mediate taxane resistance through activation of
IGF1/insulin receptor signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25670076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar 2;125(3):1243-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI79328. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Vascular niche promotes hematopoietic multipotent progenitor formation from
pluripotent stem cells.

Gori JL, Butler JM, Chan YY, Chandrasekaran D, Poulos MG, Ginsberg M, Nolan DJ,
Elemento O, Wood BL, Adair JE, Rafii S, Kiem HP.

Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) represent an alternative hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) source for treating hematopoietic disease. The limited engraftment of human
PSC-derived (hPSC-derived) multipotent progenitor cells (MPP) has hampered the
clinical application of these cells and suggests that MPP require additional cues
for definitive hematopoiesis. We hypothesized that the presence of a vascular
niche that produces Notch ligands jagged-1 (JAG1) and delta-like ligand-4 (DLL4) 
drives definitive hematopoiesis. We differentiated hes2 human embryonic stem
cells (hESC) and Macaca nemestrina-induced PSC (iPSC) line-7 with cytokines in
the presence or absence of endothelial cells (ECs) that express JAG1 and DLL4.
Cells cocultured with ECs generated substantially more CD34+CD45+ hematopoietic
progenitors compared with cells cocultured without ECs or with ECs lacking JAG1
or DLL4. EC-induced cells exhibited Notch activation and expressed HSC-specific
Notch targets RUNX1 and GATA2. EC-induced PSC-MPP engrafted at a markedly higher 
level in NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor <U+03B3> chain-null (NSG) mice compared with
cytokine-induced cells, and low-dose chemotherapy-based selection further
increased engraftment. Long-term engraftment and the myeloid-to-lymphoid ratio
achieved with vascular niche induction were similar to levels achieved for cord
blood-derived MPP and up to 20-fold higher than those achieved with hPSC-derived 
MPP engraftment. Our findings indicate that endothelial Notch ligands promote
PSC-definitive hematopoiesis and production of long-term engrafting CD34+ cells, 
suggesting these ligands are critical for HSC emergence.

PMCID: PMC4362238
PMID: 25664855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2015 Mar;28(1):55-68. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2014.11.004. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Genetic predisposition syndromes: when should they be considered in the work-up
of MDS?

Babushok DV(1), Bessler M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure Center, Division of Hematology, Department
of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA;
Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
daria.babushok@uphs.upenn.edu. (2)Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure Center,
Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Division of Hematology, Department of
Medicine, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Electronic address: besslerm@email.chop.edu.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal hematopoietic disorders characterized 
by cytopenias, ineffective hematopoiesis, myelodysplasia, and an increased risk
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While sporadic MDS is primarily a disease of the
elderly, MDS in children and young and middle-aged adults is frequently
associated with underlying genetic predisposition syndromes. In addition to the
classic hereditary bone marrow failure syndromes (BMFS) such as Fanconi Anemia
and Dyskeratosis Congenita, in recent years there has been an increased awareness
of non-syndromic familial MDS/AML predisposition syndromes such as those caused
by mutations in GATA2, RUNX1, CEBPA, and SRP72 genes. Here, we will discuss the
importance of recognizing an underlying genetic predisposition syndrome a patient
with MDS, will review clinical scenarios when genetic predisposition should be
considered, and will provide a practical overview of the common BMFS and familial
MDS/AML syndromes which may be encountered in adult patients with MDS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323616
PMID: 25659730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Dent Res. 2015 Mar;94(3 Suppl):59S-69S. doi: 10.1177/0022034514568197. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Upregulation of gingival tissue miR-200b in obese periodontitis subjects.

Kalea AZ(1), Hoteit R(2), Suvan J(3), Lovering RC(2), Palmen J(2), Cooper JA(2), 
Khodiyar VK(2), Harrington Z(4), Humphries SE(2), D'Aiuto F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Science,
University College London, London, UK a.kalea@ucl.ac.uk. (2)Centre for
Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College 
London, London, UK. (3)Unit of Periodontology, Eastman Dental Institute,
University College London, London, UK. (4)Peninsula School of Dentistry, Plymouth
University, Plymouth, UK.

Increased local immune and inflammatory responses in obese individuals with
periodontitis may explain the aggressive clinical presentation and altered
treatment response when compared to that of normal weight subjects. Our goal was 
to identify any differences in microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of gingival
tissue in periodontitis when obesity is present, which may suggest novel
molecular pathways that this miRNA network may affect. Total RNA was extracted
from gingival tissue biopsies collected from normal weight and obese individuals 
with periodontitis; miRNA expression profiling was performed with Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA 3.0 arrays; and results were validated with quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). In silico identification of
previously confirmed miRNA gene targets was conducted through miRTarBase and
miRWalk databases, and pathway enrichment analysis identified enriched miRNA gene
sets. Expression of selected genes in the same biopsy samples was tested with
qRT-PCR. The gingival tissue miRNA profile of obese patients, compared to that of
normal weight patients, showed 13 upregulated and 22 downregulated miRNAs, among 
which miR-200b was validated by qRT-PCR to be significantly increased in obesity.
Functional analysis of 51 experimentally validated miR-200b gene targets
identified enrichment of genes involved in cell motility, differentiation, DNA
binding, response to stimulus, and vasculature development pathways not
previously identified in the obesity-specific disease profile. Furthermore, the
expression of the miR-200b gene targets ZEB1/2, GATA2, and KDR was confirmed by
qRT-PCR as being lower in obese patients with periodontitis versus normal weight 
patients, suggesting a role of miR-200b in regulation of a set of gene targets
and biological pathways relevant to wound healing and angiogenesis. Functional
studies to explore the role of miR-200b in the above processes may offer new
insights on putative therapeutic targets for this group of patients.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research.

PMCID: PMC4541096
PMID: 25630869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Immunol. 2015 Mar 1;194(5):2190-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401868. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

GATA2 germline mutations impair GATA2 transcription, causing haploinsufficiency: 
functional analysis of the p.Arg396Gln mutation.

Cortés-Lavaud X(1), Landecho MF(2), Maicas M(3), Urquiza L(3), Merino J(4),
Moreno-Miralles I(3), Odero MD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Program, Center for Applied Medical Research, University
of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain; Department of Biochemistry and Genetics,
University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain; xcortes@alumni.unav.es.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University Clinic of Navarra, Navarra,
Pamplona 31008, Spain; and. (3)Hematology/Oncology Program, Center for Applied
Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain; (4)Department of 
Immunology, University Clinic of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain.
(5)Hematology/Oncology Program, Center for Applied Medical Research, University
of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain; Department of Biochemistry and Genetics,
University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain;

Germline GATA2 mutations have been identified as the cause of familial syndromes 
with immunodeficiency and predisposition to myeloid malignancies. GATA2 mutations
appear to cause loss of function of the mutated allele leading to
haploinsufficiency; however, this postulate has not been experimentally validated
as the basis of these syndromes. We hypothesized that mutations that are
translated into abnormal proteins could affect the transcription of GATA2,
triggering GATA2 deficiency. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase assays 
showed that the human GATA2 protein activates its own transcription through a
specific region located at -2.4 kb, whereas the p.Thr354Met, p.Thr355del, and
p.Arg396Gln germline mutations impair GATA2 promoter activation. Accordingly,
GATA2 expression was decreased to ~58% in a patient with p.Arg396Gln, compared
with controls. p.Arg396Gln is the second most common mutation in these syndromes,
and no previous functional analyses have been performed. We therefore analyzed
p.Arg396Gln. Our data show that p.Arg396Gln is a loss-of-function mutation
affecting DNA-binding ability and, as a consequence, it fails to maintain the
immature characteristics of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, which could 
result in defects in this cell compartment. In conclusion, we show that human
GATA2 binds to its own promoter, activating its transcription, and that the
aforementioned mutations impair the transcription of GATA2. Our results indicate 
that they can affect other GATA2 target genes, which could partially explain the 
variability of symptoms in these diseases. Moreover, we show that p.Arg396Gln is 
a loss-of-function mutation, which is unable to retain the progenitor phenotype
in cells where it is expressed.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25624456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cancer Med. 2015 Apr;4(4):490-9. doi: 10.1002/cam4.384. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Spectrum of myeloid neoplasms and immune deficiency associated with germline
GATA2 mutations.

Mir MA(1), Kochuparambil ST, Abraham RS, Rodriguez V, Howard M, Hsu AP, Jackson
AE, Holland SM, Patnaik MM.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Milton S. Hershey Cancer Institute, Hershey, Pennsylvania.

Guanine-adenine-thymine-adenine 2 (GATA2) mutated disorders include the recently 
described MonoMAC syndrome (Monocytopenia and Mycobacterium avium complex
infections), DCML (dendritic cell, monocyte, and lymphocyte deficiency), familial
MDS/AML (myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia) (myeloid neoplasms),
congenital neutropenia, congenital lymphedema (Emberger's syndrome),
sensorineural deafness, viral warts, and a spectrum of aggressive infections seen
across all age groups. While considerable efforts have been made to identify the 
mutations that characterize this disorder, pathogenesis remains a work in
progress with less than 100 patients described in current literature. Varying
clinical presentations offer diagnostic challenges. Allogeneic stem cell
transplant remains the treatment of choice. Morbidity, mortality, and social
costs due to the familial nature of the disease are considerable. We describe our
experience with the disorder in three affected families and a comprehensive
review of current literature.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4402062
PMID: 25619630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Hematol. 2015 May;90(5):E93-4. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23949. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Classification of CEBPA mutated acute myeloid leukemia by GATA2 mutations.

Marceau-Renaut A(1), Guihard S, Castaigne S, Dombret H, Preudhomme C, Cheok M.

Author information: 
(1)U837, INSERM, Lille, France; Hematology Laboratory, Biology and Pathology
Center, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.

PMID: 25611491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2794-811.

Expression of the potential therapeutic target CXXC5 in primary acute myeloid
leukemia cells - high expression is associated with adverse prognosis as well as 
altered intracellular signaling and transcriptional regulation.

Bruserud Ø(1,)(2), Reikvam H(1,)(2), Fredly H(1,)(2), Skavland J(2), Hagen KM(1),
van Hoang TT(1), Brenner AK(1), Kadi A(3,)(4,)(5), Astori A(3,)(4,)(5), Gjertsen 
BT(1,)(2), Pendino F(6,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Hematology, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 
Norway. (2)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France. (4)CNRS, UMR8104, Paris,
France. (5)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

The CXXC5 gene encodes a transcriptional activator with a zinc-finger domain, and
high expression in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells is associated with
adverse prognosis. We now characterized the biological context of CXXC5
expression in primary human AML cells. The global gene expression profile of AML 
cells derived from 48 consecutive patients was analyzed; cells with high and low 
CXXC5 expression then showed major differences with regard to extracellular
communication and intracellular signaling. We observed significant differences in
the phosphorylation status of several intracellular signaling mediators (CREB,
PDK1, SRC, STAT1, p38, STAT3, rpS6) that are important for PI3K-Akt-mTOR
signaling and/or transcriptional regulation. High CXXC5 expression was also
associated with high mRNA expression of several stem cell-associated
transcriptional regulators, the strongest associations being with WT1, GATA2,
RUNX1, LYL1, DNMT3, SPI1, and MYB. Finally, CXXC5 knockdown in human AML cell
lines caused significantly increased expression of the potential tumor suppressor
gene TSC22 and genes encoding the growth factor receptor KIT, the cytokine
Angiopoietin 1 and the selenium-containing glycoprotein Selenoprotein P. Thus,
high CXXC5 expression seems to affect several steps in human leukemogenesis,
including intracellular events as well as extracellular communication.

PMCID: PMC4413618
PMID: 25605239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis. 2015 Jan 5;31(4):350-3.

Granulomatous lung disease in a patient with a family history of hematological
disorders.

Overbeek MJ(1), van de Loosdrecht AA, Vonk-Noordegraaf A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center Haaglanden The Hague. m.overbeek@mchaaglanden.nl.

BACKGROUND: A 29-year old patient presented with granulomatous lung disease and a
family history of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia. She appeared
to be a carrier of a mutation in the transcription factor GATA2. The case adds to
the recent described heterogeneous clinical manifestations and syndromes in
which, against a background of hematologic disorders, GATA2 mutations have been
demonstrated, such as the Monomac and Emberger syndromes. In patients with a
granulomatous disease and a history of (familial) hematologic disorders, the
occurence of GATA2 mutations should be considered, as to gain further insight in 
the occurrence of granulomatous disease in a possible distinct phenotype among
GATA2 mutation carriers.

PMID: 25591147  [PubMed - in process]


125. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):304-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.009. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Developmental control of polycomb subunit composition by GATA factors mediates a 
switch to non-canonical functions.

Xu J(1), Shao Z(2), Li D(3), Xie H(4), Kim W(4), Huang J(5), Taylor JE(6),
Pinello L(7), Glass K(7), Jaffe JD(6), Yuan GC(7), Orkin SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Children's Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Key
Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (7)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. (8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) plays crucial roles in transcriptional
regulation and stem cell development. However, the context-specific functions
associated with alternative subunits remain largely unexplored. Here we show that
the related enzymatic subunits EZH1 and EZH2 undergo an expression switch during 
blood cell development. An erythroid-specific enhancer mediates transcriptional
activation of EZH1, and a switch from GATA2 to GATA1 controls the developmental
EZH1/2 switch by differential association with EZH1 enhancers. We further examine
the in vivo stoichiometry of the PRC2 complexes by quantitative proteomics and
reveal the existence of an EZH1-SUZ12 subcomplex lacking EED. EZH1 together with 
SUZ12 form a non-canonical PRC2 complex, occupy active chromatin, and positively 
regulate gene expression. Loss of EZH2 expression leads to repositioning of EZH1 
to EZH2 targets. Thus, the lineage- and developmental stage-specific regulation
of PRC2 subunit composition leads to a switch from canonical silencing to
non-canonical functions during blood stem cell specification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305004
PMID: 25578878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):214-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-612580.

Basophils take a slice of IRF8 pie.

Bhattacharya D(1).

Author information: 
(1)WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):358-69.

In this issue of Blood, Sasaki and colleagues demonstrate a strict requirement
for the transcription factor interferon regulator factor 8 (IRF8) in the
development of mouse basophils.

PMID: 25573968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;22(3):285-99. doi: 10.1177/1933719114565031. Epub 2015 Jan
5.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone and gonadal steroids regulate transcription factor
mRNA expression in primary pituitary and immortalized gonadotrope cells.

Zheng W(1), Grafer CM(2), Kim J(3), Halvorson LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Core Laboratories, St. Paul University Hospital, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Green Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Houston Fertility Institute,
Houston, TX, USA. (4)Rockville, MD, USA lhalvo@gmail.com.

Hormonal regulation of pituitary gonadotropin gene expression has been attributed
to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-mediated stimulation of immediate early 
gene expression and gonadal steroid interactions with their respective nuclear
receptors. A number of orphan nuclear receptors including steroidogenic factor 1,
liver receptor homologue 1, dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia
critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1, and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factors I/II as well as the GATA family members, GATA2 and
GATA4, have also been implicated in transcriptional regulation of the
gonadotropin genes. We hypothesized that hormonally mediated changes in these
latter transcription factors may provide an additional mechanism for mediating
hormonal effects beyond the more classically appreciated pathways. In these
studies, we demonstrate significant regulation of orphan nuclear receptor and
GATA messenger RNA levels by GnRH, dihydrotestosterone, estradiol, and
progesterone in both cultured primary pituitary cells and gonadotrope-derived
cell line, LßT2. These results advance our understanding of the complex
mechanisms by which GnRH and steroid hormones achieve precise regulation of
anterior pituitary function.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25563755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Hum Pathol. 2015 Mar;46(3):467-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.11.005. Epub 2014 
Nov 27.

Fatal aortic pseudoaneurysm from disseminated Mycobacterium kansasii infection:
case report.

Ehsani L(1), Reddy SC(2), Mosunjac M(3), Kraft CS(4), Guarner J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30322. Electronic address: laleh.ehsani@emory.edu. (2)Division of Infectious
Diseases, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322. (4)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322; Division 
of Infectious Diseases, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322. (5)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322; Division 
of Infectious Diseases, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322. Electronic address: 
jguarne@emory.edu.

Mycobacterium kansasii is a photochromogenic, slow-growing mycobacterium species 
that can cause pulmonary infection in patients with predisposing lung diseases,
as well as extrapulmonary or disseminated disease in immunosuppressed patients.
We describe a patient with a myelodysplastic syndrome, disseminated M kansasii
infection, and ruptured aortic aneurysm. He had a recent diagnosis of
mycobacterium cavitary lung lesions and was transferred to our facility for
possible surgical intervention of an aortic aneurysm. Few hours after admission, 
the patient suddenly collapsed and died despite resuscitation efforts. A complete
autopsy was performed and showed ruptured ascending aortic pseudoaneurysm with
hemopericardium, disseminated necrotizing and nonnecrotizing granulomas with
acid-fast bacilli in the aortic wall, lungs, heart, liver, spleen, and kidneys.
Further genetic studies were consistent with monocytopenia and mycobacterial
infection syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25537975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(5):805-15. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01011-14. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

Progenitor stage-specific activity of a cis-acting double GATA motif for Gata1
gene expression.

Moriguchi T(1), Suzuki M(2), Yu L(2), Takai J(2), Ohneda K(3), Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan moriguch@med.tohoku.ac.jp masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp. 
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health
and Welfare, Takasaki, Japan.

GATA1 is a master regulator of erythropoiesis, expression of which is regulated
by multiple discrete cis-acting elements. In this study, we examine the activity 
of a promoter-proximal double GATA (dbGATA) motif, using a Gata1 bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC)-transgenic green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
(G1BAC-GFP) mouse system. Deletion of the dbGATA motif led to significant
reductions in GFP expression in hematopoietic progenitors, while GFP expression
was maintained in erythroblasts. Consistently, in mice with a germ line deletion 
of the dbGATA motif (Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA) mice), GATA1 expression in progenitors was
significantly decreased. The suppressed GATA1 expression was associated with a
compensatory increase in GATA2 levels in progenitors. When we crossed
Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA) mice with Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice (Gata2(fGN/fGN) mice), the
Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA)::Gata2(fGN/fGN) compound mutant mice succumbed to a significant
decrease in the progenitor population, whereas both groups of single mutant mice 
maintained progenitors and survived to adulthood, indicating the functional
redundancy between GATA1 and GATA2 in progenitors. Meanwhile, the effects of the 
dbGATA site deletion on Gata1 expression were subtle in erythroblasts, which
showed increased GATA1 binding and enhanced accumulation of active histone marks 
around the 1st-intron GATA motif of the <U+0394>dbGATA locus. These results thus reveal 
a novel role of the dbGATA motif in the maintenance of Gata1 expression in
hematopoietic progenitors and a functional compensation between the dbGATA site
and the 1st-intron GATA motif in erythroblasts.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323484
PMID: 25535330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Apr;97(4):627-34. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1HI0714-351R. Epub 2014
Dec 16.

Langerin-expressing dendritic cells in human tissues are related to CD1c+
dendritic cells and distinct from Langerhans cells and CD141high XCR1+ dendritic 
cells.

Bigley V(1), McGovern N(1), Milne P(1), Dickinson R(1), Pagan S(1), Cookson S(1),
Haniffa M(1), Collin M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Dendritic Cell Laboratory, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (2)Human Dendritic Cell
Laboratory, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, United Kingdom matthew.collin@ncl.ac.uk.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Apr;97(4):621-3.

Langerin is a C-type lectin expressed at high level by LCs of the epidermis.
Langerin is also expressed by CD8(+)/CD103(+) XCR1(+) cross-presenting DCs of
mice but is not found on the homologous human CD141(high) XCR1(+) myeloid DC.
Here, we show that langerin is expressed at a low level on DCs isolated from
dermis, lung, liver, and lymphoid tissue and that langerin(+) DCs are closely
related to CD1c(+) myeloid DCs. They are distinguishable from LCs by the level of
expression of CD1a, EpCAM, CD11b, CD11c, CD13, and CD33 and are found in tissues 
and tissue-draining LNs devoid of LCs. They are unrelated to CD141(high) XCR1(+) 
myeloid DCs, lacking the characteristic expression profile of cross-presenting
DCs, conserved between mammalian species. Stem cell transplantation and DC
deficiency models confirm that dermal langerin(+) DCs have an independent
homeostasis to LCs. Langerin is not expressed by freshly isolated CD1c(+) blood
DCs but is rapidly induced on CD1c(+) DCs by serum or TGF-ß via an
ALK-3-dependent pathway. These results show that langerin is expressed outside of
the LC compartment of humans and highlight a species difference: langerin is
expressed by the XCR1(+) "DC1" population of mice but is restricted to the
CD1c(+) "DC2" population of humans (homologous to CD11b(+) DCs in the mouse).

© The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4370053
PMID: 25516751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):280-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Ascl1 and Helt act combinatorially to specify thalamic neuronal identity by
repressing Dlxs activation.

Song H(1), Lee B(1), Pyun D(1), Guimera J(2), Son Y(1), Yoon J(1), Baek K(1),
Wurst W(2), Jeong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si 446-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Developmental Genetics, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life
Sciences and Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si
446-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yongsu@khu.ac.kr.

The mammalian thalamus is an essential diencephalic derivative that plays unique 
roles in processing and relaying sensory and motor information to and from the
cerebral cortex. The profile of transcription factors and lineage tracing
experiments revealed a spatiotemporal relationship between diencephalic
progenitor domains and discrete differentiated neurons contributing to thalamic
nuclei. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which heterogeneous thalamic
neurons become specified and assemble into distinct thalamic nuclei are still
poorly understood. Here, we show that a combinatorial interaction between the
bHLH transcription factors Ascl1 and Helt is required for acquiring thalamic
progenitor identity. Surprisingly, in the combined absence of Ascl1 and Helt,
rostral thalamic progenitors (TH-R) adopt a molecular profile of a more rostral
diencephalic derivative, the prethalamus. Furthermore, we show that the
prethalamic factors Dlxs upregulated by Ascl1/Helt deficiency play unique roles
in regulating thalamic progenitor specification, and that derepression of Dlx2
and Dlx5 suppress generation of TH-R neurons. Taken together, our results suggest
a model whereby the combined activity of two distinct bHLH factors plays a key
role in the development of discrete classes of thalamic interneurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25512300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Nihon Rinsho. 2014 Oct;72(10):1861-9.

[GATA2 deficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Nonoyama S.

GATA2 is a transcription factor that is involved in the lympho-hematopoiesis.
Mutations of GATA2 cause MonoMAC syndrome (monocytopenia and mycobacterial
infections)/DCML deficiency (dendritic cell, monocyte, B and natural killer (NK) 
lymphoid deficiency), Emberger syndrome (lymphoedema with MDS), and MDS/AML. In
this review, we explain the new function of GATA2, and describe the clinical
phenotypes, laboratory findings, pathology, genetic anomalies and etiology.

PMID: 25509816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 9;9(12):e113485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113485.
eCollection 2014.

Ets and GATA transcription factors play a critical role in PMA-mediated
repression of the ckß promoter via the protein kinase C signaling pathway.

Kuan CS(1), Yee YH(1), See Too WC(1), Few LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 16150
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Choline kinase is the most upstream enzyme in the CDP-choline
pathway. It catalyzes the phosphorylation of choline to phosphorylcholine in the 
presence of ATP and Mg2+ during the biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine, the
major phospholipid in eukaryotic cell membranes. In humans, choline kinase (CK)
is encoded by two separate genes, cka and ckß, which produce three isoforms,
CKa1, CKa2, and CKß. Previous studies have associated ckß with muscle
development; however, the molecular mechanism underlying the transcriptional
regulation of ckß has never been elucidated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this report, the distal promoter region of the
ckß gene was characterized. Mutational analysis of the promoter sequence and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that Ets and GATA
transcription factors were essential for the repression of ckß promoter activity.
Supershift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays further identified
that GATA3 but not GATA2 was bound to the GATA site of ckß promoter. In addition,
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) decreased ckß promoter activity through Ets
and GATA elements. PMA also decreased the ckß mRNA and protein levels about 12
hours after the promoter activity was down-regulated. EMSA further revealed that 
PMA treatment increased the binding of both Ets and GATA transcription factors to
their respective DNA elements. The PMA-mediated repressive effect was abolished
by chronic PMA treatment and by treatment with the PKC inhibitor PKC412, but not 
the PKC inhibitor Go 6983, suggesting PKCe or PKC<U+03B7> as the PKC isozyme involved in
the PMA-mediated repression of ckß promoter. Further confirmation by using PKC
isozyme specific inhibitors identified PKCe as the isozyme that mediated the PMA 
repression of ckß promoter.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: These results demonstrate the participation of the PKC
signaling pathway in the regulation of ckß gene transcription by Ets and GATA
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4260826
PMID: 25490397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 23;111(51):18261-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421415111. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

GATA2 facilitates steroid receptor coactivator recruitment to the androgen
receptor complex.

He B(1), Lanz RB(2), Fiskus W(1), Geng C(3), Yi P(2), Hartig SM(2), Rajapakshe
K(2), Shou J(3), Wei L(4), Shah SS(3), Foley C(1), Chew SA(3), Eedunuri VK(5),
Bedoya DJ(3), Feng Q(2), Minami T(6), Mitsiades CS(7), Frolov A(8), Weigel NL(2),
Hilsenbeck SG(8), Rosen DG(9), Palzkill T(4), Ittmann MM(9), Song Y(4), Coarfa
C(10), O'Malley BW(10), Mitsiades N(11).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Molecular and Cellular Biology. (2)Molecular and
Cellular Biology. (3)Departments of Medicine. (4)Pharmacology, and. (5)Adrienne
Helis Malvin Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, LA, 70130; (6)Laboratory
for Systems Biology and Medicine, The Research Center for Advanced Science and
Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 153-8904; and. (7)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215. (8)Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center-Biostatistics, and. (9)Pathology and Immunology, Michael E. 
DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030; (10)Molecular and Cellular Biology, coarfa@bcm.edu berto@bcm.edu
mitsiade@bcm.edu. (11)Departments of Medicine, Molecular and Cellular Biology,
coarfa@bcm.edu berto@bcm.edu mitsiade@bcm.edu.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a key driver of prostate cancer (PC), even in the
state of castration-resistant PC (CRPC) and frequently even after treatment with 
second-line hormonal therapies such as abiraterone and enzalutamide. The
persistence of AR activity via both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent
mechanisms (including constitutively active AR splice variants) highlights the
unmet need for alternative approaches to block AR signaling in CRPC. We
investigated the transcription factor GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2) as a
regulator of AR signaling and an actionable therapeutic target in PC. We
demonstrate that GATA2 directly promotes expression of both full-length and
splice-variant AR, resulting in a strong positive correlation between GATA2 and
AR expression in both PC cell lines and patient specimens. Conversely, GATA2
expression is repressed by androgen and AR, suggesting a negative feedback
regulatory loop that, upon androgen deprivation, derepresses GATA2 to contribute 
to AR overexpression in CRPC. Simultaneously, GATA2 is necessary for optimal
transcriptional activity of both full-length and splice-variant AR. GATA2
colocalizes with AR and Forkhead box protein A1 on chromatin to enhance
recruitment of steroid receptor coactivators and formation of the transcriptional
holocomplex. In agreement with these important functions, high GATA2 expression
and transcriptional activity predicted worse clinical outcome in PC patients. A
GATA2 small molecule inhibitor suppressed the expression and transcriptional
function of both full-length and splice-variant AR and exerted potent anticancer 
activity against PC cell lines. We propose pharmacological inhibition of GATA2 as
a first-in-field approach to target AR expression and function and improve
outcomes in CRPC.

PMCID: PMC4280633
PMID: 25489091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Small. 2015 Apr 17;11(15):1818-28. doi: 10.1002/smll.201402564. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Magnetic tweezers-based 3D microchannel electroporation for high-throughput gene 
transfection in living cells.

Chang L(1), Howdyshell M, Liao WC, Chiang CL, Gallego-Perez D, Yang Z, Lu W, Byrd
JC, Muthusamy N, Lee LJ, Sooryakumar R.

Author information: 
(1)NSEC Center for Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymeric Biomedical Devices,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43209, USA; Biomedical Engineering
Department, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43209, USA.

A novel high-throughput magnetic tweezers-based 3D microchannel electroporation
system capable of transfecting 40 000 cells/cm(2) on a single chip for gene
therapy, regenerative medicine, and intracellular detection of target mRNA for
screening cellular heterogeneity is reported. A single cell or an ordered array
of individual cells are remotely guided by programmable magnetic fields to
poration sites with high (>90%) cell alignment efficiency to enable various
transfection reagents to be delivered simultaneously into the cells. The present 
technique, in contrast to the conventional vacuum-based approach, is
significantly gentler on the cellular membrane yielding >90% cell viability and, 
moreover, allows transfected cells to be transported for further analysis.
Illustrating the versatility of the system, the GATA2 molecular beacon is
delivered into leukemia cells to detect the regulation level of the GATA2 gene
that is associated with the initiation of leukemia. The uniform delivery and a
sharp contrast of fluorescence intensity between GATA2 positive and negative
cells demonstrate key aspects of the platform for gene transfer, screening and
detection of targeted intracellular markers in living cells.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4397144
PMID: 25469659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 11;9(5):1871-84. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.002. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

Direct reprogramming of murine fibroblasts to hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Batta K(1), Florkowska M(1), Kouskoff V(2), Lacaud G(3).

Author information: 
(1)CRUK Stem Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (2)CRUK Stem
Cell Haematopoiesis Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (3)CRUK Stem
Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of
Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. Electronic address:
georges.lacaud@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.

Recent reports have shown that somatic cells, under appropriate culture
conditions, could be directly reprogrammed to cardiac, hepatic, or neuronal
phenotype by lineage-specific transcription factors. In this study, we
demonstrate that both embryonic and adult somatic fibroblasts can be efficiently 
reprogrammed to clonal multilineage hematopoietic progenitors by the ectopic
expression of the transcription factors ERG, GATA2, LMO2, RUNX1c, and SCL. These 
reprogrammed cells were stably expanded on stromal cells and possessed short-term
reconstitution ability in vivo. Loss of p53 function facilitated reprogramming to
blood, and p53(-/-) reprogrammed cells efficiently generated erythroid,
megakaryocytic, myeloid, and lymphoid lineages. Genome-wide analyses revealed
that generation of hematopoietic progenitors was preceded by the appearance of
hemogenic endothelial cells expressing endothelial and hematopoietic genes.
Altogether, our findings suggest that direct reprogramming could represent a
valid alternative approach to the differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) for disease modeling and autologous
blood cell therapies.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4542300
PMID: 25466247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Nov;13(3 Pt A):431-41. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.10.002. Epub
2014 Oct 13.

The Notch Delta-4 ligand helps to maintain the quiescence and the short-term
reconstitutive potential of haematopoietic progenitor cells through activation of
a key gene network.

Catelain C(1), Michelet F(2), Hattabi A(2), Poirault-Chassac S(3), Kortulewski
T(4), Tronik-Le Roux D(4), Vainchenker W(3), Lauret E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U974, CNRS (UMR 7215), UM 76, Institut de Myologie, Paris F-75013,
France; Inserm, U1009, 114 rue E. Vaillant, Villejuif, F-94805, France; Institut 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, F-94805, France; Université Paris-Sud 11, Orsay,
F-91405, France. Electronic address: c.catelain@institut-myologie.org.
(2)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France;
Inserm, U1016, Paris, France. (3)Inserm, U1009, 114 rue E. Vaillant, Villejuif,
F-94805, France; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, F-94805, France; Université 
Paris-Sud 11, Orsay, F-91405, France. (4)CEA, 18 rue du Panorama, BP15,
Fontenay-aux Roses, F92265, France.

Understanding the role of Notch and its ligands within the different bone marrow 
niches could shed light on the mechanisms regulating haematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPCs) maintenance and self-renewal. Here, we report that murine bone
marrow HPCs activation by the vascular Notch Delta-4 ligand maintains a
significant proportion of cells specifically in the G0 state. Furthermore,
Delta-4/Notch pathway limits significantly the loss of the in vivo short-term
reconstitutive potential upon transplantation of Delta-4 activated HPCs into
lethally irradiated recipient mice. Both effects are directly correlated with the
decrease of cell cycle genes transcription such as CYCLIN-D1, -D2, and -D3, and
the upregulation of stemness related genes transcription such as BMI1, GATA2,
HOXB4 and C-MYC. In addition, the transcriptional screening also highlights new
downstream post-transcriptional factors, named PUMILIO1 and -2, as part of the
stem signature associated with the Delta-4/Notch signalling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25460604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Dec 9;3(6):1043-57. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.10.003.
Epub 2014 Nov 13.

An expandable, inducible hemangioblast state regulated by fibroblast growth
factor.

Vereide DT(1), Vickerman V(2), Swanson SA(2), Chu LF(2), McIntosh BE(2), Thomson 
JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA; Biotechnology
Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic
address: dvereide@morgridge.org. (2)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI
53715, USA. (3)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA;
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA; Department of Molecular,
Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. Electronic address: jthomson@morgridge.org.

During development, the hematopoietic and vascular lineages are thought to
descend from common mesodermal progenitors called hemangioblasts. Here we
identify six transcription factors, Gata2, Lmo2, Mycn, Pitx2, Sox17, and Tal1,
that "trap" murine cells in a proliferative state and endow them with a
hemangioblast potential. These "expandable" hemangioblasts (eHBs) are capable,
once released from the control of the ectopic factors, to give rise to functional
endothelial cells, multilineage hematopoietic cells, and smooth muscle cells. The
eHBs can be derived from embryonic stem cells, from fetal liver cells, or poorly 
from fibroblasts. The eHBs reveal a central role for fibroblast growth factor,
which not only promotes their expansion, but also facilitates their ability to
give rise to endothelial cells and leukocytes, but not erythrocytes. This study
serves as a demonstration that ephemeral progenitor states can be harnessed in
vitro, enabling the creation of tractable progenitor cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4264065
PMID: 25458896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):38-43. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.010. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Characterization of surface phenotypic molecules of teleost dendritic cells.

Shao T(1), Zhu LY(2), Nie L(1), Shi W(1), Dong WR(1), Xiang LX(3), Shao JZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Key
Laboratory for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310058,
China. (2)College of Science, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China. (3)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China; Key Laboratory for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang 
Province, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address: xianglx@zju.edu.cn.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Key
Laboratory for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310058,
China. Electronic address: shaojz@zju.edu.cn.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are among the most important professional
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that participate in various biological activities
in mammals. However, evidence of the existence of DCs in teleost fish and other
lower vertebrates remains limited. In this study, phenotypic and functional
characteristics of teleost DCs were described in a zebrafish model. An improved
method to efficiently enrich DCs was established. Immunofluorescence staining
revealed that the surface phenotypic hallmarks of mammalian DCs, including
MHC-II, CD80/86, CD83, and CD209, were distributed on the surfaces of zebrafish
DCs (DrDCs). Functional analysis results showed that DrDCs could initiate
antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell activation, in which MHC-II, CD80/86, CD83, and
CD209 are implicated. Hence, teleost DCs exhibit conserved immunophenotypes and
functions similar to those of their mammalian counterparts. Our findings
contributed to the current understanding of the evolutionary history of DCs and
the DC-regulatory mechanisms of adaptive immunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 19;9(11):e112123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112123.
eCollection 2014.

Development of an OP9 derived cell line as a robust model to rapidly study
adipocyte differentiation.

Lane JM(1), Doyle JR(2), Fortin JP(2), Kopin AS(2), Ordovás JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Center for Human Genetics Research, 185
Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, United States of America; Division of Sleep
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St, Boston, MA 02115, United
States of America; Jean Mayer-USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at
Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, United States of America. (2)Tufts Medical
Center, Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Molecular Pharmacology Research 
Center, 800 Washington St., Box 7703, Boston, MA 02111, United States of America.
(3)Jean Mayer-USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA 02111, United States of America.

One hallmark of obesity is adipocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia. To gain novel
insights into adipose biology and therapeutics, there is a pressing need for a
robust, rapid, and informative cell model of adipocyte differentiation for
potential RNAi and drug screens. Current models are prohibitive for drug and RNAi
screens due to a slow differentiation time course and resistance to transfection.
We asked if we could create a rapid, robust model of adipogenesis to potentially 
enable rapid functional and obesity therapeutic screens. We generated the clonal 
population OP9-K, which differentiates rapidly and reproducibly, and displays
classic adipocyte morphology: rounded cell shape, lipid accumulation, and
coalescence of lipids into a large droplet. We further validate the OP9-K cells
as an adipocyte model system by microarray analysis of the differentiating
transcriptome. OP9-K differentiates via known adipogenic pathways, involving the 
transcriptional activation and repression of common adipose markers Plin1, Gata2,
C/Ebpa and C/Ebpß and biological pathways, such as lipid metabolism, PPAR<U+03B3>
signaling, and osteogenesis. We implemented a method to quantify lipid
accumulation using automated microscopy and tested the ability of our model to
detect alterations in lipid accumulation by reducing levels of the known master
adipogenic regulator Ppar<U+03B3>. We further utilized our model to query the effects of
a novel obesity therapeutic target, the transcription factor SPI1. We determine
that reduction in levels of Spi1 leads to an increase in lipid accumulation. We
demonstrate rapid, robust differentiation and efficient transfectability of the
OP9-K cell model of adipogenesis. Together with our microscopy based lipid
accumulation assay, adipogenesis assays can be achieved in just four days' time. 
The results of this study can contribute to the development of rapid screens with
the potential to deepen our understanding of adipose biology and efficiently test
obesity therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4237323
PMID: 25409310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):358-69. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-557983. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Transcription factor IRF8 plays a critical role in the development of murine
basophils and mast cells.

Sasaki H(1), Kurotaki D(1), Osato N(2), Sato H(1), Sasaki I(3), Koizumi S(1),
Wang H(4), Kaneda C(1), Nishiyama A(1), Kaisho T(5), Aburatani H(2), Morse HC
3rd(4), Ozato K(6), Tamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan; (2)Genome Science Division, Research Center for
Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan;
(3)Laboratory for Immune Regulation, World Premier International Immunology
Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; (4)Virology and
Cellular Immunology Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD;
(5)Laboratory for Immune Regulation, World Premier International Immunology
Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory for
Inflammatory Regulation, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology,
Yokohama, Japan; and. (6)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):214-5.

Basophils and mast cells play critical roles in host defense against pathogens
and allergic disorders. However, the molecular mechanism by which these cells are
generated is not completely understood. Here we demonstrate that interferon
regulatory factor-8 (IRF8), a transcription factor essential for the development 
of several myeloid lineages, also regulates basophil and mast cell development.
Irf8(-/-) mice displayed a severe reduction in basophil counts, which was
accounted for by the absence of pre-basophil and mast cell progenitors
(pre-BMPs). Although Irf8(-/-) mice retained peripheral tissue mast cells,
remaining progenitors from Irf8(-/-) mice including granulocyte progenitors (GPs)
were unable to efficiently generate either basophils or mast cells, indicating
that IRF8 also contributes to the development of mast cells. IRF8 appeared to
function at the GP stage, because IRF8 was expressed in GPs, but not in
basophils, mast cells, and basophil/mast cell-restricted progenitor cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that GATA2, a transcription factor known to promote
basophil and mast cell differentiation, acts downstream of IRF8. These results
shed light on the pathways and mechanism underlying the development of basophils 
and mast cells.

PMCID: PMC4287642
PMID: 25398936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Feb;15(1):104-9. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000126.

GATA2 deficiency.

Hsu AP(1), McReynolds LJ, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)aLaboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases bPediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: GATA2 deficiency is a germline disease that causes a wide
spectrum of phenotypes including viral and bacterial infections, cytopenias,
myelodysplasia, myeloid leukemias, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and lymphedema.
The age of clinical presentation ranges from early childhood to late adulthood,
with most occurring in adolescence to early adulthood. We review the expanding
GATA2-deficient phenotype, molecular genetics of disease and developments in
treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: GATA2 mutations have been found in up to 10% of those with
congenital neutropenia and/or aplastic anemia. Heterozygous mutations appear to
cause haploinsufficiency due to either protein dysfunction or uniallelic reduced 
transcription. Disease-associated mutations in intronic regulatory elements or
variations within the 5' leader exons indicate that regulation of GATA2 is
critical. Those with GATA2 mutations are at high risk for myelodysplasia,
cytogenetic abnormalities, acute myeloid leukemia or chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia. Bone marrow transplantation has been successful for both hematopoietic 
and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis repair.
SUMMARY: GATA2 is a zinc finger transcription factor essential for embryonic and 
definitive hematopoiesis as well as lymphatic angiogenesis. GATA2 deficiency is
caused by a variety of mutations in the GATA2 gene and can have variable
presentation, onset and outcome. Patients are susceptible to mycobacterial, viral
and fungal infections and can develop myelodysplasia, acute or chronic leukemias,
lymphedema and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation reverses most of the clinical phenotype with good long-term
outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4342850
PMID: 25397911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mod Pathol. 2015 Apr;28(4):515-22. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.145. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Stratification based on methylation of TBX2 and TBX3 into three molecular grades 
predicts progression in patients with pTa-bladder cancer.

Beukers W(1), Kandimalla R(1), Masius RG(1), Vermeij M(1), Kranse R(2), van
Leenders GJ(1), Zwarthoff EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Dutch
Cancer Registry, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The potential risk of recurrence and progression in patients with
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer necessitates followup by cystoscopy. The risk 
of progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer is estimated based on the
European Organisation of Research and Treatment of Cancer score, a combination of
several clinicopathological variables. However, pathological assessment is not
objective and reproducibility is insufficient. The use of molecular markers could
contribute to the estimation of tumor aggressiveness. We recently demonstrated
that methylation of GATA2, TBX2, TBX3, and ZIC4 genes could predict progression
in Ta tumors. In this study, we aimed to validate the markers in a large patient 
set using DNA from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue. PALGA: the Dutch 
Pathology Registry was used for patient selection. We included 192 patients with 
pTaG1/2 bladder cancer of whom 77 experienced progression. Methylation analysis
was performed and log-rank analysis was used to calculate the predictive value of
each methylation marker for developing progression over time. This analysis
showed better progression-free survival in patients with low methylation rates
compared with the patients with high methylation rates for all markers (P<0.001) 
during a followup of ten-years. The combined predictive effect of the methylation
markers was analyzed with the Cox-regression method. In this analysis, TBX2,
TBX3, and ZIC4 were independent predictors of progression. On the basis of
methylation status of TBX2 and TBX3, patients were divided into three new
molecular grade groups. Survival analysis showed that only 8% of patients in the 
low molecular grade group progressed within 5 years. This was 29 and 63% for the 
intermediate- and high-molecular grade groups. In conclusion, this new
molecular-grade based on the combination of TBX2 and TBX3 methylation is an
excellent marker for predicting progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer in 
patients with primary pTaG1/2 bladder cancer.

PMID: 25394776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):133-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-591461. Epub 2014 Nov 
7.

Mutational spectrum of myeloid malignancies with inv(3)/t(3;3) reveals a
predominant involvement of RAS/RTK signaling pathways.

Gröschel S(1), Sanders MA(2), Hoogenboezem R(2), Zeilemaker A(2), Havermans M(2),
Erpelinck C(2), Bindels EM(2), Beverloo HB(3), Döhner H(4), Löwenberg B(2),
Döhner K(4), Delwel R(2), Valk PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; Department of Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor
Diseases and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany; (2)Department of
Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands; and Dutch Working Group on Hemato-Oncologic Genome Diagnostics, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany;

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):9-10.

Myeloid malignancies bearing chromosomal inv(3)/t(3;3) abnormalities are among
the most therapy-resistant leukemias. Deregulated expression of EVI1 is the
molecular hallmark of this disease; however, the genome-wide spectrum of
cooperating mutations in this disease subset has not been systematically
elucidated. Here, we show that 98% of inv(3)/t(3;3) myeloid malignancies harbor
mutations in genes activating RAS/receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling
pathways. In addition, hemizygous mutations in GATA2, as well as heterozygous
alterations in RUNX1, SF3B1, and genes encoding epigenetic modifiers, frequently 
co-occur with the inv(3)/t(3;3) aberration. Notably, neither mutational patterns 
nor gene expression profiles differ across inv(3)/t(3;3) acute myeloid leukemia, 
chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome cases, suggesting
recognition of inv(3)/t(3;3) myeloid malignancies as a single disease entity
irrespective of blast count. The high incidence of activating RAS/RTK signaling
mutations may provide a target for a rational treatment strategy in this
high-risk patient group.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4334729
PMID: 25381062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):721-37. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22244. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Genetic dissection of Gata2 selective functions during specification of V2
interneurons in the developing spinal cord.

Francius C(1,)(2), Ravassard P(1), Hidalgo-Figueroa M(2), Mallet J(1), Clotman
F(2), Nardelli J(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CRICM, UPMC/Inserm UMR_S 975; CNRS UMR 7225, Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et 
Biotherapie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, CERVI, 83 bd de l'Hôpital, F-75013,
Paris, France. (2)Laboratory of Neural Differentiation (NEDI), Université
Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Institute of Neuroscience (IoNS), box UCL-5511, 55
Avenue Hippocrate, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. (3)Inserm U676, Hôpital Robert
Debré, 48 bd Serurier, F-75019, Paris, France.

Motor activities are controlled by neural networks in the ventral spinal cord and
consist in motor neurons and a set of distinct cardinal classes of spinal
interneurons. These interneurons arise from distinct progenitor domains (p0-p3)
delineated according to a transcriptional code. Neural progenitors of each domain
express a unique combination of transcription factors (TFs) that largely
contribute to determine the fate of four classes of interneurons (V0-V3) and
motor neurons. In p2 domain, at least four subtypes of interneurons namely V2a,
V2b, V2c, and Pax6(+) V2 are generated. Although genetic and molecular mechanisms
that specify V2a and V2b are dependent on complex interplay between several TFs
including Nkx6.1, Irx3, Gata2, Foxn4, and Ascl1, and signaling pathways such as
Notch and TGF-ß, the sequence order of the activation of these regulators and
their respective contribution are not completely elucidated yet. Here, we provide
evidence by loss- or gain-of-function experiments that Gata2 is necessary for the
normal development of both V2a and V2b neurons. We demonstrate that Nkx6.1 and
Dll4 positively regulate the activation of Gata2 and Foxn4 in p2 progenitors.
Gata2 also participates in the maintenance of p2 domain by repressing motor
neuron differentiation and exerting a feedback control on patterning genes.
Finally, Gata2 promotes the selective activation of V2b program at the expense of
V2a fate. Thus our results provide new insights on the hierarchy and complex
interactions between regulators of V2 genetic program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25369423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Transfusion. 2015 Apr;55(4):864-74. doi: 10.1111/trf.12904. Epub 2014 Nov 2.

Ex vivo expansion of human mobilized peripheral blood stem cells using epigenetic
modifiers.

Saraf S(1,)(2), Araki H(1), Petro B(1), Park Y(3), Taioli S(1), Yoshinaga KG(1), 
Koca E(1), Rondelli D(1,)(3,)(2), Mahmud N(1,)(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (2)University of Illinois Cancer Center, Chicago, 
Illinois. (3)UI Hospital Stem Cell Laboratory, Blood & Marrow Transplant Program,
Chicago, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic modifications likely control the fate of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs). The chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs), 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
(5azaD) and trichostatin A (TSA), have previously been shown to expand HSCs from 
cord blood and marrow. Here we assessed whether CMA can also expand HSCs present 
in growth factor-mobilized human peripheral blood (MPB).
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: 5azaD and TSA were sequentially added to CD34+ MPB
cells in the presence of cytokines, and the cells were cultured for 9<U+2009>days.
RESULTS: After culture, a 3.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of CD34+CD90+ cells, a
10.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of primitive colony-forming unit (CFU)-mix, and a
2.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of long-term cobblestone-area-forming cells (CAFCs) was 
observed in 5azaD/TSA-expanded cells. By contrast, cells cultured in cytokines
without 5azaD/TSA displayed no expansion; rather, a reduction in CD34+CD90+ cells
(0.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.1-fold) and CAFCs (0.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.1-fold) from their initial numbers was
observed. Global hypomethylation corresponding with increased transcript levels
of several genes implicated in HSC self-renewal, including HOXB4, GATA2, and
EZH2, was observed in 5azaD/TSA-expanded MPB cells in contrast to controls.
5azaD/TSA-expanded MPB cells retained in vivo hematopoietic engraftment capacity.
CONCLUSION: MPB CD34+ cells from donors can be expanded using 5azaD/TSA, and
these expanded cells retain in vivo hematopoietic reconstitution capacity. This
strategy may prove to be potentially useful to augment HSC numbers for patients
who fail to mobilize.

© 2014 AABB.

PMCID: PMC4417464
PMID: 25363624  [PubMed - in process]


147. Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):56-70. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-580340. Epub 2014 Oct 
30.

GATA2 deficiency-associated bone marrow disorder differs from idiopathic aplastic
anemia.

Ganapathi KA(1), Townsley DM(2), Hsu AP(3), Arthur DC(1), Zerbe CS(3),
Cuellar-Rodriguez J(3), Hickstein DD(4), Rosenzweig SD(5), Braylan RC(6), Young
NS(2), Holland SM(3), Calvo KR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD; (2)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; (3)Laboratory of Clinical
Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; (4)Experimental Transplantation and 
Immunology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD; (5)Immunology Section, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; and. (6)Hematology Section,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.

Germ-line GATA2 gene mutations, leading to haploinsufficiency, have been
identified in patients with familial myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid
leukemia, monocytopenia and mycobacterial infections, Emberger syndrome, and
dendritic cell, monocyte, B-, and NK-cell deficiency. GATA2 mutations have also
been reported in a minority of patients with congenital neutropenia and aplastic 
anemia (AA). The bone marrow (BM) from patients with GATA2 deficiency is
typically hypocellular, with varying degrees of dysplasia. Distinguishing GATA2
patients from those with AA is critical for selecting appropriate therapy. We
compared the BM flow cytometric, morphologic, and cytogenetic features of 28
GATA2 patients with those of 32 patients being evaluated for idiopathic AA. The
marrow of GATA2 patients had severely reduced monocytes, B cells, and NK cells;
absent hematogones; and inverted CD4:CD8 ratios. Atypical megakaryocytes and
abnormal cytogenetics were more common in GATA2 marrows. CD34(+) cells were
comparably reduced in GATA2 and AA. Using these criteria, we prospectively
identified 4 of 32 patients with suspected AA who had features suspicious for
GATA2 mutations, later confirmed by DNA sequencing. Our results show that routine
BM flow cytometry, morphology, and cytogenetics in patients who present with
cytopenia(s) can identify patients for whom GATA2 sequencing is indicated.

PMCID: PMC4281830
PMID: 25359990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Anim Sci. 2014 Nov;92(11):4797-805. doi: 10.2527/jas.2014-7997.

Expression and functional analysis of Krüppel-like factor 2 in chicken adipose
tissue.

Zhang ZW(1), Rong EG(2), Shi MX(2), Wu CY(2), Sun B(2), Wang YX(2), Wang N(3), Li
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Chicken Genetics and Breeding at Ministry of Agriculture,
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction at Education
Department of Heilongjiang Province, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, P. R. China School of Medicine,
Shihezi University, Shihezi, 83200, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Chicken
Genetics and Breeding at Ministry of Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Animal
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction at Education Department of Heilongjiang
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural
University, Harbin 150030, P. R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Chicken Genetics and
Breeding at Ministry of Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding 
and Reproduction at Education Department of Heilongjiang Province, College of
Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, 
P. R. China lihui@neau.edu.cn wangning@neau.edu.cn.

Studies in mammalian species showed that Krüppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) regulates
adipogenesis. However, its role in birds is unclear. The objective of the current
study was to explore the expression and function of KLF2 in chicken adipogenesis.
Results showed that chicken KLF2 (Gallus gallus KLF2 [gKLF2]) was greatly
expressed in abdominal adipose tissue, and its transcripts fluctuated during
adipose tissue development. In addition, gKLF2 transcripts in abdominal adipose
tissue of lean broilers were greater at 1 wk of age but lower at 3, 5, and 8 wk
of age than those in fat broilers (P < 0.05). The gKLF2 was more greatly
expressed in preadipocytes than in mature adipocytes (P < 0.05), and its
expression level decreased during the preadipocyte differentiation in vitro (P < 
0.05). The functional analysis showed that gKLF2 overexpression inhibited chicken
preadipocyte differentiation (P < 0.05), accompanied by the reduced expression of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and the elevated expression of GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2).
Additionally, the luciferase reporter assays showed that gKLF2 overexpression
suppressed the promoter activities of chicken C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> (P < 0.05). In
conclusion, our results indicated that gKLF2 inhibits chicken adipogenesis, at
least in part, through inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa expression.

PMID: 25349335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e109253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109253.
eCollection 2014.

Overexpression of human GATA-1 and GATA-2 interferes with spine formation and
produces depressive behavior in rats.

Choi M(1), Wang SE(2), Ko SY(2), Kang HJ(3), Chae SY(2), Lee SH(2), Kim YS(4),
Duman RS(5), Son H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Life Science,
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea; Graduate School
of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry, Center for Genes and Behavior, Departments
of Psychiatry, Neurobiology, and Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

Functional consequences to which vertebrate GATA transcription factors contribute
in the adult brain remain largely an open question. The present study examines
how human GATA-1 and GATA-2 (hGATA-1 and hGATA-2) are linked to neuronal
differentiation and depressive behaviors in rats. We investigated the effects of 
adeno-associated viral expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 (AAV-hGATA1 and
AAV-hGATA2) in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the dorsal hippocampus on dendrite
branching and spine number. We also examined the influence of AAV-hGATA1 and
AAV-hGATA2 infusions into the dorsal hippocampus on rodent behavior in models of 
depression. Viral expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 cDNA in rat hippocampal
neurons impaired dendritic outgrowth and spine formation. Moreover,
viral-mediated expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 in the dorsal hippocampus caused
depressive-like deficits in the forced swim test and learned helplessness models 
of depression, and decreased the expression of several synapse-related genes as
well as spine number in hippocampal neurons. Conversely, shRNA knockdown of
GATA-2 increased synapse-related gene expression, spine number, and dendrite
branching. The results demonstrate that hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 expression in
hippocampus is sufficient to cause depressive like behaviors that are associated 
with reduction in spine synapse density and expression of synapse-related genes.

PMCID: PMC4207676
PMID: 25340772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1932-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.164178.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Divergent functions of hematopoietic transcription factors in lineage priming and
differentiation during erythro-megakaryopoiesis.

Pimkin M(1), Kossenkov AV(2), Mishra T(3), Morrissey CS(3), Wu W(3), Keller
CA(3), Blobel GA(4), Lee D(5), Beer MA(5), Hardison RC(3), Weiss MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; Pediatric Residency Program, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, USA; (2)Center for Systems and
Computational Biology, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia 19019, Pennsylvania,
USA; (3)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA; Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (4)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
(5)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; weissmi@email.chop.edu rch8@psu.edu.

Combinatorial actions of relatively few transcription factors control
hematopoietic differentiation. To investigate this process in
erythro-megakaryopoiesis, we correlated the genome-wide chromatin occupancy
signatures of four master hematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2,
TAL1, and FLI1) and three diagnostic histone modification marks with the gene
expression changes that occur during development of primary cultured
megakaryocytes (MEG) and primary erythroblasts (ERY) from murine fetal liver
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. We identified a robust, genome-wide
mechanism of MEG-specific lineage priming by a previously described
stem/progenitor cell-expressed transcription factor heptad (GATA2, LYL1, TAL1,
FLI1, ERG, RUNX1, LMO2) binding to MEG-associated cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
in multipotential progenitors. This is followed by genome-wide GATA factor
switching that mediates further induction of MEG-specific genes following lineage
commitment. Interaction between GATA and ETS factors appears to be a key
determinant of these processes. In contrast, ERY-specific lineage priming is
biased toward GATA2-independent mechanisms. In addition to its role in MEG
lineage priming, GATA2 plays an extensive role in late megakaryopoiesis as a
transcriptional repressor at loci defined by a specific DNA signature. Our
findings reveal important new insights into how ERY and MEG lineages arise from a
common bipotential progenitor via overlapping and divergent functions of shared
hematopoietic transcription factors.

© 2014 Pimkin et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248311
PMID: 25319996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1945-62. doi: 10.1101/gr.164830.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Dynamic shifts in occupancy by TAL1 are guided by GATA factors and drive
large-scale reprogramming of gene expression during hematopoiesis.

Wu W(1), Morrissey CS(1), Keller CA(1), Mishra T(1), Pimkin M(2), Blobel GA(3),
Weiss MJ(3), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (2)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Division of Hematology,
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We used mouse ENCODE data along with complementary data from other laboratories
to study the dynamics of occupancy and the role in gene regulation of the
transcription factor TAL1, a critical regulator of hematopoiesis, at multiple
stages of hematopoietic differentiation. We combined ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data in
six mouse cell types representing a progression from multilineage precursors to
differentiated erythroblasts and megakaryocytes. We found that sites of occupancy
shift dramatically during commitment to the erythroid lineage, vary further
during terminal maturation, and are strongly associated with changes in gene
expression. In multilineage progenitors, the likely target genes are enriched for
hematopoietic growth and functions associated with the mature cells of specific
daughter lineages (such as megakaryocytes). In contrast, target genes in
erythroblasts are specifically enriched for red cell functions. Furthermore,
shifts in TAL1 occupancy during erythroid differentiation are associated with
gene repression (dissociation) and induction (co-occupancy with GATA1). Based on 
both enrichment for transcription factor binding site motifs and co-occupancy
determined by ChIP-seq, recruitment by GATA transcription factors appears to be a
stronger determinant of TAL1 binding to chromatin than the canonical E-box
binding site motif. Studies of additional proteins lead to the model that TAL1
regulates expression after being directed to a distinct subset of genomic binding
sites in each cell type via its association with different complexes containing
master regulators such as GATA2, ERG, and RUNX1 in multilineage cells and the
lineage-specific master regulator GATA1 in erythroblasts.

© 2014 Wu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248312
PMID: 25319994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Semin Hematol. 2014 Oct;51(4):306-21. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2014.08.001.
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Inherited predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia.

Godley LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology and the Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics,
Department of Medicine, and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL. Electronic address: lgodley@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Germline testing for familial predisposition to myeloid malignancies is becoming 
more common with the recognition of multiple familial syndromes. Currently,
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments-approved testing exists for the
following: familial platelet disorder with propensity to acute myeloid leukemia, 
caused by mutations in RUNX1; familial myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid
leukemia with mutated GATA2; familial acute myeloid leukemia with mutated CEBPA; 
and the inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, including dyskeratosis
congenita, a disease of abnormal telomere maintenance. With the recognition of
additional families with a genetic component to their myeloid diseases, new
predisposition alleles are likely to be identified. Awareness of the existence of
these syndromes will facilitate proper genetic counseling, appropriate testing,
and clinical management of these cases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25311743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1842(12 Pt A):2367-77. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.10.001. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

GATA binding protein 2 mediates leptin inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3>1 expression in hepatic
stellate cells and contributes to hepatic stellate cell activation.

Zhou Q(1), Guan W(1), Qiao H(2), Cheng Y(1), Li Z(2), Zhai X(2), Zhou Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, Qi Xiou
Road 19, Nantong 226001, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry &
Molecular Biology, Medical College, Nantong University, Qi Xiou Road 19, Nantong,
226001, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
Medical College, Nantong University, Qi Xiou Road 19, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu,
China. Electronic address: yajunzhou97127@yahoo.com.

Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation is a crucial step in the development of
liver fibrosis. Peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) exerts a key
role in the inhibition of HSC activation. Leptin reduces PPAR<U+03B3> expression in HSCs
and plays a unique role in promoting liver fibrosis. The present studies aimed to
investigate the mechanisms underlying leptin regulation of PPAR<U+03B3>1 (a major
subtype of PPAR<U+03B3>) in HSCs in vivo and in vitro. Results revealed a leptin
response region in mouse PPAR<U+03B3>1 promoter and indicated that the region included a
GATA binding protein binding site around position -2323. GATA binding protein-2
(GATA-2) could bind to the site and inhibit PPAR<U+03B3>1 promoter activity in HSCs.
Leptin induced GATA-2 expression in HSCs in vitro and in vivo. GATA-2 mediated
leptin inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3>1 expression by its binding site in PPAR<U+03B3>1 promoter in 
HSCs and GATA-2 promoted HSC activation. Leptin upregulated GATA-2 expression
through ß-catenin and sonic hedgehog pathways in HSCs. Leptin-induced increase in
GATA-2 was accompanied by the decrease in PPAR<U+03B3> expression in HSCs and by the
increase in the activated HSC number and liver fibrosis in vivo. Our data might
suggest a possible new explanation for the promotion effect of leptin on liver
fibrogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25305367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Jul;45(4):664-9.

[GATA-2 gene overexpression and its clinical significance in acute myeloid
leukemia with AML1/ETO fusion gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie HM, Gao L, Wang N, Xu YY, Li YH, Yu L, Wang LL.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the expression level of GATA-2 gene in acute myeloid
leukemia with maturation (AML-M2) patients carrying AML1/ETO fusion gene.
METHODS: Bone marrow samples were collected from 23 patients with de novo adult
AML-M2 carrying AML1/ETO fusion gene. GATA-2 gene expression was detected by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR). We analyzed the
correlation between GATA-2 gene expression and laboratorial features and clinical
prognosis of patients.
RESULTS: GATA-2 expression levels (GATA-2 gene copies/reference gene copies) in
the patients were found to be 2.17%-1 260.65%. A GATA-2 expression over or equal 
to 82% was defined as HIGH (10 cases), while an expression level below 82% was
defined as LOW (13 cases). No significant differences were found in age, sex,
white blood cell count or the rate of bone marrow blasts between HIGH and LOW
expression groups (P > 0.05). Although the difference in complete remission rate 
between the two groups was not statistical significant (P = 0.067 8), the HIGH
expression group had higher relapse rate (71.43% vs. 15.38%, P = 0.022 3) and
higher mortality rate (70.00% vs. 7.69%, P < 0.05). The DFS and OS of the HIGH
group are statistically significantly lower than that of the LOW group (P <
0.01). In the HIGH group, the patients choosing HSCT (2/10) are all alive without
relapse, while among those choosing chemotherapy only (8/10), seven out of eight 
patients died.
CONCLUSION: High expression level of GATA-2 in AML-M2 patients with AML1/ETO is
associated with high risk of relapse and poor prognosis. Therefore, AML-M2
patients with AML1/ETO fusion gene and high expression of GATA-2 would possibly
benefit from additional treatments except for chemotherapy.

PMID: 25286696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Ann Hematol. 2015 Feb;94(2):211-21. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2208-8. Epub 2014 Sep
21.

GATA2 mutations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia-paired samples analyses
show that the mutation is unstable during disease evolution.

Hou HA(1), Lin YC, Kuo YY, Chou WC, Lin CC, Liu CY, Chen CY, Lin LI, Tseng MH,
Huang CF, Chiang YC, Liu MC, Liu CW, Tang JL, Yao M, Huang SY, Ko BS, Hsu SC, Wu 
SJ, Tsay W, Chen YC, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Recently, mutations of the GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2) gene were identified in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients with CEBPA double mutations (CEBPA
(double-mut)), but the interaction of this mutation with other genetic
alterations and its dynamic changes during disease progression remain to be
determined. In this study, 14 different missense GATA2 mutations, which were all 
clustered in the highly conserved N-terminal zinc finger 1 domain, were
identified in 27.4, 6.7, and 1 % of patients with CEBPA (double-mut), CEBPA
(single-mut), and CEBPA wild type, respectively. All but one patient with GATA2
mutation had concurrent CEBPA mutation. GATA2 mutations were closely associated
with younger age, FAB M1 subtype, intermediate-risk cytogenetics, expression of
HLA-DR, CD7, CD15, or CD34 on leukemic cells, and CEBPA mutation, but negatively 
associated with FAB M4 subtype, favorable-risk cytogenetics, and NPM1 mutation.
Patients with GATA2 mutation had significantly better overall survival and
relapse-free survival than those without GATA2 mutation. Sequential analysis
showed that the original GATA2 mutations might be lost during disease progression
in GATA2-mutated patients, while novel GATA2 mutations might be acquired at
relapse in GATA2-wild patients. In conclusion, AML patients with GATA2 mutations 
had distinct clinic-biological features and a favorable prognosis. GATA2
mutations might be lost or acquired at disease progression, implying that it was 
a second hit in the leukemogenesis of AML, especially those with CEBPA mutation.

PMID: 25241285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Haematologica. 2015 Jan;100(1):42-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.113456. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Genomic analysis of bone marrow failure and myelodysplastic syndromes reveals
phenotypic and diagnostic complexity.

Zhang MY(1), Keel SB(2), Walsh T(3), Lee MK(3), Gulsuner S(3), Watts AC(3),
Pritchard CC(4), Salipante SJ(4), Jeng MR(5), Hofmann I(6), Williams DA(7),
Fleming MD(8), Abkowitz JL(2), King MC(3), Shimamura A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA. (3)Department of Medicine and Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA. (6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA. (7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA. (8)Department of Pathology, Boston
Children's Hospital, MA. (9)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Seattle
Children's Hospital, WA Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA ashimamu@fhcrc.org.

Accurate and timely diagnosis of inherited bone marrow failure and inherited
myelodysplastic syndromes is essential to guide clinical management.
Distinguishing inherited from acquired bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic
syndrome poses a significant clinical challenge. At present, diagnostic genetic
testing for inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome is performed
gene-by-gene, guided by clinical and laboratory evaluation. We hypothesized that 
standard clinically-directed genetic testing misses patients with cryptic or
atypical presentations of inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome.
In order to screen simultaneously for mutations of all classes in bone marrow
failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genes, we developed and validated a panel of 85 
genes for targeted capture and multiplexed massively parallel sequencing. In
patients with clinical diagnoses of Fanconi anemia, genomic analysis resolved
subtype assignment, including those of patients with inconclusive complementation
test results. Eight out of 71 patients with idiopathic bone marrow failure or
myelodysplastic syndrome were found to harbor damaging germline mutations in
GATA2, RUNX1, DKC1, or LIG4. All 8 of these patients lacked classical clinical
stigmata or laboratory findings of these syndromes and only 4 had a family
history suggestive of inherited disease. These results reflect the extensive
genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic complexity of bone marrow
failure/myelodysplastic syndrome phenotypes. This study supports the integration 
of broad unbiased genetic screening into the diagnostic workup of children and
young adults with bone marrow failure and myelodysplastic syndromes.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4281311
PMID: 25239263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Target Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(2):267-75. doi: 10.1007/s11523-014-0335-8. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Decreased mRNA expression of GATA1 and GATA2 is associated with tumor
aggressiveness and poor outcome in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Peters I(1), Dubrowinskaja N, Tezval H, Kramer MW, von Klot CA, Hennenlotter J,
Stenzl A, Scherer R, Kuczyk MA, Serth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str.1, 30625, Hannover, Germany, peters.inga@mh-hannover.de.

GATA-binding proteins 1 (GATA1) and 2 (GATA2) are zinc-finger transcription
factors and belong to the GATA family proteins 1-6. GATA1 interacts with the TP53
tumor suppressor gene, and both GATAs have been shown to be involved in cell
growth, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis of several solid tumors. GATA1 and GATA2
expression alterations are associated with poor survival and adverse
clinicopathology in prostate and colorectal cancer, while the significance and
prognostic value in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been
investigated as yet. We investigated relative messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
levels of GATA1 and GATA2 in 77 ccRCC and 58 paired adjacent noncancerous renal
tissues by quantitative real-time reverse-transcribed PCR. Relative mRNA
expression levels were determined using the <U+0394><U+0394>Ct method. GATA1 and GATA2
expression levels were significantly decreased in tumor tissues compared with
normal tissues (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, paired t test). In univariate logistic regression
analysis, decreased GATA1 and GATA2 expression levels were associated with
advanced tumor disease (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005 and 0.008), positive distant metastasis
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03 and 0.001), and lymph node metastasis status (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011 and 0.038).
Reduced expression levels of GATA1 and GATA2 were associated with an increased
risk of disease recurrence (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005 and 0.006; hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05 and 0.21).
Pairwise bivariate analysis after adjusting for clinicopathological parameters
revealed relative mRNA expression of GATA1, but not GATA2, as an independent
candidate prognosticator for ccRCC. Our results support that GATA1 and GATA2 are 
involved in ccRCC tumor biology possibly affecting tumor development and
aggressiveness.

PMID: 25230694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 12;289(50):34871-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571000. Epub
2014 Sep 12.

GPR126 protein regulates developmental and pathological angiogenesis through
modulation of VEGFR2 receptor signaling.

Cui H(1), Wang Y(2), Huang H(3), Yu W(1), Bai M(4), Zhang L(1), Bryan BA(5), Wang
Y(1), Luo J(1), Li D(6), Ma Y(7), Liu M(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University,
Shanghai 200241, China. (2)the Department of Pathology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520. (3)the Core Facility of Zebrafish
Research, School of Basic Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China. (4)the Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Reproductive
Medicine and Genetic Research, Hainan Reproductive Medical Center, Affiliated
Hospital of Hainan Medical University, Haikou 570102, China. (5)the Center of
Excellence in Cancer Research, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El
Paso, Texas 79905, and. (6)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory
Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China, dlli@bio.ecnu.edu.cn. (7)the Hainan
Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Reproductive Medicine and Genetic Research,
Hainan Reproductive Medical Center, Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical
University, Haikou 570102, China, mayl1990@foxmail.com. (8)From the Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of 
Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China, the
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas 77030 mlliu@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing ones, is
essential for development, wound healing, and tumor progression. The VEGF pathway
plays irreplaceable roles during angiogenesis, but how other signals cross-talk
with and modulate VEGF cascades is not clearly elucidated. Here, we identified
that Gpr126, an endothelial cell-enriched gene, plays an important role in
angiogenesis by regulating endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and tube
formation. Knockdown of Gpr126 in the mouse retina resulted in the inhibition of 
hypoxia-induced angiogenesis. Interference of Gpr126 expression in zebrafish
embryos led to defects in intersegmental vessel formation. Finally, we identified
that GPR126 regulated the expression of VEGFR2 by targeting STAT5 and GATA2
through the cAMP-PKA-cAMP-response element-binding protein signaling pathway
during angiogenesis. Our findings illustrate that GPR126 modulates both
physiological and pathological angiogenesis through VEGF signaling, providing a
potential target for the treatment of angiogenesis-related diseases.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4263886
PMID: 25217645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 11;9(9):e107133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107133.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of transcription factor networks involved in umbilical cord
blood CD34+ stem cells-derived erythropoiesis.

Li B(1), Ding L(2), Yang C(2), Kang B(1), Liu L(3), Story MD(2), Pace BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology/Oncology Division, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America. (2)Department of
Radiation Oncology and Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas, United States of America.

Fetal stem cells isolated from umbilical cord blood (UCB) possess a great
capacity for proliferation and differentiation and serve as a valuable model
system to study gene regulation. Expanded knowledge of the molecular control of
hemoglobin synthesis will provide a basis for rational design of therapies for
ß-hemoglobinopathies. Transcriptome data are available for erythroid progenitors 
derived from adult stem cells, however studies to define molecular mechanisms
controlling globin gene regulation during fetal erythropoiesis are limited. Here,
we utilize UCB-CD34+ stem cells induced to undergo erythroid differentiation to
characterize the transcriptome and transcription factor networks (TFNs)
associated with the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch during fetal erythropoiesis. UCB-CD34+ stem
cells grown in the one-phase liquid culture system displayed a higher
proliferative capacity than adult CD34+ stem cells. The <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch was
observed after day 42 during fetal erythropoiesis in contrast to adult
progenitors where the switch occurred around day 21. To gain insights into
transcription factors involved in globin gene regulation, microarray analysis was
performed on RNA isolated from UCB-CD34+ cell-derived erythroid progenitors
harvested on day 21, 42, 49 and 56 using the HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChip.
After data normalization, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis identified transcription
factors (TFs) with significant changes in expression during the <U+03B3>/ß-globin
switch. Forty-five TFs were silenced by day 56 (Profile-1) and 30 TFs were
activated by day 56 (Profile-2). Both GSEA datasets were analyzed using the MIMI 
Cytoscape platform, which discovered TFNs centered on KLF4 and GATA2 (Profile-1) 
and KLF1 and GATA1 for Profile-2 genes. Subsequent shRNA studies in KU812
leukemia cells and human erythroid progenitors generated from UCB-CD34+ cells
supported a negative role of MAFB in <U+03B3>-globin regulation. The characteristics of 
erythroblasts derived from UCB-CD34+ stem cells including prolonged <U+03B3>-globin
expression combined with unique TFNs support novel mechanisms controlling the
<U+03B3>/ß-globin switch during UCB-derived erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4161396
PMID: 25211130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Histochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;143(2):153-69. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1269-z. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Vasculogenic and hematopoietic cellular progenitors are scattered within the
prenatal mouse heart.

Jankowska-Steifer E(1), Madej M, Niderla-Bielinska J, Ruminski S, Flaht-Zabost A,
Czarnowska E, Gula G, Radomska-Lesniewska DM, Ratajska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland, ewa.jankowska-steifer@wum.edu.pl.

Vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis are co-localized in the embryonic body, but
precise phenotypes of the cells contributing to these processes are not defined. 
The aim of this study was to characterize phenotypic profiles and location of
putative vasculogenic and hematopoietic cellular progenitors in the embryonic
mouse heart. Confocal microscopy, as well as ultrastructural and
stereomicroscopic analyses, was performed on immunohistochemical
whole-mount-stained or sectioned hearts at stages 11.5-14 dpc. A FASC analysis
was conducted to quantify putative vasculogenic and hematopoietic cells. We found
subepicardial blood islands in the form of foci of accumulation of cells
belonging to erythroblastic and megakaryocytic lineages at various stages of
maturation, exhibiting phenotypes: GATA2(+)/CD41(+), GATA2(-)/CD41(+),
GATA2(+)/CD71(-), GATA2(-)/CD71(+), Fli1(+)/CD71(+), Fli1(-)/CD71(+), with a
majority of cells expressing the Ter119 antigen, but none of them expressing
Flk1. The subepicardium and the outflow tract endothelium were recognized to be
the areas where progenitor cells were scattered or adjoining the endothelial
cells. These progenitor cells were characterized as possessing the following
antigens: CD45(+)/Fli1(+), CD41(+)/Flk1(+), Flk1(+)/Fli1(+). A FACS analysis
demonstrated that the CD41/Flk1 double-positive population of cells constituted
2.68% of total cell population isolated from 12.5 dpc hearts. Vessels and tubules
were positive for CD31, Flk1, Fli1, Tie2, including blood islands endothelia. The
endocardial wall endothelia were found to function as an anchoring apparatus for 
megakaryocytes releasing platelets into the cardiac cavities. Phenotypic
characteristics of vasculogenic (Flk1(+)/Fli1(+)) and hematopoietic
(GATA2(+)/CD71(+), CD41(+)/GATA2(+)) progenitors, as well as the putative
hemogenic endothelium (Flk1(+)/CD41(+)) in embryonic mouse hearts, have been
presented. Cardiac blood islands, the subepicardium and endothelium of the
outflow tract cushions have been defined as areas where these progenitor cells
can be found.

PMCID: PMC4298664
PMID: 25201347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Blood. 2014 Oct 9;124(15):2337-44. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-583260. Epub 2014
Aug 27.

Autoimmune and other cytopenias in primary immunodeficiencies: pathomechanisms,
novel differential diagnoses, and treatment.

Seidel MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.

Autoimmunity and immune dysregulation may lead to cytopenia and represent key
features of many primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs). Especially when cytopenia is 
the initial symptom of a PID, the order and depth of diagnostic steps have to be 
performed in accordance with both an immunologic and a hematologic approach and
will help exclude disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus, common variable
immunodeficiency, and autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes, hemophagocytic
disorders, lymphoproliferative diseases, and novel differential diagnoses such as
MonoMac syndrome (GATA2 deficiency), CD27 deficiency,
lipopolysaccharide-responsive beige-like anchor (LRBA) deficiency, activated
PI3KD syndrome (APDS), X-linked immunodeficiency with magnesium defect (MAGT1
deficiency), and others. Immunosuppressive treatment often needs to be initiated 
urgently, which impedes further relevant immunologic laboratory analyses aimed at
defining the underlying PID. Awareness of potentially involved disease spectra
ranging from hematologic to rheumatologic and immunologic disorders is crucial
for identifying a certain proportion of PID phenotypes and genotypes among
descriptive diagnoses such as autoimmune hemolytic anemia, chronic immune
thrombocytopenia, Evans syndrome, severe aplastic anemia/refractory cytopenia,
and others. A synopsis of pathomechanisms, novel differential diagnoses, and
advances in treatment options for cytopenias in PID is provided to facilitate
multidisciplinary management and to bridge different approaches.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4192747
PMID: 25163701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Anim Sci J. 2014 Dec;85(12):981-5. doi: 10.1111/asj.12267. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Localization of GATA2 in the nuclear and cytoplasmic regions of ovine
conceptuses.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Bai R, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Theriogenology and Animal Breeding, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

GATA transcription factors are emerging as critical regulators in trophoblast
development and its gene regulation. The purpose of this study was to examine the
expression and cellular localization of GATA2 in ovine conceptuses during the
peri-implantation period. In Western blot analyses, GATA2 proteins were found in 
days 15, 17 and 21 ovine conceptuses (day 0=day of estrus). Using
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analyses, we found that GATA2 was
localized in days 15, 17 and 21 ovine conceptuses, and more importantly, GATA2
protein was detected in both nuclear and cytoplasmic regions of the
trophectoderm. To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate
that GATA2 is localized in two cellular compartments of the trophectoderm in
ovine and many other mammalian species, and suggests that the difference in GATA2
location plays a role in the regulation of down-stream genes during the early
pregnancy period.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 25163535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nat Commun. 2014 Aug 27;5:4770. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5770.

Recurrent CDC25C mutations drive malignant transformation in FPD/AML.

Yoshimi A(1), Toya T(1), Kawazu M(2), Ueno T(3), Tsukamoto A(4), Iizuka H(4),
Nakagawa M(4), Nannya Y(4), Arai S(4), Harada H(5), Usuki K(6), Hayashi Y(7), Ito
E(8), Kirito K(9), Nakajima H(10), Ichikawa M(4), Mano H(3), Kurokawa M(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan [2].
(2)Department of Medical Genomics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (3)Department of Cellular
Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (4)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (5)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, 3-1-3 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8431, Japan. (6)Department of
Hematology, NTT Medical Center Tokyo, 5-9-22 Higashi-Gotanda, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo
141-8625, Japan. (7)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Gunma Children's Medical
Center, 779 Simohakoda, Kitaakebonocho, Shibukawa-shi, Gunma 377-8577, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki University, 53
Honmachi, Hirosaki-shi, Aomori 036-8563, Japan. (9)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, University of Yamanashi, 1110 Simokawakita, Chuou-shi, Yamanashi
409-3898, Japan. (10)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo
160-8582, Japan.

Familial platelet disorder (FPD) with predisposition to acute myelogenous
leukaemia (AML) is characterized by platelet defects with a propensity for the
development of haematological malignancies. Its molecular pathogenesis is poorly 
understood, except for the role of germline RUNX1 mutations. Here we show that
CDC25C mutations are frequently found in FPD/AML patients (53%). Mutated CDC25C
disrupts the G2/M checkpoint and promotes cell cycle progression even in the
presence of DNA damage, suggesting a critical role for CDC25C in malignant
transformation in FPD/AML. The predicted hierarchical architecture shows that
CDC25C mutations define a founding pre-leukaemic clone, followed by stepwise
acquisition of subclonal mutations that contribute to leukaemia progression. In
three of seven individuals with CDC25C mutations, GATA2 is the target of
subsequent mutation. Thus, CDC25C is a novel gene target identified in
haematological malignancies. CDC25C is also useful as a clinical biomarker that
predicts progression of FPD/AML in the early stage.

PMID: 25159113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014 Aug 26;15:288. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-288.

APTE: identification of indirect read-out A-DNA promoter elements in genomes.

Whitley DC, Runfola V, Cary P, Nazlamova L, Guille M, Scarlett G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, Institute of
Biomedical and Biomolecular Science, University of Portsmouth, King Henry
Building, King Henry I Street, Portsmouth PO1 2DY, UK. garry.scarlett@port.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional regulation is normally based on the recognition by a 
transcription factor of a defined base sequence in a process of direct read-out. 
However, the nucleic acid secondary and tertiary structure can also act as a
recognition site for the transcription factor in a process known as indirect
read-out, although this is much less understood. We have previously identified
such a transcriptional control mechanism in early Xenopus development where the
interaction of the transcription factor ilf3 and the gata2 promoter requires the 
presence of both an unusual A-form DNA structure and a CCAAT sequence. Rapid
identification of such promoters elsewhere in the Xenopus and other genomes would
provide insight into a less studied area of gene regulation, although currently
there are few tools to analyse genomes in such ways.
RESULTS: In this paper we report the implementation of a novel bioinformatics
approach that has identified 86 such putative promoters in the Xenopus genome. We
have shown that five of these sites are A-form in solution, bind to transcription
factors and fully validated one of these newly identified promoters as
interacting with the ilf3 containing complex CBTF. This interaction regulates the
transcription of a previously uncharacterised downstream gene that is active in
early development.
CONCLUSIONS: A Perl program (APTE) has located a number of potential A-form DNA
promotor elements in the Xenopus genome, five of these putative targets have been
experimentally validated as A-form and as targets for specific DNA binding
proteins; one has also been shown to interact with the A-form binding
transcription factor ilf3. APTE is available from
http://www.port.ac.uk/research/cmd/software/ under the terms of the GNU General
Public License.

PMCID: PMC4159511
PMID: 25158845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):1686-96. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.105692. Epub
2014 Aug 22.

GATA2 regulates differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Kamata M(1), Okitsu Y(1), Fujiwara T(2), Kanehira M(1), Nakajima S(1), Takahashi 
T(1), Inoue A(1), Fukuhara N(1), Onishi Y(1), Ishizawa K(1), Shimizu R(3),
Yamamoto M(4), Harigae H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Departments of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan Molecular
Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan. (3)Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (4)Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (5)Departments of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan Molecular
Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan
harigae@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

The bone marrow microenvironment comprises multiple cell niches derived from bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells. However, the molecular mechanism of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation is poorly understood. The transcription
factor GATA2 is indispensable for hematopoietic stem cell function as well as
other hematopoietic lineages, suggesting that it may maintain bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells in an immature state and also contribute to their
differentiation. To explore this possibility, we established bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells from GATA2 conditional knockout mice. Differentiation of
GATA2-deficient bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells into adipocytes induced
accelerated oil-drop formation. Further, GATA2 loss- and gain-of-function
analyses based on human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells confirmed that
decreased and increased GATA2 expression accelerated and suppressed bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation to adipocytes, respectively. Microarray
analysis of GATA2 knockdowned human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells revealed
that 90 and 189 genes were upregulated or downregulated by a factor of 2,
respectively. Moreover, gene ontology analysis revealed significant enrichment of
genes involved in cell cycle regulation, and the number of G1/G0 cells increased 
after GATA2 knockdown. Concomitantly, cell proliferation was decreased by GATA2
knockdown. When GATA2 knockdowned bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells as well as
adipocytes were cocultured with CD34-positive cells, hematopoietic stem cell
frequency and colony formation decreased. We confirmed the existence of
pathological signals that decrease and increase hematopoietic cell and adipocyte 
numbers, respectively, characteristic of aplastic anemia, and that suppress GATA2
expression in hematopoietic stem cells and bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4222475
PMID: 25150255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;16(8):869-73.

[MonoMAC syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZL(1), An YF, Zhao XD.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. 
chentcm@163.com.

MonoMAC syndrome is a newly discovered immune deficiency syndrome caused by
GATA-2 mutation, which is an autosomal dominant genetic disease. MonoMAC syndrome
has typical immune cell abnormalities, with severe infection and is prone to
develop into a hematological disease. Therapeutics for this disease mainly relies
on symptomatic treatment and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. In this
paper, the research advances in clinical manifestations, laboratory tests,
pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of MonoMAC syndrome are reviewed.

PMID: 25140787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Sep;71(3):577-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.04.027.

A woman with warts, leg swelling, and deafness.

Muszynski MA(1), Zerbe CS(2), Holland SM(2), Kong HH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medstar Washington Hospital Center and Georgetown
University Hospital, Washington, DC. (2)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious
Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Dermatology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address: konghe@mail.nih.gov.

KEY TEACHING POINTS  We describe a 45-year-old woman with GATA2 deficiency
associated with verrucae, lymphedema, immunodeficiency, and a history of
infections and skin cancer.  GATA2 deficiency has variable clinical expressivity
with differing presentations, including infection, hematopoietic abnormalities,
immunodeficiency, lymphedema, and cancer.  Cutaneous manifestations include
verruca vulgaris, soft tissue infections, lymphedema, and panniculitis. 
Patients may have verrucae that can progress to squamous cell carcinomas;
dermatologists therefore play an important role in managing these patients as
members of a multidisciplinary team.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4134806
PMID: 25128101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-63. doi: 10.1002/wdev.142. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Early embryonic specification of vertebrate cranial placodes.

Schlosser G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences & Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cranial placodes contribute to many sensory organs and ganglia of the vertebrate 
head. The olfactory, otic, and lateral line placodes form the sensory receptor
cells and neurons of the nose, ear, and lateral line system; the lens placode
develops into the lens of the eye; epibranchial, profundal, and trigeminal
placodes contribute sensory neurons to cranial nerve ganglia; and the
adenohypophyseal placode gives rise to the anterior pituitary, a major endocrine 
control organ. Despite these differences in fate, all placodes are now known to
originate from a common precursor, the preplacodal ectoderm (PPE). The latter is 
a horseshoe-shaped domain of ectoderm surrounding the anterior neural plate and
neural crest and is defined by expression of transcription factor Six1, its
cofactor Eya1, and other members of the Six and Eya families. Studies in
zebrafish, Xenopus, and chick reveal that the PPE is specified together with
other ectodermal territories (epidermis, neural crest, and neural plate) during
early embryogenesis. During gastrulation, domains of ventrally (e.g., Dlx3/Dlx5, 
GATA2/GATA3, AP2, Msx1, FoxI1, and Vent1/Vent2) and dorsally (e.g., Zic1, Sox3,
and Geminin) restricted transcription factors are established in response to a
gradient of BMP and help to define non-neural and neural competence territories, 
respectively. At neural plate stages, the PPE is then induced in the non-neural
competence territory by signals from the adjacent neural plate and mesoderm
including FGF, BMP inhibitors, and Wnt inhibitors. Subsequently, signals from
more localized signaling centers induce restricted expression domains of various 
transcription factors within the PPE, which specify multiplacodal areas and
ultimately individual placodes. For further resources related to this article,
please visit the WIREs website.CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has declared no
conflicts of interest for this article.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25124756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2014 Dec;20(12):1940-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2014.08.004. Epub 2014 Aug 9.

Nonmyeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for GATA2
deficiency.

Grossman J(1), Cuellar-Rodriguez J(2), Gea-Banacloche J(3), Zerbe C(2), Calvo
K(4), Hughes T(5), Hakim F(3), Cole K(3), Parta M(6), Freeman A(2), Holland
SM(2), Hickstein DD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies, Alberta Health Services, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (2)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Experimental
Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of Health
Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. (5)Department of Pharmacy, National
Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. (6)Leidos Biomedical
Research, Inc, Frederick, Maryland; Intramural Clinical Management & Operations
Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda,
Maryland. (7)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address: hicksted@mail.nih.gov.

We treated 14 patients with GATA2 deficiency using a nonmyeloablative allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation regimen. Four patients received
peripheral blood stem cells from matched related donors (MRD), 4 patients
received peripheral blood stem cells from matched unrelated donors (URD), 4
patients received hematopoietic stem cells from umbilical cord blood donors
(UCB), and 2 patients received bone marrow cells from haploidentical related
donors. MRD and URD recipients received conditioning with 3 days of fludarabine
and 200 cGy total body irradiation (TBI). Haploidentical related donor recipients
and UCB recipients received cyclophosphamide and 2 additional days of fludarabine
along with 200 cGY TBI. MRD, URD, and UCB recipients received tacrolimus and
sirolimus for post-transplantation immunosuppression, whereas haploidentical
recipients received high-dose cyclophosphamide followed by tacrolimus and
mycophenolate mofetil. Eight patients are alive with reconstitution of the
severely deficient monocyte, B cell, and natural killer cell populations and
reversal of the clinical phenotype at a median follow-up of 3.5 years. Two
patients (1 URD recipient and 1 UCB recipient) rejected the donor graft and 1 MRD
recipient relapsed with myelodysplastic syndrome after transplantation. We are
currently using a high-dose conditioning regimen with busulfan and fludarabine in
patients with GATA2 deficiency to achieve more consistent engraftment and
eradication of the malignant myeloid clones.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4253545
PMID: 25111582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1800-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2465. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Functional analysis of the mRNA profile of neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin overexpression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using multiple
bioinformatic tools.

Wu BL(1), Li CQ(1), Du ZP(2), Zhou F(1), Xie JJ(1), Luo LW(3), Wu JY(1), Zhang
PX(1), Xu LY(4), Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology,
Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated Shantou Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 
Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou Higher
Education Mega Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510000, P.R. China. (4)Institute of
Oncologic Pathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong
515041, P.R. China.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is a member of the lipocalin
superfamily; dysregulated expression of NGAL has been observed in several benign 
and malignant diseases. In the present study, differentially expressed genes, in 
comparison with those of control cells, in the mRNA expression profile of EC109
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells following NGAL overexpression
were analyzed by multiple bioinformatic tools for a comprehensive understanding. 
A total of 29 gene ontology (GO) terms associated with immune function, chromatin
structure and gene transcription were identified among the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in NGAL overexpressing cells. In addition to the detected 
GO categories, the results from the functional annotation chart revealed that the
differentially expressed genes were also associated with 101 functional
annotation category terms. A total of 59 subpathways associated locally with the 
differentially expressed genes were identified by subpathway analysis, a markedly
greater total that detected by traditional pathway enrichment analysis only.
Promoter analysis indicated that the potential transcription factors Snail,
deltaEF1, Mycn, Arnt, MNB1A, PBF, E74A, Ubx, SPI1 and GATA2 were unique to the
downregulated DEG promoters, while bZIP910, ZNF42 and SOX9 were unique for the
upregulated DEG promoters. In conclusion, the understanding of the role of NGAL
overexpression in ESCC has been improved through the present bioinformatic
analysis.

PMCID: PMC4148386
PMID: 25109818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. EMBO Rep. 2014 Sep;15(9):912-3. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439309. Epub 2014 Aug 3.

p38 links RAS to GATA2.

Baumgartner C(1), Baccarini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Center of Molecular Biology, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

PMCID: PMC4198032
PMID: 25092790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Anticancer Res. 2014 Aug;34(8):4539-50.

Multicolor analysis of cell surface marker of human leukemia cell lines using
flow cytometry.

Inoue T(1), Swain A(2), Nakanishi Y(3), Sugiyama D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
yokotomo@hsc.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp ds-mons@yb3.so-net.ne.jp. (2)Department of
Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Center for Clinical and
Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia cell lines are utilized as tools for molecular analysis.
Their implementation in therapy will require standards for quality control,
including appropriate selection criteria for functional analysis and efficacy
determination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Characteristics of six human leukemia cell lines
-Kasumi-1, NB-4, MOLM-13, MV-4-11, K562, and Jurkat cells-were investigated using
multiple color analysis of surface antigen expression and comparative analysis of
gene expression.
RESULTS: Differentiation states of Kasumi-1 and MOLM-13 cells are colony-forming 
units-granulocyte/macrophage equivalent cells to myeloblasts with comparatively
high Growth factor independent-1(GFI1) and Transcription factor PU.1 (PU.1)
expression, respectively. NB4 and MV-4-11 express high levels of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha (CEBPa) and differentiate from myeloblasts
to pro-monocytes and myeloblasts, respectively. K562 cells are colony-forming
units-erythroid equivalent cells to erythroblasts, with the highest expression of
GATA-binding factor 2 (GATA2), GATA1 and Friend of gata-1 (FOG1). Jurkat cells
are pro-T to mature T-cells with the highest Neurogenic locus notch-1 homolog
protein 1 (NOTCH1) expression.
CONCLUSION: Our study gives a useful guideline of standards for appropriate usage
of leukemia cell lines for examining novel targets in vitro.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25075097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 29;9(7):e103282. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103282.
eCollection 2014.

A PU.1 suppressive target gene, metallothionein 1G, inhibits retinoic
acid-induced NB4 cell differentiation.

Hirako N(1), Nakano H(2), Takahashi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Hematology, Kitasato University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Japan. (2)Division of Hematology,
Kitasato University School of Allied Health Sciences, Minami-ku, Sagamihara,
Japan. (3)Division of Molecular Hematology, Kitasato University Graduate School
of Medical Sciences, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Japan; Division of Hematology,
Kitasato University School of Allied Health Sciences, Minami-ku, Sagamihara,
Japan.

We recently revealed that myeloid master regulator SPI1/PU.1 directly represses
metallothionein (MT) 1G through its epigenetic activity of PU.1, but the
functions of MT1G in myeloid differentiation remain unknown. To clarify this, we 
established MT1G-overexpressing acute promyelocytic leukemia NB4 (NB4MTOE) cells,
and investigated whether MT1G functionally contributes to all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA)-induced NB4 cell differentiation. Real-time PCR analyses demonstrated that
the inductions of CD11b and CD11c and reductions in myeloperoxidase and c-myc by 
ATRA were significantly attenuated in NB4MTOE cells. Morphological examination
revealed that the percentages of differentiated cells induced by ATRA were
reduced in NB4MTOE cells. Since G1 arrest is a hallmark of ATRA-induced NB4 cell 
differentiation, we observed a decrease in G1 accumulation, as well as decreases 
in p21WAF1/CIP1 and cyclin D1 inductions, by ATRA in NB4MTOE cells. Nitroblue
tetrazolium (NBT) reduction assays revealed that the proportions of NBT-positive 
cells were decreased in NB4MTOE cells in the presence of ATRA. Microarray
analyses showed that the changes in expression of several myeloid
differentiation-related genes (GATA2, azurocidin 1, pyrroline-5-carboxylate
reductase 1, matrix metallopeptidase -8, S100 calcium-binding protein A12,
neutrophil cytosolic factor 2 and oncostatin M) induced by ATRA were disturbed in
NB4MTOE cells. Collectively, overexpression of MT1G inhibits the proper
differentiation of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC4114787
PMID: 25072246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Gene. 2014 Oct 1;549(1):134-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.07.056. Epub 2014 Jul
23.

A role for IL-10 in the transcriptional regulation of Roquin-1.

Schaefer JS(1), Montufar-Solis D(1), Klein JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biomedical Sciences, School of Dentistry, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77054, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Biomedical Sciences, School of Dentistry, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77054, USA.
Electronic address: john.r.klein@uth.tmc.edu.

Roquin-1, a RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase, functions as a modulator of
inflammation; however, nothing is known about how Rc3h1 expression is regulated. 
Here, we describe an opposing relationship between Roquin-1 and the IL-17
proinflammatory cytokine by demonstrating that enforced expression of Rc3h1
restricts Il17a expression, and that exposure of T cells to IL-10, a cytokine
with immunosuppressive activity, increases Rc3h1 expression. Luciferase reporter 
assays conducted using eight transcription factor plasmids (STAT1, STAT3, STAT5, 
GATA2, c-Rel, IKZF1, IKZF2, and IKZF3) demonstrated that STAT1, STAT3, GATA2, and
c-Rel increased Rc3h1 promoter activity, whereas IKZF2 decreased activity. Gene
expression of those five transcription factors increased in T cells exposed to
IL-10. Transcription factor-specific siRNAs suppressed the IL-10 effect on Rc3h1 
transcription. These findings identify a role for IL-10 in regulating Rc3h1
transcription, and they have implications for understanding how Roquin-1 controls
the immune response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25062971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO Rep. 2014 Sep;15(9):938-47. doi: 10.15252/embr.201438808. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Molecular basis of crosstalk between oncogenic Ras and the master regulator of
hematopoiesis GATA-2.

Katsumura KR(1), Yang C(2), Boyer ME(1), Li L(3), Bresnick EH(4).

Author information: 
(1)UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA University 
of Wisconsin School of Pharmacy, Madison, WI, USA. (4)UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center,
Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Disease mutations provide unique opportunities to decipher protein and cell
function. Mutations in the master regulator of hematopoiesis GATA-2 underlie an
immunodeficiency associated with myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia. We
discovered that a GATA-2 disease mutant (T354M) defective in chromatin binding
was hyperphosphorylated by p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. p38 also induced
multisite phosphorylation of wild-type GATA-2, which required a single
phosphorylated residue (S192). Phosphorylation of GATA-2, but not T354M,
stimulated target gene expression. While crosstalk between oncogenic Ras and
GATA-2 has been implicated as an important axis in cancer biology, its
mechanistic underpinnings are unclear. Oncogenic Ras enhanced S192-dependent
GATA-2 phosphorylation, nuclear foci localization, and transcriptional
activation. These studies define a mechanism that controls a key regulator of
hematopoiesis and a dual mode of impairing GATA-2-dependent genetic networks:
mutational disruption of chromatin occupancy yielding insufficient GATA-2, and
oncogenic Ras-mediated amplification of GATA-2 activity.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4198037
PMID: 25056917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 18;9(7):e99017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099017. eCollection
2014.

Generation and characterization of a JAK2V617F-containing erythroleukemia cell
line.

Zhao W(1), Zou K(2), Farasyn T(1), Ho WT(1), Zhao ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America. (2)Oklahoma School of Science 
and Mathematics, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

The JAK2V617F mutation is found in the majority of patients with
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). Transgenic expression of the mutant gene
causes MPN-like phenotypes in mice. We have produced JAK2V617F mice with p53 null
background. Some of these mice developed acute erythroleukemia. From one of these
mice, we derived a cell line designated J53Z1. J53Z1 cells were stained positive 
for surface markers CD71 and CD117 but negative for Sca-1, TER-119, CD11b, Gr-1, 
F4/80, CD11c, CD317, CD4, CD8a, CD3e, B220, CD19, CD41, CD42d, NK-1.1, and FceR1.
Real time PCR analyses demonstrated expressions of erythropoietin receptor EpoR, 
GATA1, and GATA2 in these cells. J53Z1 cells grew rapidly in suspension culture
containing fetal bovine serum with a doubling time of ~18 hours. When
transplanted into C57Bl/6 mice, J53Z1 cells induced acute erythroleukemia with
massive infiltration of tumor cells in the spleen and liver. J53Z1 cells were
responsive to stimulation with erythropoietin and stem cell factor and were
selectively inhibited by JAK2 inhibitors which induced apoptosis of the cells.
Together, J53Z1 cells belong to the erythroid lineage, and they may be useful for
studying the role of JAK2V617F in proliferation and differentiation of erythroid 
cells and for identifying potential therapeutic drugs targeting JAK2.

PMCID: PMC4103785
PMID: 25036984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 14;5:4372. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5372.

Direct induction of haematoendothelial programs in human pluripotent stem cells
by transcriptional regulators.

Elcheva I(1), Brok-Volchanskaya V(1), Kumar A(1), Liu P(1), Lee JH(1), Tong L(1),
Vodyanik M(1), Swanson S(2), Stewart R(2), Kyba M(3), Yakubov E(4), Cooke J(4),
Thomson JA(5), Slukvin I(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin Graduate School,
1220 Capitol Court, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (2)Morgridge Institute for
Research, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (3)Lillehei Heart
Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. (4)Center 
for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Houston
Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)1] Morgridge
Institute for Research, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA [2] 
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53707-7365, USA [3] Department of 
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa
Barbara, California 93106, USA. (6)1] National Primate Research Center,
University of Wisconsin Graduate School, 1220 Capitol Court, Madison, Wisconsin
53715, USA [2] Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53707-7365,
USA [3] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
Medical School, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

Advancing pluripotent stem cell technologies for modelling haematopoietic stem
cell development and blood therapies requires identifying key regulators of
haematopoietic commitment from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Here, by
screening the effect of 27 candidate factors, we reveal two groups of
transcriptional regulators capable of inducing distinct haematopoietic programs
from hPSCs: pan-myeloid (ETV2 and GATA2) and erythro-megakaryocytic (GATA2 and
TAL1). In both cases, these transcription factors directly convert hPSCs to
endothelium, which subsequently transform into blood cells with pan-myeloid or
erythro-megakaryocytic potential. These data demonstrate that two distinct
genetic programs regulate the haematopoietic development from hPSCs and that both
of these programs specify hPSCs directly to haemogenic endothelial cells. In
addition, this study provides a novel method for the efficient induction of blood
and endothelial cells from hPSCs via the overexpression of modified mRNA for the 
selected transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4107340
PMID: 25019369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Jun;55(6):633-42.

[Network regulation of Gata1 and Gata2 gene-dynamics underlies erythroid
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Moriguchi T, Yamamoto M.

PMID: 24975332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:519. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-519.

Transcriptional regulation and spatial interactions of head-to-head genes.

Chen Y, Li Y, Wei J(1), Li YY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, P R China.
Jenny.Wei@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic genomes, about 10% of genes are arranged in a
head-to-head (H2H) orientation, and the distance between the transcription start 
sites of each gene pair is closer than 1 kb. Two genes in an H2H pair are prone
to co-express and co-function. There have been many studies on bidirectional
promoters. However, the mechanism by which H2H genes are regulated at the
transcriptional level still needs further clarification, especially with regard
to the co-regulation of H2H pairs. In this study, we first used the Hi-C data of 
chromatin linkages to identify spatially interacting H2H pairs, and then
integrated ChIP-seq data to compare H2H gene pairs with and without evidence of
spatial interactions in terms of their binding transcription factors (TFs). Using
ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data, histones and DNase associated with H2H pairs were
identified. Furthermore, we looked into the connections between H2H genes in a
human co-expression network.
RESULTS: We found that i) Similar to the behaviour of two genes within an H2H
pair (intra-H2H pair), a gene pair involving two distinct H2H pairs (inter-H2H
pair) which interact with each other spatially, share common transcription
factors (TFs); ii) TFs of intra- and inter-H2H pairs are distributed differently.
Factors such as HEY1, GABP, Sin3Ak-20, POL2, E2F6, and c-MYC are essential for
the bidirectional transcription of intra-H2H pairs; while factors like CTCF,
BDP1, GATA2, RAD21, and POL3 play important roles in coherently regulating
inter-H2H pairs; iii) H2H gene blocks are enriched with hypersensitive DNase and 
modified histones, which participate in active transcriptions; and iv) H2H genes 
tend to be highly connected compared with non-H2H genes in the human
co-expression network.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings shed new light on the mechanism of the transcriptional 
regulation of H2H genes through their linear and spatial interactions. For
intra-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors regulate their transcriptions through
bidirectional promoters, whereas for inter-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors 
are likely to regulate their activities depending on the spatial interaction of
H2H gene pairs. In this way, two distinctive groups of transcription factors
mediate intra- and inter-H2H gene transcriptions respectively, resulting in a
highly compact gene regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC4089025
PMID: 24962804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099137. eCollection
2014.

Dose-dependent effect of estrogen suppresses the osteo-adipogenic
transdifferentiation of osteoblasts via canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

Gao B(1), Huang Q(1), Lin YS(2), Wei BY(1), Guo YS(1), Sun Z(1), Wang L(1), Fan
J(1), Zhang HY(1), Han YH(1), Li XJ(1), Shi J(1), Liu J(1), Yang L(1), Luo ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Orthopedic Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics,
First Affiliated Hospital, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, People's Republic of
China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e114981.

Fat infiltration within marrow cavity is one of multitudinous features of
estrogen deficiency, which leads to a decline in bone formation functionality.
The origin of this fat is unclear, but one possibility is that it is derived from
osteoblasts, which transdifferentiate into adipocytes that produce bone marrow
fat. We examined the dose-dependent effect of 17ß-estradiol on the ability of
MC3T3-E1 cells and murine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell
(BMMSC)-derived osteoblasts to undergo osteo-adipogenic transdifferentiation. We 
found that 17ß-estradiol significantly increased alkaline phosphatase activity
(P<0.05); calcium deposition; and Alp, Col1a1, Runx2, and Ocn expression levels
dose-dependently. By contrast, 17ß-estradiol significantly decreased the number
and size of lipid droplets, and Fabp4 and PPAR<U+03B3> expression levels during
osteo-adipogenic transdifferentiation (P<0.05). Moreover, the expression levels
of brown adipocyte markers (Myf5, Elovl3, and Cidea) and undifferentiated
adipocyte markers (Dlk1, Gata2, and Wnt10b) were also affected by 17ß-estradiol
during osteo-adipogenic transdifferentiation. Western blotting and immunostaining
further showed that canonical Wnt signaling can be activated by estrogen to exert
its inhibitory effect of osteo-adipogenesis. This is the first study to
demonstrate the dose-dependent effect of 17ß-estradiol on the osteo-adipogenic
transdifferentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells and BMMSCs likely via canonical Wnt
signaling. In summary, our results indicate that osteo-adipogenic
transdifferentiation modulated by canonical Wnt signaling pathway in bone
metabolism may be a new explanation for the gradually increased bone marrow fat
in estrogen-inefficient condition.

PMCID: PMC4053448
PMID: 24918446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Leukemia. 2015 Feb;29(2):433-40. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.183. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Survivin modulates genes with divergent molecular functions and regulates
proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells through Evi-1.

Fukuda S(1), Hoggatt J(2), Singh P(3), Abe M(1), Speth JM(3), Hu P(3), Conway
EM(4), Nucifora G(5), Yamaguchi S(1), Pelus LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shimane University School of Medicine, Izumo, Japan.
(2)1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA [2] Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Centre for Blood Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis protein Survivin regulates hematopoiesis, although its
mechanisms of regulation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) remain largely
unknown. While investigating conditional Survivin deletion in mice, we found that
Survivin was highly expressed in phenotypically defined HSCs, and Survivin
deletion in mice resulted in significantly reduced total marrow HSCs and
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Transcriptional analysis of Survivin(-/-) HSCs
revealed altered expression of multiple genes not previously linked to Survivin
activity. In particular, Survivin deletion significantly reduced expression of
the Evi-1 transcription factor indispensable for HSC function, and the downstream
Evi-1 target genes Gata2, Pbx1 and Sall2. The loss of HSCs following Survivin
deletion and impaired long-term HSC repopulating function could be partially
rescued by ectopic Evi-1 expression in Survivin -/- HSCs. These data demonstrate 
that Survivin partially regulates HSC function by modulating the Evi-1
transcription factor and its downstream targets and identify new genetic pathways
in HSCs regulated by Survivin.

PMCID: PMC4258188
PMID: 24903482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e97080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097080. eCollection 
2014.

Transcription factors involved in prostate gland adaptation to androgen
deprivation.

Rosa-Ribeiro R(1), Nishan U(1), Vidal RO(2), Barbosa GO(1), Reis LO(3), Cesar
CL(4), Carvalho HF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, National Center for
Research on Energy and Materials, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Division of
Urology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department
of Quantum Physics, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil;
National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State
University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Department of Structural 
and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo,
Brazil; National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State 
University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Androgens regulate prostate physiology, and exert their effects through the
androgen receptor. We hypothesized that androgen deprivation needs additional
transcription factors to orchestrate the changes taking place in the gland after 
castration and for the adaptation of the epithelial cells to the
androgen-deprived environment, ultimately contributing to the origin of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. This study was undertaken to identify
transcription factors that regulate gene expression after androgen deprivation by
castration (Cas). For the sake of comparison, we extended the analysis to the
effects of administration of a high dose of 17ß-estradiol (E2) and a combination 
of both (Cas+E2). We approached this by (i) identifying gene expression profiles 
and enrichment terms, and by searching for transcription factors in the derived
regulatory pathways; and (ii) by determining the density of putative
transcription factor binding sites in the proximal promoter of the 10 most up- or
down-regulated genes in each experimental group in comparison to the controls
Gapdh and Tbp7. Filtering and validation confirmed the expression and localized
EVI1 (Mecom), NFY, ELK1, GATA2, MYBL1, MYBL2, and NFkB family members (NFkB1,
NFkB2, REL, RELA and RELB) in the epithelial and/or stromal cells. These
transcription factors represent major regulators of epithelial cell survival and 
immaturity as well as an adaptation of the gland as an immune barrier in the
absence of functional stimulation by androgens. Elk1 was expressed in smooth
muscle cells and was up-regulated after day 4. Evi1 and Nfy genes are expressed
in both epithelium and stroma, but were apparently not affected by androgen
deprivation.

PMCID: PMC4041569
PMID: 24886974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):419-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB0314-145R. Epub 2014
May 27.

The Cebpa +37-kb enhancer directs transgene expression to myeloid progenitors and
to long-term hematopoietic stem cells.

Guo H(1), Ma O(1), Friedman AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA afriedm2@jhmi.edu.

C/EBPa is expressed preferentially in myeloid compared with lymphoid or erythroid
cells and directs myeloid lineage specification. C/EBPa is also expressed at
lower levels in HSCs and in several nonhematopoietic tissues. The Cebpa gene has 
a conserved, 450-bp segment at +37 kb that harbors enhancer-specific epigenetic
marks and is activate in a myeloid cell line. Herein, we characterize transgenic 
C57BL/6 mice, in which the Cebpa enhancer and 845-bp promoter regulate a hCD4
reporter. FACS analysis, in vitro colony assays, and in vivo competitive and
secondary transplantation revealed that myeloid but not MEPs or lymphoid
progenitors and also functional LT-HSCs are found almost exclusively in the
Cebpa-hCD4(+) compared with hCD4(-) marrow population. hCD4(+) CMP yielded
predominantly myeloid, whereas hCD4(-) CMP generated mainly Meg/E colonies.
Providing insight into control of CMP maturation, Cebpa and Pu.1 RNAs were
preferentially expressed in hCD4(+) CMP, Scl, Gata2, Gata1, Klf1, Ets1, and Fli1 
predominated in hCD4(-) CMP, and Runx1, Myb, HoxA9, and Erg levels were similar
in both. Cebpa-hCD4 transgene expression was lacking in multiple nonhematopoietic
tissues. In summary, the +37-kb Cebpa enhancer and promoter are sufficient for
marrow myeloid progenitor and LT-HSC-specific expression.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138201
PMID: 24868087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e98139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098139. eCollection
2014.

Identification of microRNAs regulating the developmental pathways of bone marrow 
derived mast cells.

Xiang Y(1), Eyers F(2), Young IG(3), Rosenberg HF(4), Foster PS(2), Yang M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of Biomedical Sciences and
Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia; Department of Physiology,
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China. (2)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of
Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and 
Hunter Medical Research Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia. (4)Inflammation Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Allergic
Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in leukocyte differentiation,
although those utilised for specific programs and key functions remain
incompletely characterised. As a global approach to gain insights into the
potential regulatory role of miRNA in mast cell differentiation we characterised 
expression in BM cultures from the initiation of differentiation. In cultures
enriched in differentiating mast cells we characterised miRNA expression and
identified miRNA targeting the mRNA of putative factors involved in
differentiation pathways and cellular identity. Detailed pathway analysis
identified a unique miRNA network that is intimately linked to the mast cell
differentiation program.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified 86 unique miRNAs with expression
patterns that were up- or down- regulated at 5-fold or more during bone marrow
derived mast cells (BMMC) development. By employing TargetScan and MeSH
databases, we identified 524 transcripts involved in 30 canonical pathways as
potentially regulated by these specific 86 miRNAs. Furthermore, by applying
miRanda and IPA analyses, we predict that 7 specific miRNAs of this group are
directly associated with the expression of c-Kit and FceRIa and likewise, that 18
miRNAs promote expression of Mitf, GATA1 and c/EBPa three core transcription
factors that direct mast cell differentiation. Furthermore, we have identified 11
miRNAs that may regulate the expression of STATs-3, -5a/b, GATA2 and GATA3 during
differentiation, along with 13 miRNAs that target transcripts encoding Ndst2,
mMCP4 and mMCP6 and thus may regulate biosynthesis of mast cell secretory
mediators.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This investigation characterises changes in miRNA
expression in whole BM cultures during the differentiation of mast cells and
predicts functional links between miRNAs and their target mRNAs for the
regulation of development. This information provides an important resource for
further investigations of the contributions of miRNAs to mast cell
differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC4029961
PMID: 24848502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Feb;56(2):480-91. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.924119. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Repressed BMP signaling reactivates NKL homeobox gene MSX1 in a T-ALL subset.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), several members of the NK-like
(NKL) homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed. Here, we have analyzed the
activity of NKL homeobox gene MSX1 using pediatric T-ALL in silico data,
detecting overexpression in 11% of patients. Quantification of MSX1 transcripts
in a panel of 24 T-ALL cell lines demonstrated overexpression in two examples.
Comparative expression profiling indicated inhibition of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling pathway, which was shown to inhibit MSX1 transcription.
In the LOUCY cell line we identified conspicuous expression of CHRDL1 encoding a 
BMP inhibitor which mediated activation of MSX1. Promoter analyses demonstrated
activation of CHRDL1 by oncogenic PITX1. Furthermore, knockdown and
overexpression studies of hematopoietic transcription factors demonstrated that
GATA2 and FOXC1 mediate activation and GATA3, LEF1, TAL1 and TOX repression of
MSX1 transcription. Collectively, our findings suggest that MSX1 is
physiologically restricted to lymphoid progenitors. The identification of
deregulated BMP signaling may provide novel therapeutic options for the treatment
of T-ALL.

PMID: 24844359  [PubMed - in process]


186. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Jun;9(6):784-93. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000165.

GATA2 is epigenetically repressed in human and mouse lung tumors and is not
requisite for survival of KRAS mutant lung cancer.

Tessema M(1), Yingling CM, Snider AM, Do K, Juri DE, Picchi MA, Zhang X, Liu Y,
Leng S, Tellez CS, Belinsky SA.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM.

INTRODUCTION: GATA2 was recently described as a critical survival factor and
therapeutic target for KRAS mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
whether this role is affected by epigenetic repression of GATA2 in lung cancer is
unclear.
METHODS: GATA2 expression and promoter CpG island methylation were evaluated
using human and mouse NSCLC cell lines and tumor-normal pairs. In vitro assays
were used to study GATA2 repression on cell survival and during tobacco
carcinogen-induced transformation.
RESULTS: GATA2 expression in KRAS wild-type (n = 15) and mutant (n = 10) NSCLC
cell lines and primary lung tumors (n = 24) was significantly lower, 1.3- to
33.6-fold (p = 2.2 × 10(9)), compared with corresponding normal lung. GATA2
promoter was unmethylated in normal lung (0 of 10) but frequently methylated in
lung tumors (96%, 159 of 165) and NSCLC cell lines (97%, 30 of 31). This highly
prevalent aberrant methylation was independently validated using The Cancer
Genome Atlas data for 369 NSCLC tumor-normal pairs. In vitro studies using an
established carcinogen-induced premalignancy model revealed that GATA2 expression
was initially repressed by chromatin remodeling followed by cytosine methylation 
during transformation. Similarly, expression of GATA2 in NNK-induced mouse lung
tumors (n = 6) and cell lines (n = 5) was fivefold and 100-fold lower,
respectively, than normal mouse lung. Finally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of GATA2 
in KRAS mutant (human [n = 4] and murine [n = 5]) and wild-type (human [n = 4])
NSCLC cell lines showed that further reduction of expression (up to 95%) does not
induce cell death.
CONCLUSION: GATA2 is epigenetically repressed in human and mouse lung tumors and 
its further inhibition is not a valid therapeutic strategy for KRAS mutant lung
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4132640
PMID: 24807155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Gene. 2014 Jul 10;544(2):152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.04.064. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

A study of the role of GATA2 gene polymorphism in coronary artery disease risk
traits.

Muiya NP(1), Wakil S(1), Al-Najai M(1), Tahir AI(1), Baz B(1), Andres E(1),
Al-Boudari O(1), Al-Tassan N(1), Al-Shahid M(2), Meyer BF(1), Dzimiri N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, P.
O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (2)King Faisal Heart Institute, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, P. O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211,
Saudi Arabia. (3)Genetics Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, P. O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: 
dzimiri@kfshrc.edu.sa.

The GATA2 is a multi-catalytic transcription factor believed to play an important
role in regulating inflammatory processes, largely contributory to
cardiovascular-related events. However, its role in coronary artery disease (CAD)
risk traits remains poorly understood. In a preliminary study using Affymetrix
250K, we established a link on chromosome (chr) 3, which harbors the GATA2 gene, 
to early onset of CAD in two families with heterozygous familial hyperlipidemia
(HFH), suggesting a role for the gene in metabolic-related CAD in the general
population. We then sequenced the gene in the families and an additional 200
individuals in the general population, followed by an association study for 8
SNPs on CAD metabolic risk traits in a total of 4557 individuals (2386 CAD cases 
versus 2171 angiographed controls) by the Applied Biosystems real-time PCR
system. The rs1573949_C [1.15(1.00-1.32); p=0.049] was associated with MI,
rs7431368_AA [5.2(1.05-26.60); p=0.43] conferred risk for harboring low high
density lipoprotein, and obesity was linked to rs10934857_AA [5.69(1.04-30.98);
p=0.045] following Bonferroni corrections and multivariate adjustments for
confounders. Furthermore, a haplotype CCCGGGTC (<U+03C7>(2)=4.23; p=0.04) constructed
from the eight studied SNPs and its 6-mer derivative CGGGTC (<U+03C7>(2)=5.05; p=0.025) 
were associated with CAD. Obesity was associated with the 6-mer CATAAA
(<U+03C7>(2)=3.66; p=0.049), and hypercholesterolemia was linked to the 8-mer CCTGGACC
(<U+03C7>(2)=6.02; p=0.014), but most significantly so with its 5-mer derivative, CTGGA 
(<U+03C7>(2)=6.75; p=0.009). On the other hand, high low density lipoprotein was linked 
to TGG (<U+03C7>(2)=4.48; p=0.034). Our study points to an association of GATA2 at both 
SNP and haplotype levels with important metabolic risk traits for
atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24786211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Ann Hematol. 2014 Sep;93(9):1515-22. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2090-4. Epub 2014
Apr 30.

Identification of acquired mutations by whole-genome sequencing in GATA-2
deficiency evolving into myelodysplasia and acute leukemia.

Fujiwara T(1), Fukuhara N, Funayama R, Nariai N, Kamata M, Nagashima T, Kojima K,
Onishi Y, Sasahara Y, Ishizawa K, Nagasaki M, Nakayama K, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School, 
2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

Heterozygous GATA-2 germline mutations are associated with overlapping clinical
manifestations termed GATA-2 deficiency, characterized by immunodeficiency and
predisposition to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). However, there is considerable clinical heterogeneity among patients, and 
the molecular basis for the evolution of immunodeficiency into MDS/AML remains
unknown. Thus, we conducted whole-genome sequencing on a patient with a germline 
GATA-2 heterozygous mutation (c. 988 C > T; p. R330X), who had a history
suggestive of immunodeficiency and evolved into MDS/AML. Analysis was conducted
with DNA samples from leukocytes for immunodeficiency, bone marrow mononuclear
cells for MDS and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Whereas we did not 
identify a candidate genomic deletion that may contribute to the evolution into
MDS, a total of 280 MDS-specific nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants were
identified. By narrowing down with the single nucleotide polymorphism database,
the functional missense database, and NCBI information, we finally identified
three candidate mutations for EZH2, HECW2 and GATA-1, which may contribute to the
evolution of the disease.

PMCID: PMC4119934
PMID: 24782121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Apr 8;13(2):2619-27. doi: 10.4238/2014.April.8.4.

Gene polymorphisms associated with susceptibility to coronary artery disease in
Han Chinese people.

Liu YH(1), Zhou YW(2), Yang JA(3), Tu ZG(4), Ji SY(3), Huang ZY(3), Zhou ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sun Yat-sen Cardiovascular Hospital,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
Cardiovascular Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China yiwenzhou21@aliyun.com.
(3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Cardiovascular Hospital, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, China. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

This study investigated 5 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) haplotypes in
susceptibility genes for coronary artery disease (CAD) and the putative
involvement of these SNPs in CAD in the Chi-nese Han population. From March 2008 
to June 2009, we selected 119 CAD patients and 115 subjects not related to the
CAD of Chinese Han or-igin as controls. The SNP genotypes were performed by
multiplex SNaP-shot technology. The HNRPUL1 gene rs11881940T and GATA2 gene
rs3803T loci were highly correlated with CAD (P < 0.05). rs10757278G increased
the risk of CAD in patients indicated by an odds ratio (OR) = 1.242 [95%
confidence interval (CI) = 1.04-1.49]; rs11881940T and rs3803T were protective
factors for CAD with ORs = 0.767 (95%CI = 0.61-0.97) and 0.53 (95%CI =
0.40-0.72), respectively. Analysis of the rs10757278, rs11881940 and rs3803 loci 
showed that haplotypes ATC (OR = 4.26; 95%CI = 2.85-6.40, P < 0.01), GAC (OR =
1.50; 95%CI = 1.25-1.81, P < 0.01) and GAT (OR = 1.53; 95%CI = 1.12-2.09, P <
0.01) were CAD risk factors, whereas GTC was protective (OR = 0.48; 95%CI =
0.32-0.72, P < 0.01). ATC and glucose were positively correlated (OR = 1.91;
95%CI = 1.01-3.61, P < 0.05). GAT was a risk factor for hyper-tension (OR = 2.86;
95%CI = 1.40-5.83, P < 0.01). In conclusion, poly-morphisms and haplotype
analysis of susceptibility genes for CAD can improve predicting this disease and 
will enable early diagnosis of CAD.

PMID: 24782050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;23(2):218-23. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.67. Epub 2014 Apr 
23.

Positional cloning and next-generation sequencing identified a TGM6 mutation in a
large Chinese pedigree with acute myeloid leukaemia.

Pan LL(1), Huang YM(2), Wang M(2), Zhuang XE(2), Luo DF(2), Guo SC(3), Zhang
ZS(4), Huang Q(2), Lin SL(2), Wang SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory on
Hematology, Department of Hematology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital,
Fuzhou, China [2] Union Clinical Medical College, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, China. (2)Union Clinical Medical College, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of
Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

An inherited predisposition to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is exceedingly rare,
but the investigation of these families will aid in the delineation of the
underlying mechanisms of the more common, sporadic cases. Three AML
predisposition genes, RUNX1, CEBPA and GATA2, have been recognised, but the
culprit genes in the majority of AML pedigrees remain obscure. We applied a
combined strategy of linkage analysis and next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology in an autosomal-dominant AML Chinese family with 11 cases in four
generations. A genome-wide linkage scan using a 500K SNP genotyping array was
conducted to identify a previously unreported candidate region on 20p13 with a
maximum multipoint heterogeneity LOD (HLOD) score of 3.56 (P=0.00005). Targeted
NGS within this region and whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed a missense
mutation in TGM6 (RefSeq, NM_198994.2:c.1550T>G, p.(L517W)), which cosegregated
with the phenotype in this family, and was absent in 530 healthy controls. The
mutated amino acid was located in a highly conserved position, which may be
deleterious and affect the activation of TGM6. Our results strongly support the
candidacy of TGM6 as a novel familial AML-associated gene.

PMCID: PMC4297898
PMID: 24755948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Apr 22;7:36. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-7-36.

Heritable GATA2 mutations associated with familial AML-MDS: a case report and
review of literature.

Gao J(1), Gentzler RD, Timms AE, Horwitz MS, Frankfurt O, Altman JK, Peterson LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
251 E, Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. j-gao@northwestern.edu.

Erratum in
    J Hematol Oncol. 2015;8:131.

A 50-year-old woman was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). She has
history of thrombocytopenia for 25 years and a significant family history of
thrombocytopenia, affecting her mother, siblings and their children, as well as
her own children. Both her mother and maternal aunt died from myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS). Additional genetic analysis was performed and identified two
heterozygous missence mutations in the second zinc finger domain of GATA2 gene
(p.Thr358Lys, and p.Leu359Val), occurring in cis on the same allele. Given the
patient's family history and clinical manifestation, this was interpreted as an
acute myeloid leukemia with heritable GATA2 mutations associated with familial
AML-MDS. Germline GATA2 mutations are involved in a group of complex syndromes
with overlapping clinical features of immune deficiency, lymphedema and
propensity to acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome (AML-MDS). Here 
we reported a case of familial AML-MDS with two novel GATA2 mutations. This case 
illustrates the importance of recognizing the clinical features for this rare
category of AML-MDS and performing the appropriate molecular testing. The
diagnosis of heritable gene mutations associated familial AML-MDS has significant
clinical implication for the patients and affected families. Clinical trials are 
available to further investigate the role of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplant in managing these patients.

PMCID: PMC4006458
PMID: 24754962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Leuk Res. 2014 Jun;38(6):714-21. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.03.018. Epub 2014
Apr 1.

Elevated TIM3+ hematopoietic stem cells in untreated myelodysplastic syndrome
displayed aberrant differentiation, overproliferation and decreased apoptosis.

Tao JL(1), Li LJ(1), Fu R(1), Wang HQ(1), Jiang HJ(1), Yue LZ(1), Zhang W(1), Liu
H(1), Ruan EB(1), Qu W(1), Wang GJ(1), Wang XM(1), Wu YH(1), Liu H(1), Song J(1),
Guan J(1), Xing LM(1), Shao ZH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital of Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300052, China. (2)Department of Hematology, General Hospital of Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin 300052, China. Electronic address:
shaozonghong@sina.com.

TIM3, as a negative regulator of anti-tumor immunity, is highly expressed on
LSCs, but not on normal HSCs. TIM3 on HSCs in MDS patients has not been
clarified. Here, both the percentage of TIM3 on HSCs and the MFI of TIM3+ HSCs
were higher in untreated MDS than control and were closed to AML, and excessive
TIM3+ HSCs was closely related to clinical parameters: WPSS score, karyotype
analysis, morphologic blasts, the number of cytopenia involving hematopoietic
lineages, anemia and granulocytopenia. TIM3+ HSCs expressed lower CD11b, TpoR,
EpoR, G-CSFR and Annexin V, and higher CD71 and GATA2. TIM3+ HSCs displayed
aberrant differentiation, overproliferation and decreased apoptosis. TIM3 might
be a promising marker for identifying malignant clone cells in MDS and a
candidate for targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.031.

Genomic dark matter sheds light on EVI1-driven leukemia.

Koche RP(1), Armstrong SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pediatrics, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Human Oncology and
Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: armstros@mskcc.org.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):415-27.
    Cell. 2014 Apr 10;157(2):369-81.

The orchestration of transcriptional programs depends on proper gene-enhancer
pairing. While much remains to be learned about this process in normal
development, two recent studies in Cell (Gröschel and colleagues) and this issue 
of Cancer Cell (Yamazaki and colleagues) highlight how the genomic rearrangement 
of an enhancer plays a causal role in the onset of a leukemogenic program.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4046890
PMID: 24735919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Jul;134(1):223-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.01.041.
Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Presence of hypogammaglobulinemia and abnormal antibody responses in GATA2
deficiency.

Chou J(1), Lutskiy M(1), Tsitsikov E(2), Notarangelo LD(3), Geha RS(4), Dioun
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Mass; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(3)Division of Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Mass; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass;
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Mass. (4)Division of Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Mass; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Mass. Electronic address: raif.geha@childrens.harvard.edu.

PMCID: PMC4125425
PMID: 24726394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):415-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.008. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

A remote GATA2 hematopoietic enhancer drives leukemogenesis in inv(3)(q21;q26) by
activating EVI1 expression.

Yamazaki H(1), Suzuki M(2), Otsuki A(1), Shimizu R(3), Bresnick EH(4), Engel
JD(5), Yamamoto M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (2)Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (4)UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Carbone Cancer Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (6)Department of Medical Biochemistry, 
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan; Tohoku
Medical Megabank, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8573, Japan. Electronic address: 
masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8.

Chromosomal inversion between 3q21 and 3q26 results in high-risk acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). In this study, we identified a mechanism whereby a GATA2 distal
hematopoietic enhancer (G2DHE or -77-kb enhancer) is brought into close proximity
to the EVI1 gene in inv(3)(q21;q26) inversions, leading to leukemogenesis. We
examined the contribution of G2DHE to leukemogenesis by creating a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic model that recapitulates the
inv(3)(q21;q26) allele. Transgenic mice harboring a linked BAC developed leukemia
accompanied by EVI1 overexpression-neoplasia that was not detected in mice
bearing the same transgene but that was missing the GATA2 enhancer. These results
establish the mechanistic basis underlying the pathogenesis of a severe form of
leukemia through aberrant expression of the EVI1 proto-oncogene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4012341
PMID: 24703906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell. 2014 Apr 10;157(2):369-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.019. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

A single oncogenic enhancer rearrangement causes concomitant EVI1 and GATA2
deregulation in leukemia.

Gröschel S(1), Sanders MA(2), Hoogenboezem R(2), de Wit E(3), Bouwman BA(3),
Erpelinck C(2), van der Velden VH(4), Havermans M(2), Avellino R(2), van Lom
K(2), Rombouts EJ(2), van Duin M(2), Döhner K(5), Beverloo HB(6), Bradner JE(7), 
Döhner H(5), Löwenberg B(2), Valk PJ(2), Bindels EM(2), de Laat W(3), Delwel
R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015
GE, the Netherlands; Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University
Hospital, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW
and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 3584 CT, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015
CN, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University
Hospital, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands; Dutch Working
Group on Hemato-Oncologic Genome Diagnostics, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the
Netherlands. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (8)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands. Electronic address: h.delwel@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8.

Chromosomal rearrangements without gene fusions have been implicated in
leukemogenesis by causing deregulation of proto-oncogenes via relocation of
cryptic regulatory DNA elements. AML with inv(3)/t(3;3) is associated with
aberrant expression of the stem-cell regulator EVI1. Applying functional genomics
and genome-engineering, we demonstrate that both 3q rearrangements reposition a
distal GATA2 enhancer to ectopically activate EVI1 and simultaneously confer
GATA2 functional haploinsufficiency, previously identified as the cause of
sporadic familial AML/MDS and MonoMac/Emberger syndromes. Genomic excision of the
ectopic enhancer restored EVI1 silencing and led to growth inhibition and
differentiation of AML cells, which could be replicated by pharmacologic BET
inhibition. Our data show that structural rearrangements involving the
chromosomal repositioning of a single enhancer can cause deregulation of two
unrelated distal genes, with cancer as the outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Mar 6;2(3):262-70. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.01.019.
eCollection 2014.

Five transcription factors and FGF pathway inhibition efficiently induce
erythroid differentiation in the epiblast.

Weng W(1), Sheng G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Early Embryogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Primitive erythropoiesis follows a stereotypic developmental program of mesoderm 
ventralization and internalization, hemangioblast formation and migration, and
erythroid lineage specification. Induction of erythropoiesis is inefficient in
either ES/iPS cells in vitro or nonhemangioblast cell populations in vivo. Using 
the chick model, we report that epiblast cells can be directly and efficiently
differentiated into the erythroid lineage by expressing five hematopoietic
transcription regulators (SCL+LMO2+GATA2+LDB1+E2A) and inhibiting the FGF
pathway. We show that these five genes are expressed with temporal specificity
during normal erythropoiesis. Initiation of SCL and LMO2 expression requires FGF 
activity, whereas erythroid differentiation is enhanced by FGF inhibition. The
lag between hematopoiesis and erythropoiesis is attributed to sequential
coregulator expression and hemangioblast migration. Globin gene transcription can
be ectopically and prematurely induced by manipulating the availability of these 
factors and the FGF pathway activity. We propose that similar approaches can be
taken for efficient erythroid differentiation in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3964278
PMID: 24672750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J BUON. 2014 Jan-Mar;19(1):304-14.

Transcriptional profiling of erythroid progenitors from G-CSF mobilized and
nonmobilized peripheral blood.

Cokic VP(1), Diklic M, Suboticki T, Beleslin-Cokic BB, Markovic D, Milenkovic P, 
Jovcic G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute for Medical Research,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine the gene expression profile of 
granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF)-mobilized peripheral blood
(mPB)-derived progenitors, used in transplantation.
METHODS: We correlated gene expression patterns of highly enriched steady-state
peripheral blood (PB)- and mPB-derived CD71+ cells by microarray and ingenuity
pathway analyses, to identify the transcriptional program during in vitro
erythroid differentiation.
RESULTS: The gene expression was more than doubled in mPB-derived (4180 genes)
compared to PB-derived erythroid progenitors (1667 genes) while PB-and
mPB-derived erythroid progenitors shared 1534 common genes. Comparative analysis 
of transcript levels showed differential expression of 54 genes between cultured 
erythroid progenitors of PB and mPB origin, where we identified common 13
downregulated and 30 upregulated genes. The most significant genes in mPB-derived
erythroid progenitors were P4HB, DDIA3, ARPC2 and ATP5G3. Regarding G-CSF
stimulation the G-CSF receptor CSF2RB (1.1-fold) was linked via STAT3 to
erythroid-specific ALAS2 (2.9-fold) and GATA2 (1.3-fold) factors, all upregulated
in mPB-derived erythroid progenitors, coupled to common upregulated NUDC gene
involved in the proliferation of erythroid cells.
CONCLUSION: This report provides an extensive transcriptional profile of cultured
erythroid progenitors and leads to a better understanding of diversity among the 
progenitor sources.

PMID: 24659680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3936-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302366. Epub 2014
Mar 17.

Critical Roles for PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 in the expression of human FceRI on
mast cells: PU.1 and GATA1 transactivate FCER1A, and GATA2 transactivates FCER1A 
and MS4A2.

Inage E(1), Kasakura K, Yashiro T, Suzuki R, Baba Y, Nakano N, Hara M, Tanabe A, 
Oboki K, Matsumoto K, Saito H, Niyonsaba F, Ohtsuka Y, Ogawa H, Okumura K,
Shimizu T, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan;

The high-affinity IgE receptor, FceRI, which is composed of a-, ß-, and <U+03B3>-chains,
plays an important role in IgE-mediated allergic responses. In the current study,
involvement of the transcription factors, PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2, in the
expression of FceRI on human mast cells was investigated. Transfection of small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 into the human mast cell
line, LAD2, caused significant downregulation of cell surface expression of
FceRI. Quantification of the mRNA levels revealed that PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2
siRNAs suppressed the a transcript, whereas the amount of ß mRNA was reduced in
only GATA2 siRNA transfectants. In contrast, <U+03B3> mRNA levels were not affected by
any of the knockdowns. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that
significant amounts of PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 bind to the promoter region of
FCER1A (encoding FceRIa) and that GATA2 binds to the promoter of MS4A2 (encoding 
FceRIß). Luciferase assay and EMSA showed that GATA2 transactivates the MS4A2
promoter via direct binding. These knockdowns of transcription factors also
suppressed the IgE-mediated degranulation activity of LAD2. Similarly, all three 
knockdowns suppressed FceRI expression in primary mast cells, especially PU.1
siRNA and GATA2 siRNA, which target FceRIa and FceRIß, respectively. From these
results, we conclude that PU.1 and GATA1 are involved in FceRIa transcription
through recruitment to its promoter, whereas GATA2 positively regulates FceRIß
transcription. Suppression of these transcription factors leads to downregulation
of FceRI expression and IgE-mediated degranulation activity. Our findings will
contribute to the development of new therapeutic approaches for FceRI-mediated
allergic diseases.

PMID: 24639354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Hematol. 2014 Nov;100(5):417-24. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1568-0. Epub 2014 
Mar 18.

A regulatory network governing Gata1 and Gata2 gene transcription orchestrates
erythroid lineage differentiation.

Moriguchi T(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

GATA transcription factor family members GATA1 and GATA2 play crucial roles in
the regulation of lineage-restricted genes during erythroid differentiation.
GATA1 is indispensable for survival and terminal differentiation of erythroid,
megakaryocytic and eosinophilic progenitors, whereas GATA2 regulates
proliferation and maintenance of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Expression levels of GATA1 and GATA2 are primarily regulated at the
transcriptional level through auto- and reciprocal regulatory networks formed by 
these GATA factors. The dynamic and strictly controlled change of expression from
GATA2 to GATA1 during erythropoiesis has been referred to as GATA factor
switching, which plays a crucial role in erythropoiesis. The regulatory network
comprising GATA1 and GATA2 gives rise to the stage-specific changes in Gata1 and 
Gata2 gene expression during erythroid differentiation, which ensures specific
expression of early and late erythroid genes at each stage. Recent studies have
also shed light on the genome-wide binding profiles of GATA1 and GATA2, and the
significance of epigenetic modification of Gata1 gene during erythroid
differentiation. This review summarizes the current understanding of network
regulation underlying stage-dependent Gata1 and Gata2 gene expressions and the
functional contribution of these GATA factors in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 24638828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(11):1929-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01659-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
17.

GATA2 regulates body water homeostasis through maintaining aquaporin 2 expression
in renal collecting ducts.

Yu L(1), Moriguchi T, Souma T, Takai J, Satoh H, Morito N, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA2 plays pivotal roles in early renal development,
but its distribution and physiological functions in adult kidney are largely
unknown. We examined the GATA2 expression pattern in the adult kidney by tracing 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) fluorescence in Gata2(GFP/+) mice that
recapitulate endogenous GATA2 expression and found a robust GFP expression
specifically in the renal medulla. Upon purification of the GFP-positive cells,
we found that collecting duct (CD)-specific markers, including aquaporin 2
(Aqp2), an important channel for water reabsorption from urine, were abundantly
expressed. To address the physiological function of GATA2 in the CD cells, we
generated renal tubular cell-specific Gata2-deficient mice (Gata2-CKO) by
crossing Gata2 floxed mice with inducible Pax8-Cre mice. We found that the
Gata2-CKO mice showed a significant decrease in Aqp2 expression. The Gata2-CKO
mice exhibited high 24-h urine volume and low urine osmolality, two important
signs of diabetes insipidus. We introduced biotin-tagged GATA2 into a mouse
CD-derived cell line and conducted chromatin pulldown assays, which revealed
direct GATA2 binding to conserved GATA motifs in the Aqp2 promoter region. A
luciferase reporter assay using an Aqp2 promoter-reporter showed that GATA2 trans
activates Aqp2 through the GATA motifs. These results demonstrate that GATA2
regulates the Aqp2 gene expression in CD cells and contributes to the maintenance
of the body water homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4019060
PMID: 24636993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Feb 19;13(1):945-53. doi: 10.4238/2014.February.19.5.

Discovery of somatic mutations in the progression of chronic myeloid leukemia by 
whole-exome sequencing.

Huang Y(1), Zheng J(2), Hu JD(2), Wu YA(3), Zheng XY(2), Liu TB(2), Chen FL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Provincial Clinical College, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China 
hyi8070@126.com. (2)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. (3)Provincial Clinical College, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. (4)Department of Nephrology, Fujian
Provincial Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.

We performed whole-exome sequencing in samples representing accelerated phase
(AP) and blastic crisis (BC) in a subject with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). A 
total of 12.74 Gb clean data were generated, achieving a mean depth coverage of
64.45 and 69.53 for AP and BC samples, respectively, of the target region. A
total of 148 somatic variants were detected, including 76 insertions and
deletions (indels), 64 single-nucleotide variations (SNV), and 8 structural
variations (SV). On the basis of annotation and functional prediction analysis,
we identified 3 SNVs and 6 SVs that showed a potential association with CML
progression. Among the genes that harbor the identified variants, GATA2 has
previously been reported to play important roles in the progression from AP to BC
in CML. Identification of these genes will allow us to gain a better
understanding of the pathological mechanism of CML and represents a critical
advance toward new molecular diagnostic tests for the development of potential
therapies for CML.

PMID: 24634115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e91728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091728. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of the altered gene expression profile in early porcine embryos 
generated from parthenogenesis and somatic cell chromatin transfer.

Zhou C(1), Dobrinsky J(2), Tsoi S(1), Foxcroft GR(1), Dixon WT(1), Stothard P(1),
Verstegen J(2), Dyck MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (2)International Center for Biotechnology,
Minitube of America, Mount Horeb, Wisconsin, United States of America.

The in vitro production of early porcine embryos is of particular scientific and 
economic interest. In general, embryos produced from in vitro Assisted
Reproductive Technologies (ART) manipulations, such as somatic cell chromatin
transfer (CT) and parthenogenetic activation (PA), are less developmentally
competent than in vivo-derived embryos. The mechanisms underlying the
deficiencies of embryos generated from PA and CT have not been completely
understood. To characterize the altered genes and gene networks in embryos
generated from CT and PA, comparative transcriptomic analyses of in vivo (IVV)
expanded blastocysts (XB), IVV hatched blastocyst (HB), PA XB, PA HB, and CT HB
were performed using a custom microarray platform enriched for genes expressed
during early embryonic development. Differential expressions of 1492 and 103
genes were identified in PA and CT HB, respectively, in comparison with IVV HB.
The "eIF2 signalling", "mitochondrial dysfunction", "regulation of eIF4 and
p70S6K signalling", "protein ubiquitination", and "mTOR signalling" pathways were
down-regulated in PA HB. Dysregulation of notch signalling-associated genes were 
observed in both PA and CT HB. TP53 was predicted to be activated in both PA and 
CT HB, as 136 and 23 regulation targets of TP53 showed significant differential
expression in PA and CT HB, respectively, in comparison with IVV HB. In addition,
dysregulations of several critical pluripotency, trophoblast development, and
implantation-associated genes (NANOG, GATA2, KRT8, LGMN, and DPP4) were observed 
in PA HB during the blastocyst hatching process. The critical genes that were
observed to be dysregulated in CT and PA embryos could be indicative of
underlying developmental deficiencies of embryos produced from these
technologies.

PMCID: PMC3954727
PMID: 24633136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 25;111(12):E1091-100. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400065111. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Mechanism governing a stem cell-generating cis-regulatory element.

Sanalkumar R(1), Johnson KD, Gao X, Boyer ME, Chang YI, Hewitt KJ, Zhang J,
Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical 
Research, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53705.

The unremitting demand to replenish differentiated cells in tissues requires
efficient mechanisms to generate and regulate stem and progenitor cells. Although
master regulatory transcription factors, including GATA binding protein-2
(GATA-2), have crucial roles in these mechanisms, how such factors are controlled
in developmentally dynamic systems is poorly understood. Previously, we described
five dispersed Gata2 locus sequences, termed the -77, -3.9, -2.8, -1.8, and +9.5 
GATA switch sites, which contain evolutionarily conserved GATA motifs occupied by
GATA-2 and GATA-1 in hematopoietic precursors and erythroid cells, respectively. 
Despite common attributes of transcriptional enhancers, targeted deletions of the
-2.8, -1.8, and +9.5 sites revealed distinct and unpredictable contributions to
Gata2 expression and hematopoiesis. Herein, we describe the targeted deletion of 
the -3.9 site and mechanistically compare the -3.9 site with other GATA switch
sites. The -3.9(-/-) mice were viable and exhibited normal Gata2 expression and
steady-state hematopoiesis in the embryo and adult. We established a Gata2
repression/reactivation assay, which revealed unique +9.5 site activity to
mediate GATA factor-dependent chromatin structural transitions. Loss-of-function 
analyses provided evidence for a mechanism in which a mediator of long-range
transcriptional control [LIM domain binding 1 (LDB1)] and a chromatin remodeler
[Brahma related gene 1 (BRG1)] synergize through the +9.5 site, conferring
expression of GATA-2, which is known to promote the genesis and survival of
hematopoietic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3970491
PMID: 24616499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 May;34(10):1812-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01524-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
10.

Transcription factor GATA1 is dispensable for mast cell differentiation in adult 
mice.

Ohneda K(1), Moriguchi T, Ohmori S, Ishijima Y, Satoh H, Philipsen S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, Takasaki, Gunma, Japan.

Although previous studies have shown that GATA1 is required for mast cell
differentiation, the effects of the complete ablation of GATA1 in mast cells have
not been examined. Using conditional Gata1 knockout mice (Gata1(-/y)), we
demonstrate here that the complete ablation of GATA1 has a minimal effect on the 
number and distribution of peripheral tissue mast cells in adult mice. The
Gata1(-/y) bone marrow cells were capable of differentiating into mast cells ex
vivo. Microarray analyses showed that the repression of GATA1 in bone marrow mast
cells (BMMCs) has a small impact on the mast cell-specific gene expression in
most cases. Interestingly, however, the expression levels of mast cell tryptases 
in the mouse chromosome 17A3.3 were uniformly reduced in the GATA1 knockdown
cells, and GATA1 was found to bind to a 500-bp region at the 5' end of this
locus. Revealing a sharp contrast to that observed in the Gata1-null BMMCs, GATA2
deficiency resulted in a significant loss of the c-Kit(+) FceRIa(+) mast cell
fraction and a reduced expression of several mast cell-specific genes.
Collectively, GATA2 plays a more important role than GATA1 in the regulation of
most mast cell-specific genes, while GATA1 might play specific roles in mast cell
functions.

PMCID: PMC4019035
PMID: 24615013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(2):275-82. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.8. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

A genome-wide linkage and association study of musical aptitude identifies loci
containing genes related to inner ear development and neurocognitive functions.

Oikkonen J(1), Huang Y(2), Onkamo P(3), Ukkola-Vuoti L(4), Raijas P(5), Karma
K(5), Vieland VJ(2), Järvelä I(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
[2] Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland. (2)The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of Biological and
Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department 
of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Sibelius
Academy, University of the Arts Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Humans have developed the perception, production and processing of sounds into
the art of music. A genetic contribution to these skills of musical aptitude has 
long been suggested. We performed a genome-wide scan in 76 pedigrees (767
individuals) characterized for the ability to discriminate pitch (SP), duration
(ST) and sound patterns (KMT), which are primary capacities for music perception.
Using the Bayesian linkage and association approach implemented in program
package KELVIN, especially designed for complex pedigrees, several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near genes affecting the functions of the
auditory pathway and neurocognitive processes were identified. The strongest
association was found at 3q21.3 (rs9854612) with combined SP, ST and KMT test
scores (COMB). This region is located a few dozen kilobases upstream of the GATA 
binding protein 2 (GATA2) gene. GATA2 regulates the development of cochlear hair 
cells and the inferior colliculus (IC), which are important in tonotopic mapping.
The highest probability of linkage was obtained for phenotype SP at 4p14, located
next to the region harboring the protocadherin 7 gene, PCDH7. Two SNPs rs13146789
and rs13109270 of PCDH7 showed strong association. PCDH7 has been suggested to
play a role in cochlear and amygdaloid complexes. Functional class analysis
showed that inner ear and schizophrenia-related genes were enriched inside the
linked regions. This study is the first to show the importance of auditory
pathway genes in musical aptitude.

PMCID: PMC4259854
PMID: 24614497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Jun;391(1-2):217-24. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2005-7. Epub 
2014 Mar 7.

Triiodothyronine suppresses activin-induced differentiation of erythroleukemia
K562 cells under hypoxic conditions.

Yamamoto Y(1), Shiraishi M, Fujita M, Kojima I, Tanaka Y, Tachibana S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Environmental Medicine, National Defense Medical College Research 
Institute, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama,
359-8513, Japan, yoritsuna@dream.com.

Thyroid hormone stimulates erythropoietic differentiation. However, severe anemia
is sometimes seen in patients with hyperthyroidism, and the mechanisms have not
been fully elucidated. Bone marrow is comprised about 2-8% oxygen, and the
characteristics of hematopoietic stem cells have been shown to be influenced
under hypoxia. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 is a critical mediator of cellular
responses to hypoxia and an important mediator in signal transduction of thyroid 
hormone [triiodothyronine (T3)]. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effect of T3 on erythropoiesis under hypoxia mimicking physiological conditions
in the bone marrow. We maintained human erythroleukemia K562 cells under hypoxic 
atmosphere (2% O2) and examined their cellular characteristics. Compared to that 
under normal atmospheric conditions, cells under hypoxia showed a reduction in
the proliferation rate and increase in the hemoglobin content or
benzidine-positive rate, indicating promotion of erythroid differentiation. T3
had no effect on hypoxia-induced erythroid differentiation, but significantly
inhibited activin A/erythroid differentiation factor-induced erythroid
differentiation. Moreover, GATA2 mRNA expression was suppressed in association
with erythroid differentiation, while T3 significantly diminished that
suppression. These results suggest that T3 has a direct suppressive effect on
erythroid differentiation under hypoxic conditions.

PMID: 24604674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1004158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004158.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis predicts an epigenetic switch for GATA
factor expression in endometriosis.

Dyson MT(1), Roqueiro D(2), Monsivais D(1), Ercan CM(1), Pavone ME(1), Brooks
DC(1), Kakinuma T(1), Ono M(1), Jafari N(1), Dai Y(2), Bulun SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Dept. Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. (2)Laboratory of Computational Functional Genomics, Dept.
Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

Endometriosis is a gynecological disease defined by the extrauterine growth of
endometrial-like cells that cause chronic pain and infertility. The disease is
limited to primates that exhibit spontaneous decidualization, and diseased cells 
are characterized by significant defects in the steroid-dependent genetic
pathways that typify this process. Altered DNA methylation may underlie these
defects, but few regions with differential methylation have been implicated in
the disease. We mapped genome-wide differences in DNA methylation between healthy
human endometrial and endometriotic stromal cells and correlated this with gene
expression using an interaction analysis strategy. We identified 42,248
differentially methylated CpGs in endometriosis compared to healthy cells. These 
extensive differences were not unidirectional, but were focused intragenically
and at sites distal to classic CpG islands where methylation status was typically
negatively correlated with gene expression. Significant differences in
methylation were mapped to 403 genes, which included a disproportionally large
number of transcription factors. Furthermore, many of these genes are implicated 
in the pathology of endometriosis and decidualization. Our results tremendously
improve the scope and resolution of differential methylation affecting the HOX
gene clusters, nuclear receptor genes, and intriguingly the GATA family of
transcription factors. Functional analysis of the GATA family revealed that GATA2
regulates key genes necessary for the hormone-driven differentiation of healthy
stromal cells, but is hypermethylated and repressed in endometriotic cells.
GATA6, which is hypomethylated and abundant in endometriotic cells, potently
blocked hormone sensitivity, repressed GATA2, and induced markers of
endometriosis when expressed in healthy endometrial cells. The unique epigenetic 
fingerprint in endometriosis suggests DNA methylation is an integral component of
the disease, and identifies a novel role for the GATA family as key regulators of
uterine physiology-aberrant DNA methylation in endometriotic cells correlates
with a shift in GATA isoform expression that facilitates progesterone resistance 
and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3945170
PMID: 24603652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Biol. 2014 May 15;389(2):208-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.018. Epub 2014 
Feb 26.

Cooperative interaction of Etv2 and Gata2 regulates the development of
endothelial and hematopoietic lineages.

Shi X(1), Richard J(1), Zirbes KM(1), Gong W(1), Lin G(2), Kyba M(1), Thomson
JA(3), Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Garry DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (2)Stem Cell Institute, Medical School, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (3)Morgridge Institute for Research, 330N.
Orchard St., Madison, WI 53715, USA; Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology,
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA; 
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa
Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. (4)Lillehei Heart Institute, Medical
School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. Electronic address:
garry@umn.edu.

Regulatory mechanisms that govern lineage specification of the mesodermal
progenitors to become endothelial and hematopoietic cells remain an area of
intense interest. Both Ets and Gata factors have been shown to have important
roles in the transcriptional regulation in endothelial and hematopoietic cells.
We previously reported Etv2 as an essential regulator of vasculogenesis and
hematopoiesis. In the present study, we demonstrate that Gata2 is co-expressed
and interacts with Etv2 in the endothelial and hematopoietic cells in the early
stages of embryogenesis. Our studies reveal that Etv2 interacts with Gata2 in
vitro and in vivo. The protein-protein interaction between Etv2 and Gata2 is
mediated by the Ets and Gata domains. Using the embryoid body differentiation
system, we demonstrate that co-expression of Gata2 augments the activity of Etv2 
in promoting endothelial and hematopoietic lineage differentiation. We also
identify Spi1 as a common downstream target gene of Etv2 and Gata2. We provide
evidence that Etv2 and Gata2 bind to the Spi1 promoter in vitro and in vivo. In
summary, we propose that Gata2 functions as a cofactor of Etv2 in the
transcriptional regulation of mesodermal progenitors during embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4099474
PMID: 24583263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Blood. 2014 Feb 27;123(9):1426-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-531079.

Mutations in GATA2 are rare in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

Stieglitz E(1), Liu YL, Emanuel PD, Castleberry RP, Cooper TM, Shannon KM, Loh
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Benioff Children's Hospital, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.

PMCID: PMC3938154
PMID: 24578498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Pharm. 2014 Aug 4;11(8):2612-22. doi: 10.1021/mp400714z. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Cationic lipid-assisted polymeric nanoparticle mediated GATA2 siRNA delivery for 
synthetic lethal therapy of KRAS mutant non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Shen S(1), Mao CQ, Yang XZ, Du XJ, Liu Y, Zhu YH, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences
at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei, Anhui
230027, P. R. China.

Synthetic lethal interaction provides a conceptual framework for the development 
of wiser cancer therapeutics. In this study, we exploited a therapeutic strategy 
based on the interaction between GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2) downregulation
and the KRAS mutation status by delivering small interfering RNA targeting GATA2 
(siGATA2) with cationic lipid-assisted polymeric nanoparticles for treatment of
non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) harboring oncogenic KRAS mutations.
Nanoparticles carrying siGATA2 (NPsiGATA2) were effectively taken up by NSCLC
cells and resulted in targeted gene suppression. NPsiGATA2 selectively inhibited 
cell proliferation and induced cell apoptosis in KRAS mutant NSCLC cells.
However, this intervention was harmless to normal KRAS wild-type NSCLC cells and 
HL7702 hepatocytes, confirming the advantage of synthetic lethality-based
therapy. Moreover, systemic delivery of NPsiGATA2 significantly inhibited tumor
growth in the KRAS mutant A549 NSCLC xenograft murine model, suggesting the
therapeutic promise of NPsiGATA2 delivery in KRAS mutant NSCLC therapy.

PMID: 24521262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Leukemia. 2014 Aug;28(8):1617-26. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.67. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Epigenetic regulation of GATA2 and its impact on normal karyotype acute myeloid
leukemia.

Celton M(1), Forest A(2), Gosse G(2), Lemieux S(3), Hebert J(4), Sauvageau G(5), 
Wilhelm BT(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,
Université de Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada [2] Laboratory for
high-throughput genomics, Montreal, Québec, Canada [3] INRA, UMR1083, Sciences
Pour l'Oenologie, Montpellier, France. (2)1] Department of Medicine, Institute
for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montreal, Montreal, Québec, 
Canada [2] Laboratory for high-throughput genomics, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)1] Department of Medicine, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,
Université de Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada [2] Laboratory for Functional
and Structural Bioinformatics, Montreal, Québec, Canada. (4)1] Department of
Medicine, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de
Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada [2] Leukemia Cell Bank of Quebec and Division 
of Hematology, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, Québec, Canada. (5)1]
Department of Medicine, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,
Université de Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada [2] Leukemia Cell Bank of Quebec
and Division of Hematology, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, Québec,
Canada [3] Laboratory for Molecular Genetics of Stem Cells, Montreal, Québec,
Canada.

The GATA2 gene encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor that acts as a master
regulator of normal hematopoiesis. Mutations in GATA2 have been implicated in the
development of myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Using
RNA sequencing we now report that GATA2 is either mutated with a functional
consequence, or expressed at low levels in the majority of normal karyotype AML
(NK-AML). We also show that low-GATA2-expressing specimens (GATA2(low)) exhibit
allele-specific expression (ASE) (skewing) in more than half of AML patients
examined. We demonstrate that the hypermethylation of the silenced allele can be 
reversed by exposure to demethylating agents, which also restores biallelic
expression of GATA2. We show that GATA2(low) AML lack the prototypical R882
mutation in DNMT3A frequently observed in NK-AML patients and that The Cancer
Genome Atlas AML specimens with DNMT3A R882 mutations are characterized by CpG
hypomethylation of GATA2. Finally, we validate that several known missense
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in GATA2 are actually loss-of-function variants, 
which, when combined with ASE, represent the equivalent of homozygous GATA2
mutations. From a broader perspective, this work suggests for the first time that
determinants of ASE likely have a key role in human leukemia.

PMID: 24514424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cell Signal. 2014 May;26(5):1089-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.028. Epub
2014 Feb 5.

GATA-2 inhibits transforming growth factor-ß signaling pathway through
interaction with Smad4.

Dong XM(1), Yin RH(2), Yang Y(3), Feng ZW(2), Ning HM(4), Dong L(5), Zheng WW(2),
Tang LJ(2), Wang J(2), Jia YX(6), Jiang YN(7), Liu ED(7), Chen H(2), Zhan YQ(2), 
Yu M(2), Ge CH(2), Li CY(8), Yang XM(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Department of Pharmaceutical
Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China; State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing
Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing
100850, China. (3)Purdue University, Department of Biological Sciences, 915W.
State Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2054, United States. (4)Department of
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, Affiliated Hospital to Academy of
Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100071, China. (5)Department of
Anesthesiology, General Hospital of Chinese People's Armed Police Forces,
Beijing, China. (6)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. (7)An Hui 
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. (8)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics,
Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Beijing 100850, China; An Hui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic
address: fmmli@163.com. (9)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology,
Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072,
China; State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic
address: xiaomingyang@sina.com.

GATA-2, a member of zinc finger GATA transcription factor family, plays key role 
in the hematopoietic stem cells self-renewal and differentiation. The
transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) signaling pathway is a major signaling
network that controls cell proliferation, differentiation and tumor suppression. 
Here we found that GATA-2 negatively regulated TGF-ß signaling pathway in
Smad4-dependent manner. GATA-2 specifically interacts with Smad4 with its
N-terminal while the zinc finger domain of GATA-2 is essential for negative
regulation of TGFß. Although GATA-2 did not affect the phosphorylation of Smad2/3
and the complex Smad2/3/4 formation in response to TGFß, the DNA binding activity
of Smad4 was decreased significantly by GATA-2 overexpression. Overexpression of 
GATA-2 in K562 cells led to reduced TGFß-induced erythroid differentiation while 
knockdown of GATA-2 enhanced TGFß-induced erythroid differentiation. All these
results suggest that GATA-2 is a novel negative regulator of TGFß signal pathway.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24509415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):799-800. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-539858.

GATA2 deficiency: flesh and blood.

Horwitz MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):809-21.

PMID: 24505062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014 Feb;21(2):74-82. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.86. Epub 2014 Feb
7.

Abnormal gene expression and gene fusion in lung adenocarcinoma with
high-throughput RNA sequencing.

Yang ZH(1), Zheng R(1), Gao Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

To explore the universal law of the abnormal gene expression and the structural
variation of genes related to lung adenocarcinoma, the gene expression profile of
GSE37765 were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database. The
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were analyzed with t-test and NOISeq tool, 
and the core DEGs were screened out by combining with another RNA-seq data
containing totally 77 pairs of samples in 77 patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Moreover, the functional annotation of the core DEGs was performed by using the
Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery following
selection of oncogene and tumor suppressor by combining with tumor suppressor
genes and Cancer Genes database, and motif-finding of core DEGs was performed
with motif-finding algorithm Seqpos. We also used Tophat-fusion tool to further
explore the fusion genes. In total, 850 downregulated DEGs and 206 upregulated
DEGs were screened out in lung adenocarcinoma tissues. Next, we selected 543 core
DEGs, including 401 downregulated and 142 upregulated genes, and vasculature
development (P=1.89E-06) was significantly enriched among downregulated core
genes, as well as mitosis (P=6.26E-04) enriched among upregulated core genes. On 
the basis of the cellular localization analysis of core genes, wnt-1-induced
secreted protein 1 (WISP1) and receptor (G protein-coupled) activity modifying
protein 1 (RAMP1) identified mainly located in extracellular region and
extracellular space. We also screened one oncogene, v-myb avian myeloblastosis
viral oncogene homolog-like 2 (MYBL2). Moreover, transcription factor GATA2 was
mined by motif-finding analysis. Finally, four fusion genes belonged to the human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) family. WISP1, RAMP1, MYBL2 and GATA2 could be potential 
targets of treatment for lung adenocarcinoma and the fusion of HLA family genes
might have important roles in lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 24503571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 30;9(1):e87505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087505. eCollection
2014.

Decreased expression of GATA2 promoted proliferation, migration and invasion of
HepG2 in vitro and correlated with poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li YW(1), Wang JX(1), Yin X(1), Qiu SJ(2), Wu H(1), Liao R(1), Yi Y(1), Xiao
YS(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang BH(1), Fan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory
of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan University), Ministry of Education, 
Shanghai, China. (2)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan University), Ministry
of Education, Shanghai, China ; Biomedical Research Center, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan
University), Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China ; Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: GATA family of transcription factors are critical for organ
development and associated with progression of various cancer types. However,
their expression patterns and prognostic values for hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) are still largely unknown.
METHODS: Expression of GATA transcription factors in HCC cell lines and tissues
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>240) were evaluated by RT-qPCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry.
Cellular proliferation, migration and invasion of HepG2 was evaluated by CCK-8
kit, scratch wound assay and transwell matrigel invasion assay, respectively.
RESULTS: GATA2 expression was decreased in HCC cell lines (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.056 for mRNA,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.040 for protein) and tissues (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.27E-25) compared with normal
hepatocytes. Decreased expression of intratumoral GATA2 protein significantly
correlated with elevated alpha feto-protein (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.7E-05), tumor size >5 cm
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.049), absence of tumor capsule (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002), poor differentiation
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005), presence of tumor thrombi (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005) and advanced TNM stage
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) and was associated with increased recurrence rate and decreased
overall survival rate by univariate (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.6E-04 for TTR, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.7E-04 for OS) and
multivariate analyses (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.63, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.43-0.90, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.012 for TTR;
HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.67, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.47-0.95, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.026 for OS). RNAi-mediated knockdown of
GATA2 expression significantly enhanced proliferation, migration and invasion of 
HepG2 cell in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased expression of hematopoietic factor GATA2 was associated
with poor prognosis of HCC following resection.

PMCID: PMC3907524
PMID: 24498120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):201-3. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.101303.

Collaborating constitutive and somatic genetic events in myeloid malignancies:
ASXL1 mutations in patients with germline GATA2 mutations.

Micol JB(1), Abdel-Wahab O.

Author information: 
(1)abdelwao@mskcc.org.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):276-81.

PMCID: PMC3912947
PMID: 24497555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014 Mar;1310:111-8. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12346. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Familial myelodysplastic syndrome/acute leukemia syndromes: a review and utility 
for translational investigations.

West AH(1), Godley LA, Churpek JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

The familial myelodysplastic (MDS)/acute leukemia (AL) predisposition syndromes
are inherited disorders that lead to significantly increased lifetime risks of
MDS and AL development. At present, four recognized syndromes have Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments--certified testing for their respective
germ-line mutations: telomere biology disorders due to mutation of TERC or TERT, 
familial acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with mutated CEBPA, familial MDS/AML with
mutated GATA2, and familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid
malignancy. These disorders are heterogeneous with regard to their causative
genetic mutations, clinical presentation, and progression to MDS/AL. However, as 
a group, they all share the unique requirement for a high index of clinical
suspicion to allow appropriate genetic counseling, genetic testing, and
mutation-specific clinical management. In addition, translational investigations 
of individuals and families with these syndromes provide a rare opportunity to
understand key pathways underlying susceptibility and progression to MDS/AL and
allow the possibility of novel strategies for the prevention and treatment of
both familial and sporadic forms of MDS/AL.

© 2014 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3961519
PMID: 24467820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(12):7221-7.

Comprehensive bioinformation analysis of the mRNA profile of fascin knockdown in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wu BL(1), Luo LW, Li CQ, Xie JJ, Du ZP, Wu JY, Zhang PX, Xu LY, Li EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, Guangzhou, China E-mail : lyxu@stu.edu.cn, nmli@stu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Fascin, an actin-bundling protein forming actin bundles including
filopodia and stress fibers, is overexpressed in multiple human epithelial
cancers including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Previously we
conducted a microarray experiment to analyze fascin knockdown by RNAi in ESCC.
METHOD: In this study, the differentially expressed genes from mRNA expression
profilomg of fascin knockdown were analyzed by multiple bioinformatics methods
for a comprehensive understanding of the role of fascin.
RESULTS: Gene Ontology enrichment found terms associated with cytoskeleton
organization, including cell adhesion, actin filament binding and actin
cytoskeleton, which might be related to fascin function. Except GO categories,
the differentially expressed genes were annotated by 45 functional categories
from the Functional Annotation Chart of DAVID. Subpathway analysis showed
thirty-nine pathways were disturbed by the differentially expressed genes,
providing more detailed information than traditional pathway enrichment analysis.
Two subpathways derivated from regulation of the actin cytoskeleton were shown.
Promoter analysis results indicated distinguishing sequence patterns and
transcription factors in response to the co-expression of downregulated or
upregulated differentially expressed genes. MNB1A, c-ETS, GATA2 and Prrx2
potentially regulate the transcription of the downregulated gene set, while
Arnt-Ahr, ZNF42, Ubx and TCF11-MafG might co-regulate the upregulated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This multiple bioinformatic analysis helps provide a comprehensive
understanding of the roles of fascin after its knockdown in ESCC.

PMID: 24460279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):451-61.

GATA2 as a potential metastasis-driving gene in prostate cancer.

Chiang YT(1), Wang K, Fazli L, Qi RZ, Gleave ME, Collins CC, Gout PW, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver 
BC, Canada.

Effective treatment for metastatic prostate cancer is critically needed. The
present study was aimed at identifying metastasis-driving genes as potential
targets for therapy (oncotargets). A differential gene expression profile of
metastatic LTL-313H and non-metastatic LTL-313B prostate cancer tissue
xenografts, derived from one patient's specimen, was subjected to integrative
analysis using the Ingenuity Upstream Regulator Analysis tool. Six candidate
master regulatory genes were identified, including GATA2, a gene encoding a
pioneer factor, a special transcription factor facilitating the recruitment of
additional transcription factors. Elevated GATA2 expression in metastatic
prostate cancer tissues correlated with poor patient prognosis. Furthermore,
GATA2 gene silencing in human prostate cancer LNCaP cells led to a marked
reduction in cell migration, tissue invasion, focal adhesion disassembly and to a
dramatic change in cell transcriptomes, indicating that GATA2 plays a critical
role in prostate cancer metastasis. As such, GATA2 could represent a prostate
cancer metastasis-driving gene and a potential target for therapy of metastatic
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3964220
PMID: 24448395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biosci Rep. 2014 Jan 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Oleate promotes differentiation of chicken primary preadipocytes in vitro.

Shang Z, Guo L, Wang N, Shi H, Wang Y, Li H.

In addition to providing energy and constituting cell membrane, fatty acids also 
play an important role in adipocyte differentiation and lipid metabolism. As an
important member of monounsaturated fatty acids, oleate, together with other
components, is widely used to induce chicken preadipocyte differentiation.
However, it is not clear whether oleate alone can induce chicken preadipocyte
differentiation. In the present study, four different treatments were designed to
test this question: basal medium, IDX[1] (insulin, dexamethasone and
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine), oleate, and IDX plus oleate. Cytoplasmic lipid
droplet accumulation and mRNA expression for adipogenesis-related genes were
monitored. After treatment of oleate on chicken preadipocytes, apparent lipid
droplet formation and lipid accumulation were observed, accompanied by increasing
expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and adipocyte 
fatty acid-binding protein (AFABP), but decreasing level of GATA binding protein 
2 (GATA2). In contrast, for cells cultured in basal medium with or without IDX
supplementation, lipid droplet barely occurred. These results suggest that
exogenous oleate alone can act as an inducer of preadipocyte differentiation into
adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3917231
PMID: 24428793  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


222. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):3607-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1382. Epub 2014
Jan 13.

Three-tiered role of the pioneer factor GATA2 in promoting androgen-dependent
gene expression in prostate cancer.

Wu D(1), Sunkel B, Chen Z, Liu X, Ye Z, Li Q, Grenade C, Ke J, Zhang C, Chen H,
Nephew KP, Huang TH, Liu Z, Jin VX, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH 43210, USA,
Ohio State Biochemistry Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China and Medical
Sciences Program and Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

In prostate cancer, androgen receptor (AR) binding and androgen-responsive gene
expression are defined by hormone-independent binding patterns of the pioneer
factors FoxA1 and GATA2. Insufficient evidence of the mechanisms by which GATA2
contributes to this process precludes complete understanding of a key determinant
of tissue-specific AR activity. Our observations suggest that GATA2 facilitates
androgen-responsive gene expression by three distinct modes of action. By
occupying novel binding sites within the AR gene locus, GATA2 positively
regulates AR expression before and after androgen stimulation. Additionally,
GATA2 engages AR target gene enhancers prior to hormone stimulation, producing an
active and accessible chromatin environment via recruitment of the histone
acetyltransferase p300. Finally, GATA2 functions in establishing and/or
sustaining basal locus looping by recruiting the Mediator subunit MED1 in the
absence of androgen. These mechanisms may contribute to the generally positive
role of GATA2 in defining AR genome-wide binding patterns that determine
androgen-responsive gene expression profiles. We also find that GATA2 and FoxA1
exhibit both independent and codependent co-occupancy of AR target gene
enhancers. Identifying these determinants of AR transcriptional activity may
provide a foundation for the development of future prostate cancer therapeutics
that target pioneer factor function.

PMCID: PMC3973339
PMID: 24423874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e84206. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084206.
eCollection 2013.

Adipose stromal cells contain phenotypically distinct adipogenic progenitors
derived from neural crest.

Sowa Y(1), Imura T(2), Numajiri T(1), Takeda K(1), Mabuchi Y(3), Matsuzaki Y(4), 
Nishino K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural University
of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology and Applied Neurobiology,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan ; Department of Basic
Pathology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.
(3)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ;
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Graduate School of Health Care
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ; Institute of
Medical Science, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that adipose-derived stromal/stem cells (ASCs) contain 
phenotypically and functionally heterogeneous subpopulations of cells, but their 
developmental origin and their relative differentiation potential remain elusive.
In the present study, we aimed at investigating how and to what extent the neural
crest contributes to ASCs using Cre-loxP-mediated fate mapping. ASCs harvested
from subcutaneous fat depots of either adult P0-Cre/or Wnt1-Cre/Floxed-reporter
mice contained a few neural crest-derived ASCs (NCDASCs). This subpopulation of
cells was successfully expanded in vitro under standard culture conditions and
their growth rate was comparable to non-neural crest derivatives. Although
NCDASCs were positive for several mesenchymal stem cell markers as non-neural
crest derivatives, they exhibited a unique bipolar or multipolar morphology with 
higher expression of markers for both neural crest progenitors (p75NTR, Nestin,
and Sox2) and preadipocytes (CD24, CD34, S100, Pref-1, GATA2, and C/EBP-delta).
NCDASCs were able to differentiate into adipocytes with high efficiency but their
osteogenic and chondrogenic potential was markedly attenuated, indicating their
commitment to adipogenesis. In vivo, a very small proportion of adipocytes were
originated from the neural crest. In addition, p75NTR-positive neural
crest-derived cells were identified along the vessels within the subcutaneous
adipose tissue, but they were negative for mural and endothelial markers. These
results demonstrate that ASCs contain neural crest-derived adipocyte-restricted
progenitors whose phenotype is distinct from that of non-neural crest
derivatives.

PMCID: PMC3877257
PMID: 24391913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Leuk Res Rep. 2013 Mar 19;2(1):21-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lrr.2013.02.002. eCollection 
2013.

GATA2 zinc finger 2 mutation found in acute myeloid leukemia impairs myeloid
differentiation.

Niimi K(1), Kiyoi H(1), Ishikawa Y(1), Hayakawa F(1), Kurahashi S(1), Kihara
R(1), Tomita A(1), Naoe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

We identified two novel GATA2 mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). One
mutation (p.R308P-GATA2) was a R308P substitution within the zinc finger (ZF)-1
domain, and the other (p.A350_N351ins8-GATA2) was an eight-amino-acid insertion
between A350 and N351 residues within the ZF-2 domain. p.R308P-GATA2 did not
affect DNA-binding and transcriptional activities, while p.A350_N351ins8-GATA2
reduced them, and impaired G-CSF-induced granulocytic differentiation of 32D
cells. Although p.A350_N351ins8-GATA2 did not show a dominant-negative effect
over wild-type (Wt)-GATA2 by the reporter assay, it might be involved in the
pathophysiology of AML by impairing myeloid differentiation because of little
Wt-GATA2 expression in primary AML cells harboring the p.A350_N351ins8 mutation.

PMCID: PMC3850381
PMID: 24371770  [PubMed]


226. Br J Dermatol. 2014 May;170(5):1182-6. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12794.

Generalized verrucosis in a patient with GATA2 deficiency.

West ES(1), Kingsbery MY, Mintz EM, Hsu AP, Holland SM, Rady PL, Tyring SK,
Grossman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University Medical Center, 161 Fort
Washington Avenue 12th Floor, New York, NY, 10032, U.S.A.

Generalized verrucosis is a characteristic of several genetic and
immunodeficiency disorders including epidermodysplasia verruciformis; warts,
hypogammaglobulinaemia, infections and myelokathexis (WHIM) syndrome; warts,
immunodeficiency, lymphoedema and anogenital dysplasia (WILD) syndrome; severe
combined immune deficiency and HIV, among others. In recent years, it has been
consistently recognized in patients with GATA2 deficiency, a novel
immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by monocytopenia, B-cell and natural
killer-cell lymphopenia, and a tendency to develop myeloid leukaemias and
disseminated mycobacterial, human papillomavirus (HPV) and opportunistic fungal
infections. Mutations in GATA2 cause haploinsufficiency and track in families as 
an autosomal dominant immunodeficiency. GATA2 is a transcription factor involved 
in early haematopoietic differentiation and lymphatic and vascular development.
We describe a case of generalized verrucosis with HPV type 57 presenting in a
young man with GATA2 deficiency. GATA2 deficiency is a novel dominant
immunodeficiency that is often recognized later in life and should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of patients with generalized verrucosis.

© 2013 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24359037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):863-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-517151. Epub 2013 Dec
17.

The evolution of cellular deficiency in GATA2 mutation.

Dickinson RE(1), Milne P, Jardine L, Zandi S, Swierczek SI, McGovern N, Cookson
S, Ferozepurwalla Z, Langridge A, Pagan S, Gennery A, Heiskanen-Kosma T,
Hämäläinen S, Seppänen M, Helbert M, Tholouli E, Gambineri E, Reykdal S,
Gottfreðsson M, Thaventhiran JE, Morris E, Hirschfield G, Richter AG, Jolles S,
Bacon CM, Hambleton S, Haniffa M, Bryceson Y, Allen C, Prchal JT, Dick JE, Bigley
V, Collin M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom;

Constitutive heterozygous GATA2 mutation is associated with deafness, lymphedema,
mononuclear cytopenias, infection, myelodysplasia (MDS), and acute myeloid
leukemia. In this study, we describe a cross-sectional analysis of 24 patients
and 6 relatives with 14 different frameshift or substitution mutations of GATA2. 
A pattern of dendritic cell, monocyte, B, and natural killer (NK) lymphoid
deficiency (DCML deficiency) with elevated Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand
(Flt3L) was observed in all 20 patients phenotyped, including patients with
Emberger syndrome, monocytopenia with Mycobacterium avium complex (MonoMAC), and 
MDS. Four unaffected relatives had a normal phenotype indicating that cellular
deficiency may evolve over time or is incompletely penetrant, while 2 developed
subclinical cytopenias or elevated Flt3L. Patients with GATA2 mutation maintained
higher hemoglobin, neutrophils, and platelets and were younger than controls with
acquired MDS and wild-type GATA2. Frameshift mutations were associated with
earlier age of clinical presentation than substitution mutations. Elevated Flt3L,
loss of bone marrow progenitors, and clonal myelopoiesis were early signs of
disease evolution. Clinical progression was associated with increasingly elevated
Flt3L, depletion of transitional B cells, CD56(bright) NK cells, naïve T cells,
and accumulation of terminally differentiated NK and CD8(+) memory T cells. These
studies provide a framework for clinical and laboratory monitoring of patients
with GATA2 mutation and may inform therapeutic decision-making.

PMCID: PMC3916878
PMID: 24345756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Dec 2;12(4):6032-9. doi: 10.4238/2013.December.2.1.

HMGB3 characterization in gastric cancer.

Gong Y(1), Cao Y, Song L, Zhou J, Wang C, Wu B.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Department of Southern Building, PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Gastric cancer is a major health problem worldwide; it is the second most common 
cause of cancer death in the world. Recent studies indicate that the
high-mobility group (HMG) of chromosomal proteins is associated with cancer
progression. However, HMGB3 has been little studied. We analyzed the
co-expression network between HMGB3 and differentially-expressed genes in the
GSE17187 database, identifying the relevant transcription factors, and the
conserved domain of HMGB3 to understand the underlying regulation mechanisms
involved in gastric cancer. Thirty-one relationships between 11
differentially-expressed genes were included in a co-expression network; many of 
these genes have been identified as related to cancer, including TBX5 and TFR2.
Further analysis identified nine transcription factors, these being GATA3, MZF1, 
GATA1, GATA2, SRY, REL, NFYB, NFYC, and NFYA, which could interact with HMGB3 to 
regulate target gene expression and consequently regulate gastric cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. The HMG-box domain was very similar in
various species, with only a few amino acid changes, indicating conserved
functions in HMG-box. This information helps to provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms of HMGB3 in human gastric cancer.

PMID: 24338397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(3):335-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.27507. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

"There will be blood" from fibroblasts.

Pereira CF(1), Lemischka IR(1), Moore K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology; Black Family Stem Cell
Institute; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY USA.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Aug 1;13(2):205-18.

PMCID: PMC3956521
PMID: 24335410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Anim Sci J. 2014 Apr;85(4):388-94. doi: 10.1111/asj.12156. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Expression and in situ localization of GATA4, 5 and 6 mRNAs in ovine conceptuses 
and uterine endometria during the peri-implantation period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In vertebrates, six GATA transcription factors, GATA1 through GATA6, have been
identified and GATA1-3 is known to be involved in hematopoietic developments,
while GATA4-6 play roles in cardiac and endoderm developments. Recently, we and
others have found that GATA2 and GATA3 found in the trophectoderm plays a role in
gene expression specific to this cell type, but GATA4-6 have not been well
characterized in early embryonic developments. Using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and in situ hybridization, we examined the expression of
GATA4, 5 and 6 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in ovine conceptuses and uteri during the
peri-implantation period. In ovine conceptuses, GATA4, 5 and 6 transcripts were
present on days 15, 17 and 21 (day 0<U+2009>=<U+2009>day of mating), and high GATA5 and 6 mRNAs
were found on day 21, most of which were localized in the trophectoderm and
endoderm. Moreover, minute and substantial GATA4 and 5 mRNAs were found in days
15 and 21 uterine endometria, respectively. Increase in GATA4-6 transcripts in
day 21 uteri indicates that in addition to GATA1-3, GATA4-6 may also play a
potentially novel role in the development of ovine trophectoderm, endoderm and/or
uterine endometria following conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24329758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Immunol Lett. 2014 Oct;161(2):222-5. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.11.018. Epub 2013 
Dec 4.

Primary immunodeficiencies appearing as combined lymphopenia, neutropenia, and
monocytopenia.

Dotta L(1), Badolato R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Institute of Molecular
Medicine "Angelo Nocivelli", University of Brescia, c/o Spedali Civili, 25123
Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Institute of
Molecular Medicine "Angelo Nocivelli", University of Brescia, c/o Spedali Civili,
25123 Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: badolato@med.unibs.it.

Recurrent or prolonged severe infections associated to panleukopenia strongly
suggest primary immune disorders. In recent years, new immunodeficiency syndromes
turned up: besides the importance of continuous clinical characterization
throughout added reports, the phenotype can easily lead to diagnosis of known
rare entities. Our purpose is to review main emerging genetic syndromes featuring
lymphopenia combined to neutropenia and/or monocytopenia in order to facilitate
diagnosis of rare primary immune deficiencies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Exp Med. 2013 Dec 16;210(13):2843-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130751. Epub 2013 Dec 
2.

Gata2 is required for HSC generation and survival.

de Pater E(1), Kaimakis P, Vink CS, Yokomizo T, Yamada-Inagawa T, van der Linden 
R, Kartalaei PS, Camper SA, Speck N, Dzierzak E.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus Medical Center, Erasmus Stem Cell Institute, 3000 CA Rotterdam,
Netherlands.

Knowledge of the key transcription factors that drive hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) generation is of particular importance for current hematopoietic
regenerative approaches and reprogramming strategies. Whereas GATA2 has long been
implicated as a hematopoietic transcription factor and its dysregulated
expression is associated with human immunodeficiency syndromes and vascular
integrity, it is as yet unknown how GATA2 functions in the generation of HSCs.
HSCs are generated from endothelial cells of the major embryonic vasculature
(aorta, vitelline, and umbilical arteries) and are found in intra-aortic
hematopoietic clusters. In this study, we find that GATA2 function is essential
for the generation of HSCs during the stage of endothelial-to-hematopoietic cell 
transition. Specific deletion of Gata2 in Vec (Vascular Endothelial
Cadherin)-expressing endothelial cells results in a deficiency of long-term
repopulating HSCs and intra-aortic cluster cells. By specific deletion of Gata2
in Vav-expressing hematopoietic cells (after HSC generation), we further show
that GATA2 is essential for HSC survival. This is in contrast to the known
activity of the RUNX1 transcription factor, which functions only in the
generation of HSCs, and highlights the unique requirement for GATA2 function in
HSCs throughout all developmental stages.

PMCID: PMC3865477
PMID: 24297996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Exp Med. 2013 Dec 16;210(13):2833-42. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130733. Epub 2013 Dec 
2.

Gata2 cis-element is required for hematopoietic stem cell generation in the
mammalian embryo.

Gao X(1), Johnson KD, Chang YI, Boyer ME, Dewey CN, Zhang J, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, and 2
McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, 3 UW-Madison Blood Research Program; and 
4 Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705.

The generation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from hemogenic endothelium
within the aorta, gonad, mesonephros (AGM) region of the mammalian embryo is
crucial for development of the adult hematopoietic system. We described a
deletion of a Gata2 cis-element (+9.5) that depletes fetal liver HSCs, is lethal 
at E13-14 of embryogenesis, and is mutated in an immunodeficiency that progresses
to myelodysplasia/leukemia. Here, we demonstrate that the +9.5 element enhances
Gata2 expression and is required to generate long-term repopulating HSCs in the
AGM. Deletion of the +9.5 element abrogated the capacity of hemogenic endothelium
to generate HSC-containing clusters in the aorta. Genomic analyses indicated that
the +9.5 element regulated a rich ensemble of genes that control hemogenic
endothelium and HSCs, as well as genes not implicated in hematopoiesis. These
results reveal a mechanism that controls stem cell emergence from hemogenic
endothelium to establish the adult hematopoietic system.

PMCID: PMC3865483
PMID: 24297994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Biol Open. 2013 Oct 7;2(11):1229-38. doi: 10.1242/bio.20136296. eCollection 2013.

Single site-specific integration targeting coupled with embryonic stem cell
differentiation provides a high-throughput alternative to in vivo enhancer
analyses.

Wilkinson AC(1), Goode DK, Cheng YH, Dickel DE, Foster S, Sendall T, Tijssen MR, 
Sanchez MJ, Pennacchio LA, Kirkpatrick AM, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem
Cell Institute, University of Cambridge , Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY , UK.

Comprehensive analysis of cis-regulatory elements is key to understanding the
dynamic gene regulatory networks that control embryonic development. While
transgenic animals represent the gold standard assay, their generation is costly,
entails significant animal usage, and in utero development complicates
time-course studies. As an alternative, embryonic stem (ES) cells can readily be 
differentiated in a process that correlates well with developing embryos. Here,
we describe a highly effective platform for enhancer assays using an Hsp68/Venus 
reporter cassette that targets to the Hprt locus in mouse ES cells. This platform
combines the flexibility of Gateway® cloning, live cell trackability of a
fluorescent reporter, low background and the advantages of single copy insertion 
into a defined genomic locus. We demonstrate the successful recapitulation of
tissue-specific enhancer activity for two cardiac and two haematopoietic
enhancers. In addition, we used this assay to dissect the functionality of the
highly conserved Ets/Ets/Gata motif in the Scl+19 enhancer, which revealed that
the Gata motif is not required for initiation of enhancer activity. We further
confirmed that Gata2 is not required for endothelial activity of the Scl+19
enhancer using Gata2(-/-) Scl+19 transgenic embryos. We have therefore
established a valuable toolbox to study gene regulatory networks with broad
applicability.

PMCID: PMC3828770
PMID: 24244860  [PubMed]


235. Free Radic Res. 2014 Mar;48(3):292-302. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2013.865840. Epub
2014 Jan 7.

Erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 erythroleukemic cells by
monochloramine.

Ogino T(1), Kobuchi H, Fujita H, Matsukawa A, Utsumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing Science, Faculty of Health and Welfare, Okayama
Prefectural University , Soja , Japan.

The induction of leukemic cell differentiation is a hopeful therapeutic modality.
We studied the effects of monochloramine (NH2Cl) on erythroleukemic K562 cell
differentiation, and compared the effects observed with those of U0126 and
staurosporine, which are known inducers of erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation, respectively. CD235 (glycophorin) expression, a marker of
erythroid differentiation, was significantly increased by NH2Cl and U0126, along 
with an increase in cd235 mRNA levels. Other erythroid markers such as <U+03B3>-globin
and CD71 (transferrin receptor) were also increased by NH2Cl and U0126. In
contrast, CD61 (integrin ß3) and CD42b (GP1ba) expression, markers of
megakaryocytic differentiation, was increased by staurosporine, but did not
change significantly by NH2Cl and U0126. NH2Cl retarded cell proliferation
without a marked loss of viability. When ERK phosphorylation (T202/Y204) and
CD235 expression were compared using various chemicals, a strong negative
correlation was observed (r = -0.76). Paradoxically, NH2Cl and staurosporine, but
not U0126, induced large cells with multiple or lobulated nuclei, which was
characteristic to megakaryocytes. NH2Cl increased the mRNA levels of gata1 and
scl, decreased that of gata2, and did not change those of pu.1 and klf1. The
changes observed in mRNA expression were different from those of U0126 or
staurosporine. These results suggest that NH2Cl induces the bidirectional
differentiation of K562. Oxidative stress may be effective in inducing leukemic
cell differentiation.

PMID: 24237253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):809-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528. Epub 2013 Nov
13.

GATA2 deficiency: a protean disorder of hematopoiesis, lymphatics, and immunity.

Spinner MA(1), Sanchez LA, Hsu AP, Shaw PA, Zerbe CS, Calvo KR, Arthur DC, Gu W, 
Gould CM, Brewer CC, Cowen EW, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zelazny AM, Daub
JR, Spalding CD, Claypool RJ, Giri NK, Alter BP, Mace EM, Orange JS,
Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):799-800.

Haploinsufficiency of the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA2 underlies
monocytopenia and mycobacterial infections; dendritic cell, monocyte, B, and
natural killer (NK) lymphoid deficiency; familial myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS)/acute myeloid leukemia (AML); and Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema
with MDS). A comprehensive examination of the clinical features of GATA2
deficiency is currently lacking. We reviewed the medical records of 57 patients
with GATA2 deficiency evaluated at the National Institutes of Health from January
1, 1992, to March 1, 2013, and categorized mutations as missense, null, or
regulatory to identify genotype-phenotype associations. We identified a broad
spectrum of disease: hematologic (MDS 84%, AML 14%, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia 8%), infectious (severe viral 70%, disseminated mycobacterial 53%, and
invasive fungal infections 16%), pulmonary (diffusion 79% and ventilatory defects
63%, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis 18%, pulmonary arterial hypertension 9%),
dermatologic (warts 53%, panniculitis 30%), neoplastic (human papillomavirus+
tumors 35%, Epstein-Barr virus+ tumors 4%), vascular/lymphatic (venous thrombosis
25%, lymphedema 11%), sensorineural hearing loss 76%, miscarriage 33%, and
hypothyroidism 14%. Viral infections and lymphedema were more common in
individuals with null mutations (P = .038 and P = .006, respectively).
Monocytopenia, B, NK, and CD4 lymphocytopenia correlated with the presence of
disease (P < .001). GATA2 deficiency unites susceptibility to MDS/AML,
immunodeficiency, pulmonary disease, and vascular/lymphatic dysfunction. Early
genetic diagnosis is critical to direct clinical management, preventive care, and
family screening.

PMCID: PMC3916876
PMID: 24227816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Apr;71(8):1395-415. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1501-3. Epub 
2013 Nov 7.

Mechanisms regulating GABAergic neuron development.

Achim K(1), Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany,
kaia.achim@embl.de.

Neurons using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) as their neurotransmitter are the
main inhibitory neurons in the mature central nervous system (CNS) and show great
variation in their form and function. GABAergic neurons are produced in all of
the main domains of the CNS, where they develop from discrete regions of the
neuroepithelium. Here, we review the gene expression and regulatory mechanisms
controlling the main steps of GABAergic neuron development: early patterning of
the proliferative neuroepithelium, production of postmitotic neural precursors,
establishment of their identity and migration. By comparing the molecular
regulation of these events across CNS, we broadly identify three regions
utilizing distinct molecular toolkits for GABAergic fate determination:
telencephalon-anterior diencephalon (DLX2 type), posterior diencephalon-midbrain 
(GATA2 type) and hindbrain-spinal cord (PTF1A and TAL1 types). Similarities and
differences in the molecular regulatory mechanisms reveal the core determinants
of a GABAergic neuron as well as provide insights into generation of the vast
diversity of these neurons.

PMID: 24196748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. World J Stem Cells. 2013 Oct 26;5(4):205-16. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v5.i4.205.

Human adipose tissue contains erythroid progenitors expressing fetal hemoglobin.

Navarro A(1), Carbonell-Uberos F, Marín S, Miñana MD.

Author information: 
(1)Amparo Navarro, María Dolores Miñana, Regenerative Medicine Laboratory,
Fundación Hospital General Universitario, 46014 Valencia, Spain.

AIM: To investigate the origin of hematopoietic progenitors contained in the
stromal vascular fraction (SVF) of human adipose tissue.
METHODS: Tissue samples obtained from lipectomies were subjected to enzymatic
digestion with collagenase to obtain a single-cell suspension. The centrifuged
cell pellet, termed SVF, was separated immunomagnetically into CD45(+) and
CD45(-) cells and cultured in serum-free medium containing hematopoietic
cytokines. The freshly isolated and cultured cells were evaluated to determine
their ability to form hematopoietic colony-forming units in clonogenic assays and
for the expression of certain hematopoietic transcription factors by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction; the gene expression level was compared
to that in CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells from cord blood (CB) and adult 
peripheral blood (PB). To characterize erythroid progenitors, burst-forming
units-erythroid (BFU-E) were developed in a semisolid medium under different
culture conditions, and the hemoglobin composition and globin gene expression in 
the erythroid colonies were determined.
RESULTS: The transcription factors SCL/TAL1, RUNX1, RUNX2 and GATA2 were
expressed in both the CD45(+) and CD45(-) SVF populations; however, in contrast
to our observations in the CD34(+) cells from CB and adult PB, GATA1 was not
detected. Nevertheless, GATA1 could be detected in the SVF cells after seven days
in culture, whereas its expression was upregulated in the CB CD34(+) cells. The
analysis of BFU-E-derived colonies revealed that virtually all erythroid cells
produced by SVF cells expressed fetal hemoglobin, and the <U+03B3>-globin mRNA levels
ranged between those obtained in the adult- and neonatal-derived erythroid cells.
Moreover, the SVF-derived erythroid cells synthesized similar levels of a- and
ß-globin mRNA, whereas the a-globin transcript levels were consistently higher
those of ß-globin in the cells derived from CB or PB CD34(+) cells. Furthermore, 
although the cellular distribution of hemoglobin in the erythroid cells derived
from the CD34(+) cells obtained from hematopoietic tissues was dependent on the
presence or absence of serum in the culture medium, this did not affect the
SVF-derived erythroid cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that hematopoietic progenitors in SVF have
molecular and functional features that differ from those exhibited by circulating
progenitors, suggesting the possibility of a different origin.

PMCID: PMC3812524
PMID: 24179608  [PubMed]


239. Biol Open. 2013 Aug 9;2(10):990-7. doi: 10.1242/bio.20135041. eCollection 2013.

The role of Tal2 and Tal1 in the differentiation of midbrain GABAergic neuron
precursors.

Achim K(1), Peltopuro P, Lahti L, Tsai HH, Zachariah A, Astrand M, Salminen M,
Rowitch D, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of 
Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland.

Midbrain- and hindbrain-derived GABAergic interneurons are critical for
regulation of sleep, respiratory, sensory-motor and motivational processes, and
they are implicated in human neurological disorders. However, the precise
mechanisms that underlie generation of GABAergic neuron diversity in the
midbrain-hindbrain region are poorly understood. Here, we show unique and
overlapping requirements for the related bHLH proteins Tal1 and Tal2 in GABAergic
neurogenesis in the midbrain. We show that Tal2 and Tal1 are specifically and
sequentially activated during midbrain GABAergic neurogenesis. Similar to Gata2, 
a post-mitotic selector of the midbrain GABAergic neuron identity, Tal2
expression is activated very early during GABAergic neuron differentiation.
Although the expression of Tal2 and Gata2 genes are independent of each other,
Tal2 is important for normal midbrain GABAergic neurogenesis, possibly as a
partner of Gata2. In the absence of Tal2, the majority of midbrain GABAergic
neurons switch to a glutamatergic-like phenotype. In contrast, Tal1 expression is
activated in a Gata2 and Tal2 dependent fashion in the more mature midbrain
GABAergic neuron precursors, but Tal1 alone is not required for GABAergic neuron 
differentiation from the midbrain neuroepithelium. However, inactivation of both 
Tal2 and Tal1 in the developing midbrain suggests that the two factors co-operate
to guide GABAergic neuron differentiation in a specific ventro-lateral midbrain
domain. The observed similarities and differences between Tal1/Tal2 and Gata2
mutants suggest both co-operative and unique roles for these factors in
determination of midbrain GABAergic neuron identities.

PMCID: PMC3798194
PMID: 24167708  [PubMed]


240. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Sep;4(6):257-66. doi: 10.1159/000354097. Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Mutations in the VEGFR3 signaling pathway explain 36% of familial lymphedema.

Mendola A, Schlögel MJ, Ghalamkarpour A, Irrthum A, Nguyen HL, Fastré E, Bygum A,
van der Vleuten C, Fagerberg C, Baselga E, Quere I, Mulliken JB, Boon LM,
Brouillard P, Vikkula M; Lymphedema Research Group.

Lymphedema is caused by dysfunction of lymphatic vessels, leading to disabling
swelling that occurs mostly on the extremities. Lymphedema can be either primary 
(congenital) or secondary (acquired). Familial primary lymphedema commonly
segregates in an autosomal dominant or recessive manner. It can also occur in
combination with other clinical features. Nine mutated genes have been identified
in different isolated or syndromic forms of lymphedema. However, the prevalence
of primary lymphedema that can be explained by these genetic alterations is
unknown. In this study, we investigated 7 of these putative genes. We screened 78
index patients from families with inherited lymphedema for mutations in FLT4,
GJC2, FOXC2, SOX18, GATA2, CCBE1, and PTPN14. Altogether, we discovered 28
mutations explaining 36% of the cases. Additionally, 149 patients with sporadic
primary lymphedema were screened for FLT4, FOXC2, SOX18, CCBE1, and PTPN14.
Twelve mutations were found that explain 8% of the cases. Still unidentified is
the genetic cause of primary lymphedema in 64% of patients with a family history 
and 92% of sporadic cases. Identification of those genes is important for
understanding of etiopathogenesis, stratification of treatments and generation of
disease models. Interestingly, most of the proteins that are encoded by the genes
mutated in primary lymphedema seem to act in a single functional pathway
involving VEGFR3 signaling. This underscores the important role this pathway
plays in lymphatic development and function and suggests that the unknown genes
also have a role.

PMCID: PMC3776465
PMID: 24167460  [PubMed]


241. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 16;8(10):e77731. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077731.
eCollection 2013.

Massively parallel sequencing reveals an accumulation of de novo mutations and an
activating mutation of LPAR1 in a patient with metastatic neuroblastoma.

Wei JS(1), Johansson P, Chen L, Song YK, Tolman C, Li S, Hurd L, Patidar R, Wen
X, Badgett TC, Cheuk AT, Marshall JC, Steeg PS, Vaqué Díez JP, Yu Y, Gutkind JS, 
Khan J.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenomics Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, Advanced Technology Center,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Neuroblastoma is one of the most genomically heterogeneous childhood malignances 
studied to date, and the molecular events that occur during the course of the
disease are not fully understood. Genomic studies in neuroblastoma have showed
only a few recurrent mutations and a low somatic mutation burden. However, none
of these studies has examined the mutations arising during the course of disease,
nor have they systemically examined the expression of mutant genes. Here we
performed genomic analyses on tumors taken during a 3.5 years disease course from
a neuroblastoma patient (bone marrow biopsy at diagnosis, adrenal primary tumor
taken at surgical resection, and a liver metastasis at autopsy). Whole genome
sequencing of the index liver metastasis identified 44 non-synonymous somatic
mutations in 42 genes (0.85 mutation/MB) and a large hemizygous deletion in the
ATRX gene which has been recently reported in neuroblastoma. Of these 45 somatic 
alterations, 15 were also detected in the primary tumor and bone marrow biopsy,
while the other 30 were unique to the index tumor, indicating accumulation of de 
novo mutations during therapy. Furthermore, transcriptome sequencing on the 3
tumors demonstrated only 3 out of the 15 commonly mutated genes (LPAR1, GATA2,
and NUFIP1) had high level of expression of the mutant alleles, suggesting
potential oncogenic driver roles of these mutated genes. Among them, the
druggable G-protein coupled receptor LPAR1 was highly expressed in all tumors.
Cells expressing the LPAR1 R163W mutant demonstrated a significantly increased
motility through elevated Rho signaling, but had no effect on growth. Therefore, 
this study highlights the need for multiple biopsies and sequencing during
progression of a cancer and combinatorial DNA and RNA sequencing approach for
systematic identification of expressed driver mutations.

PMCID: PMC3797724
PMID: 24147068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Dec;13(6):589-95. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000011.

Inborn errors of the development of human natural killer cells.

Jouanguy E(1), Gineau L, Cottineau J, Béziat V, Vivier E, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)aLaboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM
U980, Necker Hospital for Sick Children bParis Descartes University, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France cSt. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA dCenter
for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden eCentre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, INSERM
U1104 fCNRS UMR7280 gAix Marseille Université, UM2 hService d'Immunologie,
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital de la Conception, Marseille 
iPediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, Necker Hospital, Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Inborn errors of human natural killer (NK) cells may affect
the development of these cells, their function, or both. There are two broad
categories of genetic defects of NK cell development, depending on whether the
deficiency is apparently specific to NK cells or clearly affects multiple
hematopoietic lineages. We review here recent progress in the genetic dissection 
of these NK deficiencies (NKDs).
RECENT FINDINGS: Patients with severe combined immunodeficiencies bearing
mutations of adenosine deaminase, adenylate kinase 2, interleukin-2 receptor
gamma chain, and Janus kinase 3 genes present NKDs and are prone to a broad range
of infections. Patients with GATA binding protein 2 deficiency are susceptible to
both mycobacterial and viral infections, and display NKDs and a lack of
monocytes. Rare patients with mini chromosomal maintenance 4 deficiency display
an apparently selective NKD associated with viral infections, but they also
display various nonhematopoietic phenotypes, including adrenal insufficiency and 
growth retardation.
SUMMARY: These studies have initiated a genetic dissection of the development of 
human NK cells. Further studies are warranted, including the search for genetic
causes of NKD in particular. This research may lead to the discovery of molecules
specifically controlling the development of NK cells and to improvements in our
understanding of the hitherto elusive function of these cells in humans.

PMCID: PMC4077347
PMID: 24135998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Dec 5;13(6):754-68. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.09.003. Epub
2013 Oct 10.

Dynamic analysis of gene expression and genome-wide transcription factor binding 
during lineage specification of multipotent progenitors.

May G(1), Soneji S, Tipping AJ, Teles J, McGowan SJ, Wu M, Guo Y, Fugazza C,
Brown J, Karlsson G, Pina C, Olariu V, Taylor S, Tenen DG, Peterson C, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London WC1E 
6BT, UK; Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

We used the paradigmatic GATA-PU.1 axis to explore, at the systems level, dynamic
relationships between transcription factor (TF) binding and global gene
expression programs as multipotent cells differentiate. We combined global
ChIP-seq of GATA1, GATA2, and PU.1 with expression profiling during
differentiation to erythroid and neutrophil lineages. Our analysis reveals (1)
differential complexity of sequence motifs bound by GATA1, GATA2, and PU.1; (2)
the scope and interplay of GATA1 and GATA2 programs within, and during
transitions between, different cell compartments, and the extent of their
hard-wiring by DNA motifs; (3) the potential to predict gene expression
trajectories based on global associations between TF-binding data and target gene
expression; and (4) how dynamic modeling of DNA-binding and gene expression data 
can be used to infer regulatory logic of TF circuitry. This rubric exemplifies
the utility of this cross-platform resource for deconvoluting the complexity of
transcriptional programs controlling stem/progenitor cell fate in hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3878573
PMID: 24120743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Dec;27(12):2028-40. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1098. Epub 2013 Oct
9.

Androgen regulation of the TMPRSS2 gene and the effect of a SNP in an androgen
response element.

Clinckemalie L(1), Spans L, Dubois V, Laurent M, Helsen C, Joniau S, Claessens F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1, PO Box 901, Herestraat 49, B-3000
Leuven, Belgium. frank.claessens@med.kuleuven.be.

More than 50% of prostate cancers have undergone a genomic reorganization that
juxtaposes the androgen-regulated promoter of TMPRSS2 and the protein coding
parts of several ETS oncogenes. These gene fusions lead to prostate-specific and 
androgen-induced ETS expression and are associated with aggressive lesions, poor 
prognosis, and early-onset prostate cancer. In this study, we showed that an
enhancer at 13 kb upstream of the TMPRSS2 transcription start site is crucial for
the androgen regulation of the TMPRSS2 gene when tested in bacterial artificial
chromosomal vectors. Within this enhancer, we identified the exact androgen
receptor binding sequence. This newly identified androgen response element is
situated next to two binding sites for the pioneer factor GATA2, which were
identified by DNase I footprinting. Both the androgen response element and the
GATA-2 binding sites are involved in the enhancer activity. Importantly, a single
nucleotide polymorphism (rs8134378) within this androgen response element reduces
binding and transactivation by the androgen receptor. The presence of this SNP
might have implications on the expression and/or formation levels of TMPRSS2
fusions, because both have been shown to be influenced by androgens.

PMID: 24109594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Dec;27(12):2013-27. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1161. Epub 2013 Oct
7.

Cell-specific actions of a human LHX3 gene enhancer during pituitary and spinal
cord development.

Park S(1), Mullen RD, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)PhD, Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
LD222, 402 North Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5120.
srhodes@iupui.edu.

The LIM class of homeodomain protein 3 (LHX3) transcription factor is essential
for pituitary gland and nervous system development in mammals. In humans,
mutations in the LHX3 gene underlie complex pediatric syndromes featuring
deficits in anterior pituitary hormones and defects in the nervous system. The
mechanisms that control temporal and spatial expression of the LHX3 gene are
poorly understood. The proximal promoters of the human LHX3 gene are insufficient
to guide expression in vivo and downstream elements including a conserved
enhancer region appear to play a role in tissue-specific expression in the
pituitary and nervous system. Here we characterized the activity of this
downstream enhancer region in regulating gene expression at the cellular level
during development. Human LHX3 enhancer-driven Cre reporter transgenic mice were 
generated to facilitate studies of enhancer actions. The downstream LHX3 enhancer
primarily guides gene transcription in a-glycoprotein subunit -expressing cells
secreting the TSHß, LHß, or FSHß hormones and expressing the GATA2 and
steroidogenic factor 1 transcription factors. In the developing nervous system,
the enhancer serves as a targeting module active in V2a interneurons. These
results demonstrate that the downstream LHX3 enhancer is important in specific
endocrine and neural cell types but also indicate that additional regulatory
elements are likely involved in LHX3 gene expression. Furthermore, these studies 
revealed significant gonadotrope cell heterogeneity during pituitary development,
providing insights into the cellular physiology of this key reproductive
regulatory cell. The human LHX3 enhancer-driven Cre reporter transgenic mice also
provide a valuable tool for further developmental studies of cell determination
and differentiation in the pituitary and nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3857196
PMID: 24100213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):276-81. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.090217. Epub
2013 Sep 27.

Acquired ASXL1 mutations are common in patients with inherited GATA2 mutations
and correlate with myeloid transformation.

West RR(1), Hsu AP, Holland SM, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)westrob@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):201-3.

Inherited or sporadic heterozygous mutations in the transcription factor GATA2
lead to a clinical syndrome characterized by non-tuberculous mycobacterial and
other opportunistic infections, a severe deficiency in monocytes, B cells and
natural killer cells, and progression from a hypocellular myelodysplastic
syndrome to myeloid leukemias. To identify acquired somatic mutations associated 
with myeloid transformation in patients with GATA2 mutations, we sequenced the
region of the ASXL1 gene previously associated with transformation from
myelodysplasia to myeloid leukemia. Somatic, heterozygous ASXL1 mutations were
identified in 14/48 (29%) of patients with GATA2 deficiency, including four out
of five patients who developed a proliferative chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
Although patients with GATA2 mutations had a similarly high incidence of myeloid 
transformation when compared to previously described patients with ASXL1
mutations, GATA2 deficiency patients with acquired ASXL1 mutation were
considerably younger, almost exclusively female, and had a high incidence of
transformation to a proliferative chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. These patients
may benefit from allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation before the
development of acute myeloid leukemia or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
(ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT00018044, NCT00404560, NCT00001467,
NCT00923364.).

PMCID: PMC3912957
PMID: 24077845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 11;440(1):184-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.061. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Mediator subunit MED1 is a T3-dependent and T3-independent coactivator on the
thyrotropin ß gene promoter.

Matsui K(1), Oda K, Mizuta S, Ishino R, Urahama N, Hasegawa N, Roeder RG, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Division of Medical Biophysics, Kobe University
Graduate School of Health Sciences, 7-10-2 Tomogaoka, Suma-ku, Kobe 654-0142,
Japan.

The MED1 subunit of the Mediator transcriptional coregulator complex is a nuclear
receptor-specific coactivator. A negative feedback mechanism of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, or thyrotropin) expression in the thyrotroph in
the presence of triiodothyronine (T3) is employed by liganded thyroid hormone
receptor ß (TRß) on the TSHß gene promoter, where conventional histone-modifying 
coactivators act as corepressors. We now provide evidence that MED1 is a
ligand-dependent positive cofactor on this promoter. TSHß gene transcription was 
attenuated in MED1 mutant mice in which the nuclear receptor-binding ability of
MED1 was specifically disrupted. MED1 stimulated GATA2- and Pit1-mediated TSHß
gene promoter activity in a ligand-independent manner in cultured cells. MED1
also stimulated transcription from the TSHß gene promoter in a T3-dependent
manner. The transcription was further enhanced when the T3-dependent corepressors
SRC1, SRC2, and HDAC2 were downregulated. Hence, MED1 is a T3-dependent and
-independent coactivator on the TSHß gene promoter.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4388257
PMID: 24055033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Jul 25;1(2):166-82. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.06.005.
eCollection 2013.

Enhanced hemangioblast generation and improved vascular repair and regeneration
from embryonic stem cells by defined transcription factors.

Liu F(1), Bhang SH, Arentson E, Sawada A, Kim CK, Kang I, Yu J, Sakurai N, Kim
SH, Yoo JJ, Kim P, Pahng SH, Xia Y, Solnica-Krezel L, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The fetal liver kinase 1 (FLK-1)(+) hemangioblast can generate hematopoietic,
endothelial, and smooth muscle cells (SMCs). ER71/ETV2, GATA2, and SCL form a
core transcriptional network in hemangioblast development. Transient coexpression
of these three factors during mesoderm formation stage in mouse embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) robustly enhanced hemangioblast generation by activating bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) and FLK-1 signaling while inhibiting
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, WNT signaling, and cardiac output. Moreover,
etsrp, gata2, and scl inhibition converted hematopoietic field of the zebrafish
anterior lateral plate mesoderm to cardiac. FLK-1(+) hemangioblasts generated by 
transient coexpression of the three factors (ER71-GATA2-SCL [EGS]-induced
FLK-1(+)) effectively produced hematopoietic, endothelial, and SMCs in culture
and in vivo. Importantly, EGS-induced FLK-1(+) hemangioblasts, when codelivered
with mesenchymal stem cells as spheroids, were protected from apoptosis and
generated functional endothelial cells and SMCs in ischemic mouse hindlimbs,
resulting in improved blood perfusion and limb salvage. ESC-derived, EGS-induced 
FLK-1(+) hemangioblasts could provide an attractive cell source for future
hematopoietic and vascular repair and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3757752
PMID: 24052951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(1):442-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt848. Epub 2013 Sep 
18.

A regulatory circuit comprising GATA1/2 switch and microRNA-27a/24 promotes
erythropoiesis.

Wang F(1), Zhu Y, Guo L, Dong L, Liu H, Yin H, Zhang Z, Li Y, Liu C, Ma Y, Song
W, He A, Wang Q, Wang L, Zhang J, Li J, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) & Peking Union Medical College (PUMC), Beijing
100005, PR China, Zebrafish Core Facility, State Key Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Sciences, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS & PUMC, Beijing
100005, PR China, Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Computation and
Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, PR China,
Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China and
Cancer Center, The General Hospital of the People's Liberation Army, Beijing
100853, PR China.

Transcriptional networks orchestrate complex developmental processes, and such
networks are commonly instigated by master regulators for development. By now,
considerable progress has been made in elucidating GATA factor-dependent genetic 
networks that control red blood cell development. Here we reported that GATA-1
and GATA-2 co-regulated the expression of two microRNA genes, microRNA-27a and
microRNA-24, with critical roles in regulating erythroid differentiation. In
general, GATA-2 occupied the miR-27a24 promoter and repressed their
transcription in immature erythroid progenitor cells. As erythropoiesis
proceeded, GATA-1 directly activated miR-27a24 transcription, and this involved 
a GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 from chromatin, a process termed 'GATA
switch'. Furthermore, the mature miR-27a and miR-24 cooperatively inhibited
GATA-2 translation and favoured the occupancy switch from GATA-2 to GATA-1, thus 
completing a positive feedback loop to promote erythroid maturation. In line with
the essential role of GATA factors, ectopic expression of miR-27a or miR-24
promoted erythropoiesis in human primary CD34+ haematopoietic progenitor cells
and mice, whereas attenuated miR-27 or miR-24 level led to impaired erythroid
phenotypes in haematopoietic progenitor cells and zebrafish. Taken together,
these data integrated micro RNA expression and function into GATA factor
coordinated networks and provided mechanistic insight into a regulatory circuit
that comprised GATA1/2 switch and miR-27a/24 in erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3874166
PMID: 24049083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Br J Haematol. 2014 Jan;164(1):142-5. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12559. Epub 2013 Sep 14.

Mutations of the GATA2 and CEBPA genes in paediatric acute myeloid leukaemia.

Shiba N(1), Funato M, Ohki K, Park MJ, Mizushima Y, Adachi S, Kobayashi M,
Kinoshita A, Sotomatsu M, Arakawa H, Tawa A, Horibe K, Tsukimoto I, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology/Oncology, Gunma Children's Medical Centre,
Shibukawa, Japan; Department of Paediatrics, Gunma University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 24033149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Blood. 2013 Nov 14;122(20):3450-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-476911. Epub 2013 
Sep 10.

The Gata1 5' region harbors distinct cis-regulatory modules that direct gene
activation in erythroid cells and gene inactivation in HSCs.

Takai J(1), Moriguchi T, Suzuki M, Yu L, Ohneda K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Nov 14;122(20):3391-2.

GATA1 is a master regulator of hematopoietic differentiation, but Gata1
expression is inactivated in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Using a bacterial
artificial chromosome containing the Gata1 gene modified with green fluorescent
protein (GFP) reporter, we explored the function of the 3.7-kb Gata1 upstream
region (GdC region) that harbors 3 core cis-elements: Gata1 hematopoietic
enhancer, double GATA-motif, and CACCC-motif. Transgenic GFP expression directed 
by the Gata1-BAC faithfully recapitulated the endogenous Gata1 expression
pattern. However, deletion of the GdC-region eliminated reporter expression in
all hematopoietic cells. To test whether the combination of the core cis-elements
represents the regulatory function of the GdC-region, we replaced the region with
a 659-bp minigene that linked the three cis-elements (MG-GFP). The GFP reporter
expression directed by the MG-GFP BAC fully recapitulated the
erythroid-megakaryocytic Gata1 expression. However, the GFP expression was
aberrantly increased in the HSCs and was associated with decreases in DNA
methylation and abundant GATA2 binding to the transgenic MG-GFP allele. The
3.2-kb sequences interspaced between the Gata1 hematopoietic enhancer and the
double GATA-motif were able to recruit DNA methyltransferase 1, thereby exerting 
a cis-repressive function in the HSC-like cell line. These results indicate that 
the 3.2-kb interspacing sequences inactivate Gata1 by maintaining DNA-methylation
in the HSCs.

PMID: 24021675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 7;51(3):313-24. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0089. Print 2013
Dec.

GATA augments GNRH-mediated increases in Adcyap1 gene expression in pituitary
gonadotrope cells.

Thomas RL(1), Crawford NM, Grafer CM, Zheng W, Halvorson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-9032, USA.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide 1 (PACAP or ADCYAP1) regulates
gonadotropin biosynthesis and secretion, both alone and in conjunction with GNRH.
Initially identified as a hypothalamic-releasing factor, ADCYAP1 subsequently has
been identified in pituitary gonadotropes, suggesting it may act as an
autocrine-paracrine factor in this tissue. GNRH has been shown to increase
pituitary Adcyap1 gene expression through the interaction of CREB and jun/fos
with CRE/AP1 cis-elements in the proximal promoter. In these studies, we were
interested in identifying additional transcription factors and cognate
cis-elements which regulate Adcyap1 gene promoter activity and chose to focus on 
the GATA family of transcription factors known to be critical for both pituitary 
cell differentiation and gonadotropin subunit expression. By transient
transfection and electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis, we demonstrate
that GATA2 and GATA4 stimulate Adcyap1 promoter activity via a GATA cis-element
located at position -191 in the rat Adcyap1 gene promoter. Furthermore, we show
that addition of GATA2 or GATA4 significantly augments GNRH-mediated stimulation 
of Adcyap1 gene promoter activity in the gonadotrope LßT2 cell line. Conversely, 
blunting GATA expression with specific siRNA inhibits the ability of GNRH to
stimulate ADCYAP1 mRNA levels in these cells. These data demonstrate a complex
interaction between GNRH and GATA on ADCYAP1 expression, providing important new 
insights into the regulation of gonadotrope function.

PMCID: PMC3825478
PMID: 24018543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2812-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-489641. Epub 2013 
Sep 6.

The control of hematopoietic stem cell maintenance, self-renewal, and
differentiation by Mysm1-mediated epigenetic regulation.

Wang T(1), Nandakumar V, Jiang XX, Jones L, Yang AG, Huang XF, Chen SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA; and.

Epigenetic histone modifications play critical roles in the control of
self-renewal and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Mysm1 is a
recently identified histone H2A deubiquitinase with essential and intrinsic roles
for maintaining functional HSCs. In this study, in addition to confirming this
function of Mysm1, by using Mysm1-deficient (Mysm1(-/-)) mice, we provide more
evidence for how Mysm1 controls HSC homeostasis. Mysm1 deletion drives HSCs from 
quiescence into rapid cycling and increases their apoptotic rate, resulting in an
exhaustion of the stem cell pool, which leads to an impaired self-renewal and
lineage reconstituting abilities in the Mysm1-deficient mice. Our study
identified Gfi1 as one of the candidate genes responsible for the HSC defect in
Mysm1-deficient mice. Mechanistic studies revealed that Mysm1 modulates histone
modifications and directs the recruitment of key transcriptional factors such as 
Gata2 and Runx1 to the Gfi1 locus in HSCs. We found that Mysm1 directly
associates with the Gfi1 enhancer element and promotes its transcription through 
Gata2 and Runx1 transactivation. Thus, our study not only elaborates on the
initial reports of Mysm1 association with HSC homeostasis but also delineates a
possible epigenetic mechanism through which Mysm1 carries out this function in
the HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3798996
PMID: 24014243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):770-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.257. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

CBFB-MYH11/RUNX1 together with a compendium of hematopoietic regulators,
chromatin modifiers and basal transcription factors occupies self-renewal genes
in inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Mandoli A(1), Singh AA(1), Jansen PW(2), Wierenga AT(3), Riahi H(1), Franci G(4),
Prange K(1), Saeed S(1), Vellenga E(5), Vermeulen M(2), Stunnenberg HG(1),
Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)1] Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine University of Groningen and University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e
Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different mechanisms for CBFß-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus,
interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of
histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target
genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFß-MYH11-binding site analysis and
quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFß-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 
occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and
PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed
that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFß-MYH11 target genes
show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression.
However, the majority of CBFß-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively
transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results
suggest an essential role for CBFß-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes
involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 24002588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;21(4):999-1004. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.04.036.

[Effect of GATA-2 overexpression on function of mouse fetal liver hematopoietic
stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu J(1), Wu B, Zhang YL, Xie YY, Huang QH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the effect of GATA-2 over-expression on
function of mouse fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells. GATA-2 was introduced
into mouse fetal liver cells via retrovirus mediated transduction with GFP as a
detecting marker. Flow cytometry, colony-forming assay and cell cycle assay were 
used to detect the biologic changes of these retrovirus infected mouse fetal
liver hematopoietic stem cells. The results showed that GATA-2 over-expression
increased the Lin(-)Sca1(+)C-Kit(+) (LSK) population dramatically. Cell cycle of 
LSK cells didn't show abnormal, while colony forming ability decreased
significantly. These data indicated that GATA-2 over-expression inhibited
definitive differentiation of mouse fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells. It is
concluded that over-expression of GATA-2 can significantly raise the LSK cell
proportion in mouse fetal liver and inhibit the differentiation capability, the
underlying mechanisms may be related to up-regulation of Hes-1, which may lead to
the blocking of cell differentiation at the stem/progenitor cell stage.

PMID: 23998601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(8):e1003197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003197. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Transcriptional regulation of lineage commitment--a stochastic model of cell fate
decisions.

Teles J(1), Pina C, Edén P, Ohlsson M, Enver T, Peterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology & Biological Physics, Department of Astronomy and
Theoretical Physics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Molecular mechanisms employed by individual multipotent cells at the point of
lineage commitment remain largely uncharacterized. Current paradigms span from
instructive to noise-driven mechanisms. Of considerable interest is also whether 
commitment involves a limited set of genes or the entire transcriptional program,
and to what extent gene expression configures multiple trajectories into
commitment. Importantly, the transient nature of the commitment transition
confounds the experimental capture of committing cells. We develop a
computational framework that simulates stochastic commitment events, and affords 
mechanistic exploration of the fate transition. We use a combined modeling
approach guided by gene expression classifier methods that infers a time-series
of stochastic commitment events from experimental growth characteristics and gene
expression profiling of individual hematopoietic cells captured immediately
before and after commitment. We define putative regulators of commitment and
probabilistic rules of transition through machine learning methods, and employ
clustering and correlation analyses to interrogate gene regulatory interactions
in multipotent cells. Against this background, we develop a Monte Carlo
time-series stochastic model of transcription where the parameters governing
promoter status, mRNA production and mRNA decay in multipotent cells are fitted
to experimental static gene expression distributions. Monte Carlo time is
converted to physical time using cell culture kinetic data. Probability of
commitment in time is a function of gene expression as defined by a logistic
regression model obtained from experimental single-cell expression data. Our
approach should be applicable to similar differentiating systems where single
cell data is available. Within our system, we identify robust model solutions for
the multipotent population within physiologically reasonable values and explore
model predictions with regard to molecular scenarios of entry into commitment.
The model suggests distinct dependencies of different commitment-associated genes
on mRNA dynamics and promoter activity, which globally influence the probability 
of lineage commitment.

PMCID: PMC3749951
PMID: 23990771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(8):e1003193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003193. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Gause's principle and the effect of resource partitioning on the dynamical
coexistence of replicating templates.

Szilágyi A(1), Zachar I, Szathmáry E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systematics, Institute of Biology, Eötvös University,
Budapest, Hungary.

Models of competitive template replication, although basic for replicator
dynamics and primordial evolution, have not yet taken different sequences
explicitly into account, neither have they analyzed the effect of resource
partitioning (feeding on different resources) on coexistence. Here we show by
analytical and numerical calculations that Gause's principle of competitive
exclusion holds for template replicators if resources (nucleotides) affect growth
linearly and coexistence is at fixed point attractors. Cases of complementary or 
homologous pairing between building blocks with parallel or antiparallel strands 
show no deviation from the rule that the nucleotide compositions of stably
coexisting species must be different and there cannot be more coexisting
replicator species than nucleotide types. Besides this overlooked mechanism of
template coexistence we show also that interesting sequence effects prevail as
parts of sequences that are copied earlier affect coexistence more strongly due
to the higher concentration of the corresponding replication intermediates.
Template and copy always count as one species due their constraint of strict
stoichiometric coupling. Stability of fixed-point coexistence tends to decrease
with the length of sequences, although this effect is unlikely to be detrimental 
for sequences below 100 nucleotides. In sum, resource partitioning (niche
differentiation) is the default form of competitive coexistence for replicating
templates feeding on a cocktail of different nucleotides, as it may have been the
case in the RNA world. Our analysis of different pairing and strand orientation
schemes is relevant for artificial and potentially astrobiological genetics.

PMCID: PMC3749944
PMID: 23990769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Oct;13(5):507-13. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0b013e328364e9c0.

The role of eosinophils and basophils in allergic diseases considering genetic
findings.

Nadif R(1), Zerimech F, Bouzigon E, Matran R.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Centre for research in Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP),
U1018, Respiratory and Environmental Epidemiology Team, Villejuif, France.
rachel.nadif@inserm.fr

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Basophils and eosinophils represent less than 1 and 5% of
white blood cells, respectively. Their role in asthma and allergic inflammation
remains incompletely defined. The present review addresses recent advances
regarding the role of these two cell populations in allergic inflammation and
asthma regarding both biological and genetic point of view.
RECENT FINDINGS: Regarding eosinophils, the role of interleukin(IL)-25, IL-33 and
thymic stromal lymphoprotein (TSLP) have been evidenced, and activation states of
eosinophil ß1 and ß2 integrins have been found to correlate with the measurement 
of eosinophil recruitment and pulmonary function in asthma. New insights into the
biology of basophils concern their role as regulators of Th2 cell response
through IL-4 expression or the differentiation of monocytes to macrophages, and
their population heterogeneity in human. The transcription factor PU.1 was
reported to be involved in controlling transcription of specific genes both in
eosinophils and basophils. Candidate genetic studies on eosinophils have explored
genes involved in the intracellular calcium influx and apoptosis. At the
genome-wide level, studies identified genetic variants belonging to IL1RL1, TSLP 
and IL-33, and four loci with pleiotropic effects on eosinophil and basophil
counts [GATA2 (3q21), MHC (6p21), HBS1L-MYB (6q23), and ERG (21q22)].
SUMMARY: Recent findings from biological and genetic studies on eosinophils and
basophils highlight the role of epithelial cell-derived cytokines such as TSLP
and IL-33 in asthma and allergic diseases.

PMID: 23974679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Blood. 2013 Oct 3;122(14):e12-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-490425. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Genome-wide analysis of transcriptional regulators in human HSPCs reveals a
densely interconnected network of coding and noncoding genes.

Beck D(1), Thoms JA, Perera D, Schütte J, Unnikrishnan A, Knezevic K, Kinston SJ,
Wilson NK, O'Brien TA, Göttgens B, Wong JW, Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia;

Genome-wide combinatorial binding patterns for key transcription factors (TFs)
have not been reported for primary human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells 
(HSPCs), and have constrained analysis of the global architecture of molecular
circuits controlling these cells. Here we provide high-resolution genome-wide
binding maps for a heptad of key TFs (FLI1, ERG, GATA2, RUNX1, SCL, LYL1, and
LMO2) in human CD34(+) HSPCs, together with quantitative RNA and microRNA
expression profiles. We catalog binding of TFs at coding genes and microRNA
promoters, and report that combinatorial binding of all 7 TFs is favored and
associated with differential expression of genes and microRNA in HSPCs. We also
uncover a previously unrecognized association between FLI1 and RUNX1 pairing in
HSPCs, we establish a correlation between the density of histone modifications
that mark active enhancers and the number of overlapping TFs at a peak, we
demonstrate bivalent histone marks at promoters of heptad target genes in CD34(+)
cells that are poised for later expression, and we identify complex relationships
between specific microRNAs and coding genes regulated by the heptad. Taken
together, these data reveal the power of integrating multifactor sequencing of
chromatin immunoprecipitates with coding and noncoding gene expression to
identify regulatory circuits controlling cell identity.

PMID: 23974199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 6;8(8):e72404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072404. Print 2013.

GATA-2 transduces LPS-induced il-1ß gene expression in macrophages via a
toll-like receptor 4/MD88/MAPK-dependent mechanism.

Wu TT(1), Tai YT, Cherng YG, Chen TG, Lin CJ, Chen TL, Chang HC, Chen RM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences and Center of Excellent Cancer
Research, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a critical factor for inducing acute lung injury.
GATA-2, a transcription factor, contributes to the control of cell activity and
function. Exposure of RAW 264.7 cells to LPS induced interleukin (IL)-1ß mRNA and
protein expression and GATA-2 translocation from the cytoplasm to nuclei in
concentration- and time-dependent manners. A bioinformatic search revealed that
GATA-2-specific binding elements exist in the 5'-promoter region of the il-1ß
gene. LPS could enhance the transactivation activity of GATA-2 in macrophages.
Knocking-down translation of GATA-2 mRNA using RNA interference significantly
alleviated LPS-induced IL-1ß mRNA and protein expression. As to the mechanism,
transfection of toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 small interfering (si)RNA into
macrophages concurrently decreased LPS-caused increases in nuclear GATA-2 levels.
Sequentially, treatment with myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) siRNA
decreased LPS-induced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) kinase 1/2 and subsequent translocation of GATA-2. Reducing MAPK
activities using specific inhibitors simultaneously decreased GATA-2 activation. 
Furthermore, exposure of primary macrophages to LPS significantly increased the
transactivation activities of GATA-2 and IL-1ß mRNA and protein expression.
Transfection of GATA-2 siRNA inhibited LPS-induced IL-1ß mRNA expression. Results
of this study show that LPS induction of il-1ß gene expression in macrophages is 
mediated by GATA-2 via activation of TLR4, MyD88, and MAPKs.

PMCID: PMC3735524
PMID: 23940812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Ther Adv Hematol. 2013 Aug;4(4):254-69. doi: 10.1177/2040620713487399.

Recognizing familial myeloid leukemia in adults.

Nickels EM(1), Soodalter J, Churpek JE, Godley LA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Germline testing for familial cases of myeloid leukemia in adults is becoming
more common with the recognition of multiple genetic syndromes predisposing
people to bone marrow disease. Currently, Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments approved testing exists for several myeloid leukemia predisposition
syndromes: familial platelet disorder with propensity to acute myeloid leukemia
(FPD/AML), caused by mutations in RUNX1; familial AML with mutated CEBPA;
familial myelodysplastic syndrome and acute leukemia with mutated GATA2; and the 
inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, including dyskeratosis congenita, a
disease of abnormal telomere maintenance. With the recognition of additional
families with a genetic component to their leukemia, new predisposition alleles
will likely be identified. We highlight how to recognize and manage these cases
as well as outline the characteristics of the major known syndromes. We look
forward to future research increasing our understanding of the scope of inherited
myeloid leukemia syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3734901
PMID: 23926458  [PubMed]


263. Genes Cells. 2013 Nov;18(11):921-33. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12086. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

GATA factor switching from GATA2 to GATA1 contributes to erythroid
differentiation.

Suzuki M(1), Kobayashi-Osaki M, Tsutsumi S, Pan X, Ohmori S, Takai J, Moriguchi
T, Ohneda O, Ohneda K, Shimizu R, Kanki Y, Kodama T, Aburatani H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan; Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
980-8575, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA2 is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and
progenitors, whereas its expression declines after erythroid commitment of
progenitors. In contrast, the start of GATA1 expression coincides with the
erythroid commitment and increases along with the erythroid differentiation. We
refer this dynamic transition of GATA factor expression to as the 'GATA factor
switching'. Here, we examined contribution of the GATA factor switching to the
erythroid differentiation. In Gata1-knockdown embryos that concomitantly express 
Gata2-GFP reporter, high-level expression of GFP reporter was detected in
accumulated immature hematopoietic cells with impaired differentiation,
demonstrating that GATA1 represses Gata2 gene expression in hematopoietic
progenitors in vivo. We have conducted chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on
microarray analyses of GATA2 and GATA1, and results indicate that the
GATA1-binding sites widely overlap with the sites pre-occupied by GATA2 before
the GATA1 expression. Importantly, erythroid genes harboring GATA boxes bound by 
both GATA1 and GATA2 tend to be expressed in immature erythroid cells, whereas
those harboring GATA boxes to which GATA1 binds highly but GATA2 binds only
weakly are important for the mature erythroid cell function. Our results thus
support the contention that preceding binding of GATA2 helps the following
binding of GATA1 and thereby secures smooth expression of the transient-phase
genes.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23911012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Angiogenesis. 2013 Oct;16(4):939-52. doi: 10.1007/s10456-013-9370-9. Epub 2013
Jul 28.

GATA2 and Lmo2 control angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis via direct
transcriptional regulation of neuropilin-2.

Coma S(1), Allard-Ratick M, Akino T, van Meeteren LA, Mammoto A, Klagsbrun M.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Program, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Karp Building, Room 12.210, 1 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2) and LIM domain only 2 (Lmo2) form common
transcription complexes during hematopoietic differentiation. Here we show that
these two transcription factors also play a key role in endothelial cells (EC)
and lymphatic EC (LEC) function. Primary EC and tumor-associated blood vessels
expressed GATA2 and Lmo2. VEGF-induced sprouting angiogenesis in both
differentiating embryonic stem cells (embryoid bodies) and primary EC increased
GATA2 and Lmo2 levels. Conversely, silencing of GATA2 and Lmo2 expression in
primary EC inhibited VEGF-induced angiogenic activity, including EC migration and
sprouting in vitro, two key steps of angiogenesis in vivo. This inhibition of EC 
function was associated with downregulated expression of neuropilin-2 (NRP2), a
co-receptor of VEGFRs for VEGF, at the protein, mRNA and promoter levels. NRP2
overexpression partially rescued the impaired angiogenic sprouting in the
GATA2/Lmo2 knockdown EC, confirming that GATA2 and Lmo2 mediated EC function, at 
least in part, by directly regulating NRP2 gene expression. Furthermore, it was
found that primary LEC expressed GATA2 and Lmo2 as well. Silencing of GATA2 and
Lmo2 expression in LEC inhibited VEGF-induced LEC sprouting, also in a
NRP2-dependent manner. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that GATA2 and Lmo2
cooperatively regulate VEGF-induced angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis via NRP2.

PMCID: PMC3793839
PMID: 23892628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(18):8526-36. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt644. Epub 2013
Jul 25.

CCAR1 promotes chromatin loading of androgen receptor (AR) transcription complex 
by stabilizing the association between AR and GATA2.

Seo WY(1), Jeong BC, Yu EJ, Kim HJ, Kim SH, Lim JE, Kwon GY, Lee HM, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, 135-710, Korea,
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung
Medical Center, Seoul, 135-710, Korea, Department of Urology, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 135-710, Korea and
Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, 135-710, Korea.

Androgen receptor (AR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor, plays a critical
role in prostate cancer onset and progression, and its transcriptional function
is mediated largely by distinct nuclear receptor co-regulators. Here, we show
that cell cycle and apoptosis regulator 1 (CCAR1) functions as an AR
co-activator. CCAR1 interacted with and enhanced the transcriptional activity of 
AR. Depletion of CCAR1 caused reduction in androgen-dependent expression of a
subset of AR target genes. We further showed that CCAR1 is required for
recruitment of AR, MED1 and RNA polymerase II to the enhancers of AR target genes
and for androgen-induced long-range prostate specific antigen enhancer-promoter
interaction. The molecular mechanism underlying CCAR1 function in AR-mediated
transcription involves CCAR1-mediated enhanced recruitment of GATA2, a pioneer
factor for AR, to AR-binding sites. CCAR1 stabilized the interaction between AR
and GATA2 by interacting directly with both proteins, thereby facilitating AR and
GATA2 occupancy on the enhancers. Furthermore, CCAR1 depletion inhibited the
growth, migration, invasion of prostate cancer cells and reduced the
tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells in vivo. Our results firmly established
CCAR1 as an AR co-activator that plays a key role in AR transcription complex
assembly and has an important physiological role in androgen signaling and
prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3794601
PMID: 23887938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 26;8(6):e67855. Print 2013.

Beta-Actin Is Involved in Modulating Erythropoiesis during Development by
Fine-Tuning Gata2 Expression Levels.

Tondeleir D(1), Drogat B, Slowicka K, Bakkali K, Bartunkova S, Goossens S, Haigh 
JJ, Ampe C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

The functions of actin family members during development are poorly understood.
To investigate the role of beta-actin in mammalian development, a beta-actin
knockout mouse model was used. Homozygous beta-actin knockout mice are lethal at 
embryonic day (E)10.5. At E10.25 beta-actin knockout embryos are growth retarded 
and display a pale yolk sac and embryo proper that is suggestive of altered
erythropoiesis. Here we report that lack of beta-actin resulted in a block of
primitive and definitive hematopoietic development. Reduced levels of Gata2, were
associated to this phenotype. Consistently, ChIP analysis revealed multiple
binding sites for beta-actin in the Gata2 promoter. Gata2 mRNA levels were almost
completely rescued by expression of an erythroid lineage restricted
ROSA26-promotor based GATA2 transgene. As a result, erythroid differentiation was
restored and the knockout embryos showed significant improvement in yolk sac and 
embryo vascularization. These results provide new molecular insights for a novel 
function of beta-actin in erythropoiesis by modulating the expression levels of
Gata2 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3694046
PMID: 23840778  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


267. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 5;377(1-2):75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.06.032.
Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Downstream targets of the homeobox gene DLX3 are differentially expressed in the 
placentae of pregnancies affected by human idiopathic fetal growth restriction.

Chui A(1), Kalionis B, Abumaree M, Cocquebert M, Fournier T, Evain-Brion D,
Brennecke SP, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Human idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is associated with placental
insufficiency. Previously, we reported that the expression of homeobox gene
Distal-less 3 (DLX3) is increased in idiopathic FGR placentae and is a regulator 
of villous trophoblast differentiation. Here, we identify the downstream targets 
of DLX3 in trophoblast-derived cell lines. We modelled the high levels of DLX3 in
FGR using an over-expression plasmid construct and complemented this using
short-interference RNA (siRNA) for inactivation in cultured cells. Using a
real-time PCR-based gene profiling, candidate target genes of DLX3
over-expression and inactivation were identified as regulators of trophoblast
differentiation; GATA2 and PPAR<U+03B3>. The expression of GATA2 and PPAR<U+03B3> were further 
assessed in placental tissues and showed increased mRNA and protein levels in
FGR-affected tissues compared with gestation-matched controls. We conclude that
DLX3 orchestrates the expression of multiple regulators of trophoblast
differentiation and that expression of these regulatory genes is abnormal in FGR.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;21(3):550-5. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.03.003.

[Effects of transcription factor GATA-2 on transcriptive regulation of iASPP
gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Xing HY(1), Jia YJ, Tang KJ, Tian Z, Chen YR, Rao Q, Wang M, Wang JX.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin, China.

iASPP can prompt the cell proliferation and inhibit the apoptosis of many cells. 
There are putative binding sites of transcription factor GATA-2 upstream of iASPP
transcription start site. GATA-2 plays an important role in the proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitors. This study was
aimed to explore the role of GATA-2 protein in iASPP gene transcription. Firstly,
the expression of iASPP and GATA-2 protein in some leukemia cell lines was
detected by Western blot. Second, The expressive vector of pCMV5-GATA2 and the
luciferase reporter vectors containing possible binding sites of GATA-2 were
constructed and co-transfected into HEK293 and CV-1 cells. Then the luciferase
activity was assayed by luminometer. Also, ChIP assays were performed to further 
confirm the specific binding of GATA-2 to iASPP promoter. The results showed that
GATA-2 was overexpressed in most cell lines with high level of iASPP. GATA-2
exhibited a significant effect on luciferase activity of reporter gene iASPP and 
in a dose-dependant manner. The relative luciferase activity was up-regulated to 
about two-fold of the empty vector control when the transfection dose of
pCMV5-GATA2 plasmid was increased to 100 ng. While the effect was more
significant in CV-1 cells and showed a 6.7-fold increase. The ChIP assay
demonstrated the in vivo specific binding of GATA-2 to iASPP. The binding sites
of GATA2 were located between nt -361 ~ -334 in upstream of iASPP gene
transcription start site. It is concluded that transcription factor GATA-2 can
bind with the cis-regulatory region of the iASPP promoter and up-regulate iASPP
expression.

PMID: 23815896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2013 May;46(5):405-16. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20132893.

The epigenetic modifiers 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A influence
adipocyte differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells.

Zych J(1), Stimamiglio MA, Senegaglia AC, Brofman PR, Dallagiovanna B, Goldenberg
S, Correa A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Básica de Células-Tronco, Instituto Carlos Chagas,
FIOCRUZ, Curitiba, PR, Brasil. jzych@tecpar.br

Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation and histone modification are
important in stem cell differentiation. Methylation is principally associated
with transcriptional repression, and histone acetylation is correlated with an
active chromatin state. We determined the effects of these epigenetic mechanisms 
on adipocyte differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived from bone
marrow (BM-MSCs) and adipose tissue (ADSCs) using the chromatin-modifying agents 
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5azadC), a demethylating agent. Subconfluent MSC cultures were treated with 5,
50, or 500 nM TSA or with 1, 10, or 100 µM 5azadC for 2 days before the
initiation of adipogenesis. The differentiation was quantified and expression of 
the adipocyte genes PPARG and FABP4 and of the anti-adipocyte gene GATA2 was
evaluated. TSA decreased adipogenesis, except in BM-MSCs treated with 5 nM TSA.
Only treatment with 500 nM TSA decreased cell proliferation. 5azadC treatment
decreased proliferation and adipocyte differentiation in all conditions
evaluated, resulting in the downregulation of PPARG and FABP4 and the
upregulation of GATA2. The response to treatment was stronger in ADSCs than in
BM-MSCs, suggesting that epigenetic memories may differ between cells of
different origins. As epigenetic signatures affect differentiation, it should be 
possible to direct the use of MSCs in cell therapies to improve process
efficiency by considering the various sources available.

PMCID: PMC3854397
PMID: 23797495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Food Chem. 2013 Nov 15;141(2):809-15. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.04.062. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

The in vitro and in vivo effects of yerba mate (Ilex paraguariensis) extract on
adipogenesis.

Arçari DP(1), Santos JC, Gambero A, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade Integrada de Farmacologia e Gastroenterologia, Universidade São
Francisco, Bragança Paulista, SP, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of yerba mate extract and its
principal bioactive compounds on adipogenesis. The anti-adipogenic effects of
yerba mate, chlorogenic acid, quercetin and rutin were evaluated in 3T3-L1 cells 
using a PCR array. The results obtained in vitro were validated in vivo in a
high-fat diet-induced model of obesity. The in vitro and in vivo results
demonstrated that yerba mate extract down-regulated the expression of genes that 
regulate adipogenesis, such as Creb-1and C/EBPa, and the extract up-regulated the
expression of genes related to the inhibition of adipogenesis, including Dlk1,
Gata2, Gata3, Klf2, Lrp5, Ppar<U+03B3>2, Sfrp1, Tcf7l2, Wnt10b, and Wnt3a. In summary,
it was demonstrated that yerba mate and its bioactive compounds regulate the
expression of genes related to in vitro adipogenesis. Furthermore, yerba mate
might regulate adipogenesis through the Wnt pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23790851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1545-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496281. Epub 2013
Jun 18.

RNAi screen identifies Jarid1b as a major regulator of mouse HSC activity.

Cellot S(1), Hope KJ, Chagraoui J, Sauvageau M, Deneault É, MacRae T, Mayotte N, 
Wilhelm BT, Landry JR, Ting SB, Krosl J, Humphries K, Thompson A, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1533-4.

Histone methylation is a dynamic and reversible process proposed to directly
impact on stem cell fate. The Jumonji (JmjC) domain-containing family of
demethylases comprises 27 members that target mono-, di-, and trimethylated
lysine residues of histone (or nonhistone) proteins. To evaluate their role in
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) behavior, we performed an in vivo
RNAi-based functional screen and demonstrated that Jarid1b and Jhdm1f play
opposing roles in regulation of HSC activity. Decrease in Jarid1b levels
correlated with an in vitro expansion of HSCs with preserved long-term in vivo
lymphomyeloid differentiation potential. Through RNA sequencing analysis, Jarid1b
knockdown was associated with increased expression levels of several HSC
regulators (Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hes1, Gata2) and reduced levels of
differentiation-associated genes. shRNA against Jhdmlf, in contrast, impaired
hematopoietic reconstitution of bone marrow cells. Together, our studies
identified Jarid1b as a negative regulator of HSC activity and Jhdmlf as a
positive regulator of HSC activity.

PMID: 23777767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Aug 1;13(2):205-18. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.05.024. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Induction of a hemogenic program in mouse fibroblasts.

Pereira CF(1), Chang B, Qiu J, Niu X, Papatsenko D, Hendry CE, Clark NR,
Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Kovacic JC, Ma'ayan A, Schaniel C, Lemischka IR, Moore K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1496, New York, NY 10029, USA.
filipe.pereira@mssm.edu

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(3):335-6.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Aug 1;13(2):131-3.

Definitive hematopoiesis emerges during embryogenesis via an
endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition. We attempted to induce this process in
mouse fibroblasts by screening a panel of factors for hemogenic activity. We
identified a combination of four transcription factors, Gata2, Gfi1b, cFos, and
Etv6, that efficiently induces endothelial-like precursor cells, with the
subsequent appearance of hematopoietic cells. The precursor cells express a human
CD34 reporter, Sca1, and Prominin1 within a global endothelial transcription
program. Emergent hematopoietic cells possess nascent hematopoietic stem cell
gene-expression profiles and cell-surface phenotypes. After transgene silencing
and reaggregation culture, the specified cells generate hematopoietic colonies
in vitro. Thus, we show that a simple combination of transcription factors is
sufficient to induce a complex, dynamic, and multistep developmental program
in vitro. These findings provide insights into the specification of definitive
hemogenesis and a platform for future development of patient-specific stem and
progenitor cells, as well as more-differentiated blood products.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3735774
PMID: 23770078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3064-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00296-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

Direct protein interactions are responsible for Ikaros-GATA and Ikaros-Cdk9
cooperativeness in hematopoietic cells.

Bottardi S(1), Mavoungou L, Bourgoin V, Mashtalir N, Affar el B, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
and Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Ikaros (Ik) is a critical regulator of hematopoietic gene expression. Here, we
established that the Ik interactions with GATA transcription factors and
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a component of the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), are required for transcriptional activation of Ik
target genes. A detailed dissection of Ik-GATA and Ik-Cdk9 protein interactions
indicated that the C-terminal zinc finger domain of Ik interacts directly with
the C-terminal zinc fingers of GATA1, GATA2, and GATA3, whereas the N-terminal
zinc finger domain of Ik is required for interaction with the kinase and T-loop
domains of Cdk9. The relevance of these interactions was demonstrated in vivo in 
COS-7 and primary hematopoietic cells, in which Ik facilitated Cdk9 and GATA
protein recruitment to gene promoters and transcriptional activation. Moreover,
the oncogenic isoform Ik6 did not efficiently interact with Cdk9 or GATA proteins
in vivo and perturbed Cdk9/P-TEFb recruitment to Ik target genes, thereby
affecting transcription elongation. Finally, characterization of a novel nuclear 
Ik isoform revealed that Ik exon 6 is dispensable for interactions with Mi2 and
GATA proteins but is essential for the Cdk9 interaction. Thus, Ik is central to
the Ik-GATA-Cdk9 regulatory network, which is broadly utilized for gene
regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC3753914
PMID: 23732910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Sep;57(5):697-9. doi: 10.1093/cid/cit368. Epub 2013 May 31.

MonoMAC syndrome in a patient with a GATA2 mutation: case report and review of
the literature.

Camargo JF(1), Lobo SA, Hsu AP, Zerbe CS, Wormser GP, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York Medical
College, Valhalla 10595, USA. josefcamargo@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2014 Jul 15;59(2):323.

We report a case of MonoMAC syndrome in a patient with a GATA2 mutation and
discuss the manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of this novel
immunodeficiency disorder.

PMCID: PMC3739466
PMID: 23728141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):286-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.027. Epub 2013 
May 3.

The LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor Islet-1 is required for the development 
of sympathetic neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells.

Huber K(1), Narasimhan P, Shtukmaster S, Pfeifer D, Evans SM, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany. katrin.huber@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Islet-1 is a LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor with important functions for
the development of distinct neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations. We show
here that Islet-1 acts genetically downstream of Phox2B in cells of the
sympathoadrenal cell lineage and that the development of sympathetic neurons and 
chromaffin cells is impaired in mouse embryos with a conditional deletion of
Islet-1 controlled by the wnt1 promotor. Islet-1 is not essential for the initial
differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells, as indicated by the correct expression 
of pan-neuronal and catecholaminergic subtype specific genes in primary
sympathetic ganglia of Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos. However, our data
indicate that the subsequent survival of sympathetic neuron precursors and their 
differentiation towards TrkA expressing neurons depends on Islet-1 function. In
contrast to spinal sensory neurons, sympathetic neurons of Islet-1 deficient mice
did not display ectopic expression of genes normally present in the CNS. In
Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos the numbers of chromaffin cells were only mildly 
reduced, in contrast to that of sympathetic neurons, but the initiation of the
adrenaline synthesizing enzyme PNMT was abrogated and the expression level of
chromogranin A was diminished. Microarray analysis revealed that developing
chromaffin cells of Islet-1 deficient mice displayed normal expression levels of 
TH, DBH and the transcription factors Phox2B, Mash-1, Hand2, Gata3 and Insm1, but
the expression levels of the transcription factors Gata2 and Hand1, and AP-2ß
were significantly reduced. Together our data indicate that Islet-1 is not
essentially required for the initial differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells,
but has an important function for the correct subsequent development of
sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23648511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):208-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.023. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Differential BMP signaling controls formation and differentiation of multipotent 
preplacodal ectoderm progenitors from human embryonic stem cells.

Leung AW(1), Kent Morest D, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Sensory and endoneurocrine tissues as diverse as the lens, the olfactory
epithelium, the inner ear, the cranial sensory ganglia, and the anterior
pituitary arise from a common pool of progenitors in the preplacodal ectoderm
(PPE). Around late gastrulation, the PPE forms at the border surrounding the
anterior neural plate, and expresses a unique set of evolutionarily conserved
transcription regulators including Six1, Eya 1 and Eya2. Here, we describe the
first report to generate and characterize the SIX1(+) PPE cells from human
embryonic stem (ES) cells by adherent differentiation. Before forming PPE cells, 
differentiating cultures first expressed the non-neural ectoderm specific
transcriptional factors TFAP2A, GATA2, GATA3, DLX3, and DLX5, which are crucial
in establishing the PPE competence. We demonstrated that bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) activity plays a transient but essential role in inducing
expression of these PPE competence factors and eventually the PPE cells.
Interestingly, we found that attenuating BMP signaling after establishing the
competence state induces anterior placode precursors. By manipulating BMP and
hedgehog signaling pathways, we further differentiate these precursors into
restricted lineages including the lens placode and the oral ectoderm (pituitary
precursor) cells. Finally, we also show that sensory neurons can be generated
from human PPE cells, demonstrating the multipotency of the human ES-derived PPE 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712508
PMID: 23643939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Development. 2013 Jun;140(12):2632-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.090829. Epub 2013 May 1.

VEGFA-dependent and -independent pathways synergise to drive Scl expression and
initiate programming of the blood stem cell lineage in Xenopus.

Ciau-Uitz A(1), Pinheiro P, Kirmizitas A, Zuo J, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

The first haematopoietic stem cells share a common origin with the dorsal aorta
and derive from putative adult haemangioblasts in the dorsal lateral plate (DLP) 
mesoderm. Here we show that the transcription factor (TF) stem cell leukaemia
(Scl/Tal1) is crucial for development of these adult haemangioblasts in Xenopus
and establish the regulatory cascade controlling its expression. We show that
VEGFA produced in the somites is required to initiate adult haemangioblast
programming in the adjacent DLP by establishing endogenous VEGFA signalling. This
response depends on expression of the VEGF receptor Flk1, driven by Fli1 and
Gata2. Scl activation requires synergy between this VEGFA-controlled pathway and 
a VEGFA-independent pathway controlled by Fli1, Gata2 and Etv2/Etsrp/ER71, which 
also drives expression of the Scl partner Lmo2. Thus, the two ETS factors Fli1
and Etv6, which drives the VEGFA expression in both somites and the DLP, sit at
the top of the adult haemangioblast gene regulatory network (GRN). Furthermore,
Gata2 is initially activated by Fli1 but later maintained by another ETS factor, 
Etv2. We also establish that Flk1 and Etv2 act independently in the two pathways 
to Scl activation. Thus, detailed temporal, epistatic measurements of key TFs and
VEGFA plus its receptor have enabled us to build a Xenopus adult haemangioblast
GRN.

PMCID: PMC3666388
PMID: 23637333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):258-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.016. Epub 2013 
Apr 23.

Mathematical model of a gene regulatory network reconciles effects of genetic
perturbations on hematopoietic stem cell emergence.

Narula J(1), Williams CJ, Tiwari A, Marks-Bluth J, Pimanda JE, Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA.

Interlinked gene regulatory networks (GRNs) are vital for the spatial and
temporal control of gene expression during development. The hematopoietic
transcription factors (TFs) Scl, Gata2 and Fli1 form one such densely connected
GRN which acts as a master regulator of embryonic hematopoiesis. This triad has
been shown to direct the specification of the hemogenic endothelium and emergence
of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in response to Notch1 and Bmp4-Smad signaling.
Here we employ previously published data to construct a mathematical model of
this GRN network and use this model to systematically investigate the network
dynamical properties. Our model uses a statistical-thermodynamic framework to
describe the combinatorial regulation of gene expression and reconciles,
mechanistically, several previously published but unexplained results from
different genetic perturbation experiments. In particular, our results
demonstrate how the interactions of Runx1, an essential hematopoietic TF, with
components of the Bmp4 signaling pathway allow it to affect triad activation and 
acts as a key regulator of HSC emergence. We also explain why heterozygous
deletion of this essential TF, Runx1, speeds up the network dynamics leading to
accelerated HSC emergence. Taken together our results demonstrate that the triad,
a master-level controller of definitive hematopoiesis, is an irreversible
bistable switch whose dynamical properties are modulated by Runx1 and components 
of the Bmp4 signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Clin Genet. 2013 Oct;84(4):303-14. doi: 10.1111/cge.12173. Epub 2013 Jun 27.

The classification and diagnostic algorithm for primary lymphatic dysplasia: an
update from 2010 to include molecular findings.

Connell FC(1), Gordon K, Brice G, Keeley V, Jeffery S, Mortimer PS, Mansour S,
Ostergaard P.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Guy's Hospital, 
London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Historically, primary lymphoedema was classified into just three categories
depending on the age of onset of swelling; congenital, praecox and tarda.
Developments in clinical phenotyping and identification of the genetic cause of
some of these conditions have demonstrated that primary lymphoedema is highly
heterogenous. In 2010, we introduced a new classification and diagnostic pathway 
as a clinical and research tool. This algorithm has been used to delineate
specific primary lymphoedema phenotypes, facilitating the discovery of new
causative genes. This article reviews the latest molecular findings and provides 
an updated version of the classification and diagnostic pathway based on this new
knowledge.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23621851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Genomics Inform. 2013 Mar;11(1):24-33. doi: 10.5808/GI.2013.11.1.24. Epub 2013
Mar 31.

Bioinformatics interpretation of exome sequencing: blood cancer.

Kim J(1), Lee YG, Kim N.

Author information: 
(1)Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

Erratum in
    Genomics Inform. 2013 Jun;11(2):98.

We had analyzed 10 exome sequencing data and single nucleotide polymorphism chips
for blood cancer provided by the PGM21 (The National Project for Personalized
Genomic Medicine) Award program. We had removed sample G06 because the pair is
not correct and G10 because of possible contamination. In-house software somatic 
copy-number and heterozygosity alteration estimation (SCHALE) was used to detect 
one loss of heterozygosity region in G05. We had discovered 27 functionally
important mutations. Network and pathway analyses gave us clues that NPM1, GATA2,
and CEBPA were major driver genes. By comparing with previous somatic mutation
profiles, we had concluded that the provided data originated from acute myeloid
leukemia. Protein structure modeling showed that somatic mutations in IDH2,
RASGEF1B, and MSH4 can affect protein structures.

PMCID: PMC3630382
PMID: 23613679  [PubMed]


282. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun;27(6):892-908. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1334. Epub 2013 Apr 
16.

Control of endothelin-a receptor expression by progesterone is enhanced by
synergy with Gata2.

Zhang Y(1), Knutsen GR, Brown MD, Ruest LB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Research and Diagnosis and Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Texas A&M University-Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, Texas 75246, 
USA.

The endothelin-A receptor (Ednra) is involved in several physiological,
pathological, and developmental pathways. Known for its function in
vasoconstriction after being activated by endothelin-1, Ednra also controls
cephalic neural crest cell development and appears to play a role in several
pathologies, including cancer and periodontitis. However, the mechanisms
regulating Ednra expression have not been identified despite its important
functions. In this study, we investigated the role progesterone plays in Ednra
gene expression in vivo and in vitro. In mice, pregnancy promotes Ednra
expression in the heart, kidney, lung, uterus, and placenta, and the
up-regulation is mediated by progesterone. We determined that the conserved
region between -5.7 and -4.2 kb upstream of the mouse Ednra gene is necessary for
the progesterone response. We also found that progesterone mediates Ednra
activation through progesterone receptor B activation by its recruitment to PRE6,
one of the 6 progesterone response elements found in that locus. However, gene
activation by means of a GATA2 site was also necessary for the progesterone
response. The Gata2 transcription factor enhances the progesterone response
mediated by the progesterone receptor B. Together these results indicate that
progesterone regulates Ednra expression by synergizing with Gata2 activity, a
previously unknown mechanism. This mechanism may have an impact on pathologies
involving the endothelin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3656236
PMID: 23592430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Leukemia. 2013 Nov;27(11):2247-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.105. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Highly variable clinical manifestations in a large family with a novel GATA2
mutation.

Mutsaers PG(1), van de Loosdrecht AA, Tawana K, Bödör C, Fitzgibbon J, Menko FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Cancer Center
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PMID: 23563236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jun;161(5):701-5. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12317. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

GATA2 mutations in sporadic and familial acute myeloid leukaemia patients with
CEBPA mutations.

Green CL(1), Tawana K, Hills RK, Bödör C, Fitzgibbon J, Inglott S, Ancliff P,
Burnett AK, Linch DC, Gale RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK.

GATA2 mutations have recently been reported in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
patients with CEBPA-double mutations. To explore their impact on this
favourable-risk disease, we determined GATA2 status in 153 sporadic AML patients 
and three members of a germ-line CEBPA-mutant family at AML presentation.
Overall, 27% (15/55) CEBPA-double, 16% (7/43) CEBPA-single and 0% (0/55) normal
karyotype/CEBPA-wild-type patients were GATA2-mutant. All familial AML patients
acquired both a second CEBPA and a GATA2 mutation. CEBPA and GATA2 mutant levels 
indicated that both mutations were likely to be early events in leukaemogenesis. 
GATA2 status did not impact on the favourable outcome of
CEBPA-double/FLT3-inernal tandem duplication-negative patients.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23560626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Blood. 2013 Apr 4;121(14):2579-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-483362.

"AbroGATAed" human NK cell development.

Fehniger TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Apr 4;121(14):2669-77.

PMID: 23557967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059509. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Leishmania donovani infection induces anemia in hamsters by differentially
altering erythropoiesis in bone marrow and spleen.

Lafuse WP(1), Story R, Mahylis J, Gupta G, Varikuti S, Steinkamp H, Oghumu S,
Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, Wexner Medical Center at the
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Leishmania donovani is a parasite that causes visceral leishmaniasis by infecting
and replicating in macrophages of the bone marrow, spleen, and liver. Severe
anemia and leucopenia is associated with the disease. Although immune defense
mechanisms against the parasite have been studied, we have a limited
understanding of how L. donovani alters hematopoiesis. In this study, we used
Syrian golden hamsters to investigate effects of L. donovani infection on
erythropoiesis. Infection resulted in severe anemia and leucopenia by 8 weeks
post-infection. Anemia was associated with increased levels of serum
erythropoietin, which indicates the hamsters respond to the anemia by producing
erythropoietin. We found that infection also increased numbers of BFU-E and CFU-E
progenitor populations in the spleen and bone marrow and differentially altered
erythroid gene expression in these organs. In the bone marrow, the mRNA
expression of erythroid differentiation genes (a-globin, ß-globin, ALAS2) were
inhibited by 50%, but mRNA levels of erythroid receptor (c-kit, EpoR) and
transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2, FOG1) were not affected by the infection.
This suggests that infection has a negative effect on differentiation of
erythroblasts. In the spleen, erythroid gene expression was enhanced by
infection, indicating that the anemia activates a stress erythropoiesis response 
in the spleen. Analysis of cytokine mRNA levels in spleen and bone marrow found
that IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA is highly increased by L. donovani infection. Expression of the
IFN-<U+03B3> inducible cytokine, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), was also
up-regulated. Since TRAIL induces erythroblasts apoptosis, apoptosis of bone
marrow erythroblasts from infected hamsters was examined by flow cytometry.
Percentage of erythroblasts that were apoptotic was significantly increased by L.
donovani infection. Together, our results suggest that L. donovani infection
inhibits erythropoiesis in the bone marrow by cytokine-mediated apoptosis of
erythroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3606219
PMID: 23533629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;15(4):363-72. doi: 10.1038/ncb2709. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Characterization of transcriptional networks in blood stem and progenitor cells
using high-throughput single-cell gene expression analysis.

Moignard V(1), Macaulay IC, Swiers G, Buettner F, Schütte J, Calero-Nieto FJ,
Kinston S, Joshi A, Hannah R, Theis FJ, Jacobsen SE, de Bruijn MF, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute and Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 May;15(5):544.

Cellular decision-making is mediated by a complex interplay of external stimuli
with the intracellular environment, in particular transcription factor regulatory
networks. Here we have determined the expression of a network of 18 key
haematopoietic transcription factors in 597 single primary blood stem and
progenitor cells isolated from mouse bone marrow. We demonstrate that different
stem/progenitor populations are characterized by distinctive transcription factor
expression states, and through comprehensive bioinformatic analysis reveal
positively and negatively correlated transcription factor pairings, including
previously unrecognized relationships between Gata2, Gfi1 and Gfi1b. Validation
using transcriptional and transgenic assays confirmed direct regulatory
interactions consistent with a regulatory triad in immature blood stem cells,
where Gata2 may function to modulate cross-inhibition between Gfi1 and Gfi1b.
Single-cell expression profiling therefore identifies network states and allows
reconstruction of network hierarchies involved in controlling stem cell fate
choices, and provides a blueprint for studying both normal development and human 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3796878
PMID: 23524953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jun;161(5):649-58. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12297. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

CEBPA double-mutated acute myeloid leukaemia harbours concomitant molecular
mutations in 76·8% of cases with TET2 and GATA2 alterations impacting prognosis.

Grossmann V(1), Haferlach C, Nadarajah N, Fasan A, Weissmann S, Roller A, Eder C,
Stopp E, Kern W, Haferlach T, Kohlmann A, Schnittger S.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with CEBPA mutations is listed as a provisional
entity in the current World Health Organization classification. A difference in
clinical outcome between single- (sm) and double-mutated (dm) cases has been
reported, whereupon CEBPAdm cases were shown to be associated with better overall
survival (OS). The occurrence and prognostic impact of concomitant molecular
mutations in addition to CEBPAdm has not been assessed until now with exception
of GATA2 mutations. Here, we investigated a cohort of 95 AML CEBPAdm cases for
concomitant mutations. TET2 was found to be most frequently mutated (34·0%) gene,
followed by GATA2 (21·0%), WT1 (13·7%), DNMT3A (9·6%), ASXL1 (9·5%), NRAS (8·4%),
KRAS (3·2%), IDH1/2 (6·3%), FLT3-internal tandem duplication (6·3%),
FLT3-tyrosine kinase domain (2·1%), NPM1 (2·1%), and RUNX1 (1/94). Patients
harbouring additional mutations in the TET2 gene showed significantly worse OS
than TET2 wild-type cases (P = 0·035), whereas GATA2-mutated patients showed
improved OS (P = 0·032). Serial analyses were performed for 39 CEBPAdm cases with
concomitant mutations. Here, we observed that CEBPA mutations present the primary
pathogenetic event in the majority of cases (76·9%). Further, a distinct gene
expression profile (GEP) was confirmed for CEBPAdm versus CEBPAsm or CEBPA
wild-type cases while no significant changes in GEP were observed related to
additional mutations within the CEBPAdm AML.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23521373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2013 May 9;121(19):3830-7, S1-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-452763. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

GATA2 haploinsufficiency caused by mutations in a conserved intronic element
leads to MonoMAC syndrome.

Hsu AP(1), Johnson KD, Falcone EL, Sanalkumar R, Sanchez L, Hickstein DD,
Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Lemieux JE, Zerbe CS, Bresnick EH, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Previous reports of GATA2 mutations have focused on the coding region of the gene
or full gene deletions. We recently identified 2 patients with novel
insertion/deletion mutations predicted to result in mRNA nonsense-mediated decay,
suggesting haploinsufficiency as the mechanism of GATA2 deficient disease. We
therefore screened patients without identified exonic lesions for mutations
within conserved noncoding and intronic regions. We discovered 1 patient with an 
intronic deletion mutation, 4 patients with point mutations within a conserved
intronic element, and 3 patients with reduced or absent transcription from 1
allele. All mutations affected GATA2 transcription. Full-length cDNA analysis
provided evidence for decreased expression of the mutant alleles. The intronic
deletion and point mutations considerably reduced the enhancer activity of the
intron 5 enhancer. Analysis of 512 immune system genes revealed similar
expression profiles in all clinically affected patients and reduced GATA2
transcript levels. These mutations strongly support the haploinsufficient nature 
of GATA2 deficiency and identify transcriptional mechanisms and targets that lead
to MonoMAC syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3650705
PMID: 23502222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Biol Sci. 2013;9(3):267-78. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4887. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Yes-associated protein (yap) is required for early embryonic development in
zebrafish (danio rerio).

Hu J(1), Sun S, Jiang Q, Sun S, Wang W, Gui Y, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical School and 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, PR China.

The hippo (Hpo) signaling pathway plays a critical role in regulation of organ
size. The kinase cascade ultimately antagonizes the transcriptional co-activator 
Yki/YAP, which is a key regulator of cell proliferation and apoptosis. In this
study, we performed a knocking down study using antisense morpholino (MO)
reagents and found that zebrafish YAP, a key transcriptional co-activator of Hpo 
pathway, plays a critical role in early embryonic development. At the cellular
level, yap inhibition increases apoptosis and decreases cell proliferation.
Reduction of yap function severely delays several developmental events, including
gastrulation, cardiogenesis and hematopoiesis. Knockdown of yap showed some
evidence of ventralization, including reduction of dorsally expressed marker
goosecoid (gsc), expansion of ventral marker gata2, disruption of the somites,
and reduction in head size. Finally, we performed a preliminary analysis with
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) for the candidate targets of zebrafish
Hpo pathway. In conclusion, our results revealed that zebrafish yap coordinately 
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis and is required for dorsoventral axis 
formation, gastrulation, cardiogenesis, hematopoiesis, and somitogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3596712
PMID: 23494967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058123. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

OP9 bone marrow stroma cells differentiate into megakaryocytes and platelets.

Matsubara Y(1), Ono Y, Suzuki H, Arai F, Suda T, Murata M, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. yumikoma@a7.keio.jp

Platelets are essential for hemostatic plug formation and thrombosis. The
mechanisms of megakaryocyte (MK) differentiation and subsequent platelet
production from stem cells remain only partially understood. The manufacture of
megakaryocytes (MKs) and platelets from cell sources including hematopoietic stem
cells and pluripotent stem cells have been highlighted for studying the platelet 
production mechanisms as well as for the development of new strategies for
platelet transfusion. The mouse bone marrow stroma cell line OP9 has been widely 
used as feeder cells for the differentiation of stem cells into MK lineages. OP9 
cells are reported to be pre-adipocytes. We previously reported that 3T3-L1
pre-adipocytes differentiated into MKs and platelets. In the present study, we
examined whether OP9 cells differentiate into MKs and platelets using MK lineage 
induction (MKLI) medium previously established to generate MKs and platelets from
hematopoietic stem cells, embryonic stem cells, and pre-adipocytes. OP9 cells
cultured in MKLI medium had megakaryocytic features, i.e., positivity for surface
markers CD41 and CD42b, polyploidy, and distinct morphology. The OP9-derived
platelets had functional characteristics, providing the first evidence for the
differentiation of OP9 cells into MKs and platelets. We then analyzed gene
expressions of critical factors that regulate megakaryopoiesis and
thrombopoiesis. The gene expressions of p45NF-E2, FOG, Fli1, GATA2, RUNX1,
thrombopoietin, and c-mpl were observed during the MK differentiation. Among the 
observed transcription factors of MK lineages, p45NF-E2 expression was increased 
during differentiation. We further studied MK and platelet generation using
p45NF-E2-overexpressing OP9 cells. OP9 cells transfected with p45NF-E2 had
enhanced production of MKs and platelets. Our findings revealed that OP9 cells
differentiated into MKs and platelets in vitro. OP9 cells have critical factors
for megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, which might be involved in a mechanism
of this differentiation. p45NF-E2 might also play important roles in the
differentiation of OP9 cells into MK lineages cells.

PMCID: PMC3585802
PMID: 23469264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Feb;121(2 Pt 2 Suppl 1):424-7. doi:
http://10.1097/AOG.0b013e318270ecd3.

Management of uterine bleeding during hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Purisch SE(1), Shanis D, Zerbe C, Merideth M, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Stratton P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital of University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hematopoietic stem cell transplant is an effective treatment strategy
for a variety of hematologic disorders, but patients are at risk for
dysfunctional coagulation and abnormal bleeding. Gynecologists are often
consulted before transplant for management of abnormal uterine bleeding, which
may be particularly challenging in this context.
CASE: A premenopausal woman with MonoMAC (a rare adult-onset immunodeficiency
syndrome characterized by monocytopenia and Mycobacterium avium complex
infections resulting from mutations in GATA2, a crucial gene in early
hematopoiesis) presented with pancytopenia, evolving leukemia, and recent
strokes, necessitating anticoagulation. During preparation for hematopoietic stem
cell transplant, she experienced prolonged menorrhagia requiring transfusions.
Surgical therapy was contraindicated, and medical management was successful only 
when combined with balloon tamponade.
CONCLUSION: Balloon tamponade may be a potentially life-saving adjunct to medical
therapy for control of uterine hemorrhage before hematopoietic stem cell
transplant.

PMCID: PMC3798064
PMID: 23344397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Med Oncol. 2013 Jun;30(2):498. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0498-7. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Expression and prognostic significance of GATA-binding protein 2 in colorectal
cancer.

Chen L(1), Jiang B, Wang Z, Liu M, Ma Y, Yang H, Xing J, Zhang C, Yao Z, Zhang N,
Cui M, Su X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Minimally Invasive Gastrointestinal Surgery, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, 52 Fucheng Road, Haidian District,
Beijing 100142, China.

GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2) is a nuclear transcription factor that plays a
critical role in tumorigenesis. High levels of GATA2 expression are correlated
with poor survival outcomes in many types of cancer. However, the expression and 
prognostic significance of GATA2 in colorectal cancer remain unknown. In this
study, GATA2 protein expression was examined using immunohistochemistry in 307
colorectal cancer tissues, and its association with clinicopathological features 
and prognosis was analyzed. The expression of GATA2 was found to be significantly
higher in colorectal cancer tissues than in matched adjacent noncancerous tissues
(60.3 vs. 9.0 %, P < 0.0001). The expression of GATA2 was significantly
correlated with tumor location (P = 0.005), histological type (P = 0.019), and
recurrence (P = 0.009). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated that patients
with high levels of GATA2 expression had worse disease-free survival outcomes
than those with low levels of GATA2 expression (P = 0.016). Univariate analysis
showed high levels of GATA2 expression to be significantly associated with
shorter periods of disease-free survival (HR 2.196; 95 % CI 1.142-4.226; P =
0.018). Multivariate analysis showed GATA2 expression to be an independent
prognostic factor for patients with colorectal cancer (HR 1.952; 95 % CI
1.010-3.775; P = 0.047). These findings suggest that high levels of GATA2
expression may be a useful indicator of disease recurrence after curative
colorectal cancer treatment.

PMID: 23423786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Curr Biol. 2013 Mar 4;23(5):412-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.046. Epub 2013 Feb 
14.

Retinoid acid specifies neuronal identity through graded expression of Ascl1.

Jacob J(1), Kong J, Moore S, Milton C, Sasai N, Gonzalez-Quevedo R, Terriente J, 
Imayoshi I, Kageyama R, Wilkinson DG, Novitch BG, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. jjacob@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Apr 8;23(7):632. Kageyama, Ryoichoro [corrected to Kageyama,
Ryoichiro].

Cell diversity and organization in the neural tube depend on the integration of
extrinsic signals acting along orthogonal axes. These are believed to specify
distinct cellular identities by triggering all-or-none changes in expression of
combinations of transcription factors. Under the influence of a common
dorsoventral signal, sonic hedgehog, and distinct anterior-posterior (A-P)
inductive signals, two topographically related progenitor pools that share a
common transcriptional code produce serotonergic and V3 neurons in the hindbrain 
and spinal cord, respectively. These neurons have different physiological
properties, functions, and connectivity. Serotonergic involvement in
neuropsychiatric diseases has prompted greater characterization of their
postmitotic repertoire of fate determinants, which include Gata2, Lmx1b, and
Pet1, whereas V3 neurons express Sim1. How distinct serotonergic and V3 neuronal 
identities emerge from progenitors that share a common transcriptional code is
not understood. Here, we show that changes in retinoid activity in these two
progenitor pools determine their fates. Retinoids, via Notch signaling, control
the expression level in progenitors of the transcription factor Ascl1, which
selects serotonergic and V3 neuronal identities in a dose-dependent manner.
Therefore, quantitative differences in the expression of a single component of a 
transcriptional code can select distinct cell fates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3659286
PMID: 23416099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 May;30(5):1159-71. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst019. Epub 2013 Feb 
5.

Inference of natural selection from interspersed genomic elements based on
polymorphism and divergence.

Gronau I(1), Arbiza L, Mohammed J, Siepel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell
University, USA.

Complete genome sequences contain valuable information about natural selection,
but this information is difficult to access for short, widely scattered noncoding
elements such as transcription factor binding sites or small noncoding RNAs.
Here, we introduce a new computational method, called Inference of Natural
Selection from Interspersed Genomically coHerent elemenTs (INSIGHT), for
measuring the influence of natural selection on such elements. INSIGHT uses a
generative probabilistic model to contrast patterns of polymorphism and
divergence in the elements of interest with those in flanking neutral sites,
pooling weak information from many short elements in a manner that accounts for
variation among loci in mutation rates and coalescent times. The method is able
to disentangle the contributions of weak negative, strong negative, and positive 
selection based on their distinct effects on patterns of polymorphism and
divergence. It obtains information about divergence from multiple outgroup
genomes using a general statistical phylogenetic approach. The INSIGHT model is
efficiently fitted to genome-wide data using an approximate expectation
maximization algorithm. Using simulations, we show that the method can accurately
estimate the parameters of interest even in complex demographic scenarios, and
that it significantly improves on methods based on summary statistics describing 
polymorphism and divergence. To demonstrate the usefulness of INSIGHT, we apply
it to several classes of human noncoding RNAs and to GATA2-binding sites in the
human genome.

PMCID: PMC3697874
PMID: 23386628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Blood. 2013 Apr 11;121(15):2882-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-451641. Epub 2013 
Jan 31.

RUNX1a enhances hematopoietic lineage commitment from human embryonic stem cells 
and inducible pluripotent stem cells.

Ran D(1), Shia WJ, Lo MC, Fan JB, Knorr DA, Ferrell PI, Ye Z, Yan M, Cheng L,
Kaufman DS, Zhang DE.

Author information: 
(1)Moores University of California at San Diego Cancer Center, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Jun 27;121(26):5250-2.
    Blood. 2013 Jun 27;121(26):5252-3.

Advancements in human pluripotent stem cell (hPSC) research have potential to
revolutionize therapeutic transplantation. It has been demonstrated that
transcription factors may play key roles in regulating maintenance, expansion,
and differentiation of hPSCs. In addition to its regulatory functions in
hematopoiesis and blood-related disorders, the transcription factor RUNX1 is also
required for the formation of definitive blood stem cells. In this study, we
demonstrated that expression of endogenous RUNX1a, an isoform of RUNX1, parallels
with lineage commitment and hematopoietic emergence from hPSCs, including both
human embryonic stem cells and inducible pluripotent stem cells. In a defined
hematopoietic differentiation system, ectopic expression of RUNX1a facilitates
emergence of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) and positively regulates
expression of mesoderm and hematopoietic differentiation-related factors,
including Brachyury, KDR, SCL, GATA2, and PU.1. HPCs derived from RUNX1a hPSCs
show enhanced expansion ability, and the ex vivo-expanded cells are capable of
differentiating into multiple lineages. Expression of RUNX1a in embryoid bodies
(EBs) promotes definitive hematopoiesis that generates erythrocytes with ß-globin
production. Moreover, HPCs generated from RUNX1a EBs possess =9-week repopulation
ability and show multilineage hematopoietic reconstitution in vivo. Together, our
results suggest that RUNX1a facilitates the process of producing therapeutic HPCs
from hPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3624936
PMID: 23372166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Blood. 2013 Apr 4;121(14):2669-77. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-453969. Epub 2013
Jan 30.

Mutations in GATA2 cause human NK cell deficiency with specific loss of the
CD56(bright) subset.

Mace EM(1), Hsu AP, Monaco-Shawver L, Makedonas G, Rosen JB, Dropulic L, Cohen
JI, Frenkel EP, Bagwell JC, Sullivan JL, Biron CA, Spalding C, Zerbe CS, Uzel G, 
Holland SM, Orange JS.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Apr 4;121(14):2579-80.

Mutations in the transcription factor GATA2 underlie the syndrome of
monocytopenia and B- and natural killer (NK)-cell lymphopenia associated with
opportunistic infections and cancers. In addition, patients have recurrent and
severe viral infections. NK cells play a critical role in mediating antiviral
immunity. Human NK cells are thought to mature in a linear fashion, with the
CD56(bright) stage preceding terminal maturation to the CD56(dim) stage,
considered the most enabled for cytotoxicity. Here we report an NK cell
functional defect in GATA2-deficient patients and extend this genetic lesion to
what is considered to be the original NK cell-deficient patient. In most cases,
GATA2 deficiency is accompanied by a severe reduction in peripheral blood NK
cells and marked functional impairment. The NK cells detected in peripheral blood
of some GATA2-deficient patients are exclusively of the CD56(dim) subset, which
is recapitulated on in vitro NK cell differentiation. In vivo, interferon a
treatment increased NK cell number and partially restored function but did not
correct the paucity of CD56(bright) cells. Thus, GATA2 is required for the
maturation of human NK cells and the maintenance of the CD56(bright) pool in the 
periphery. Defects in GATA2 are a novel cause of profound NK cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3617632
PMID: 23365458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(8):4261-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03497-12. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

The myeloid transcription factor GATA-2 regulates the viral UL144 gene during
human cytomegalovirus latency in an isolate-specific manner.

Poole E(1), Walther A, Raven K, Benedict CA, Mason GM, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Medicine, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

It is generally accepted that, following primary infection, human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) establishes lifelong latency in CD34(+) progenitor cells and other
derivative cells of the myeloid lineage. In this study, we show that the viral
UL144 gene is expressed during latent infection in two cell types of the myeloid 
lineage, CD34(+) and CD14(+) monocytes, and that the UL144 protein is functional 
in latently infected monocytes. However, this latency-associated expression of
UL144 occurs only in certain isolates of HCMV and depends on the presence of
functional GATA-2 transcription factor binding sites in the UL144 promoter, in
contrast to the viral latency-associated gene LUNA, which we also show is
regulated by GATA-2 but expressed uniformly during latent infection independent
of the virus isolate. Taken together, these data suggest that the HCMV
latency-associated transcriptome may be virus isolate specific and dependent on
the repertoire of transcription factor binding sites in the promoters of
latency-associated genes.

PMCID: PMC3624344
PMID: 23365437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Blood. 2013 Mar 21;121(12):2289-300. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-446120. Epub 2013
Jan 17.

Activity of a heptad of transcription factors is associated with stem cell
programs and clinical outcome in acute myeloid leukemia.

Diffner E(1), Beck D, Gudgin E, Thoms JA, Knezevic K, Pridans C, Foster S, Goode 
D, Lim WK, Boelen L, Metzeler KH, Micklem G, Bohlander SK, Buske C, Burnett A,
Ottersbach K, Vassiliou GS, Olivier J, Wong JW, Göttgens B, Huntly BJ, Pimanda
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):2901.

Aberrant transcriptional programs in combination with abnormal proliferative
signaling drive leukemic transformation. These programs operate in normal
hematopoiesis where they are involved in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
proliferation and maintenance. Ets Related Gene (ERG) is a component of normal
and leukemic stem cell signatures and high ERG expression is a risk factor for
poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, mechanisms that underlie
ERG expression in AML and how its expression relates to leukemic stemness are
unknown. We report that ERG expression in AML is associated with activity of the 
ERG promoters and +85 stem cell enhancer and a heptad of transcription factors
that combinatorially regulate genes in HSCs. Gene expression signatures derived
from ERG promoter-stem cell enhancer and heptad activity are associated with
clinical outcome when ERG expression alone fails. We also show that the heptad
signature is associated with AMLs that lack somatic mutations in NPM1 and confers
an adverse prognosis when associated with FLT3 mutations. Taken together, these
results suggest that transcriptional regulators cooperate to establish or
maintain primitive stem cell-like signatures in leukemic cells and that the
underlying pattern of somatic mutations contributes to the development of these
signatures and modulate their influence on clinical outcome.

PMID: 23327922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5381-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.447227. Epub 2013
Jan 14.

SON protein regulates GATA-2 through transcriptional control of the microRNA
23a~27a~24-2 cluster.

Ahn EE(1), Higashi T, Yan M, Matsuura S, Hickey CJ, Lo MC, Shia WJ, DeKelver RC, 
Zhang DE.

Author information: 
(1)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, the University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

SON is a DNA- and RNA-binding protein localized in nuclear speckles. Although its
function in RNA splicing for effective cell cycle progression and genome
stability was recently unveiled, other mechanisms of SON functions remain
unexplored. Here, we report that SON regulates GATA-2, a key transcription factor
involved in hematopoietic stem cell maintenance and differentiation. SON is
highly expressed in undifferentiated hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells and
leukemic blasts. SON knockdown leads to significant depletion of GATA-2 protein
with marginal down-regulation of GATA-2 mRNA. We show that miR-27a is
up-regulated upon SON knockdown and targets the 3'-UTR of GATA-2 mRNA in
hematopoietic cells. Up-regulation of miR-27a was due to activation of the
promoter of the miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster, suggesting that SON suppresses this
promoter to lower the microRNAs from this cluster. Our data revealed a previously
unidentified role of SON in microRNA production via regulating the transcription 
process, thereby modulating GATA-2 at the protein level during hematopoietic
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3581430
PMID: 23322776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 15;22(10):2119-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt010. Epub 2013 Jan
12.

Genetic variation associated with circulating monocyte count in the eMERGE
Network.

Crosslin DR(1), McDavid A, Weston N, Zheng X, Hart E, de Andrade M, Kullo IJ,
McCarty CA, Doheny KF, Pugh E, Kho A, Hayes MG, Ritchie MD, Saip A, Crawford DC, 
Crane PK, Newton K, Carrell DS, Gallego CJ, Nalls MA, Li R, Mirel DB, Crenshaw A,
Couper DJ, Tanaka T, van Rooij FJ, Chen MH, Smith AV, Zakai NA, Yango Q, Garcia
M, Liu Y, Lumley T, Folsom AR, Reiner AP, Felix JF, Dehghan A, Wilson JG, Bis JC,
Fox CS, Glazer NL, Cupples LA, Coresh J, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason V, Bandinelli
S, Frayling TM, Chakravarti A, van Duijn CM, Melzer D, Levy D, Boerwinkle E,
Singleton AB, Hernandez DG, Longo DL, Witteman JC, Psaty BM, Ferrucci L, Harris
TB, O'Donnell CJ, Ganesh SK; CHARGE Hematology Working Group, Larson EB, Carlson 
CS, Jarvik GP; electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) Network.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. davidcr@u.washington.edu

With white blood cell count emerging as an important risk factor for chronic
inflammatory diseases, genetic associations of differential leukocyte types,
specifically monocyte count, are providing novel candidate genes and pathways to 
further investigate. Circulating monocytes play a critical role in vascular
diseases such as in the formation of atherosclerotic plaque. We performed a joint
and ancestry-stratified genome-wide association analyses to identify variants
specifically associated with monocyte count in 11 014 subjects in the electronic 
Medical Records and Genomics Network. In the joint and European ancestry samples,
we identified novel associations in the chromosome 16 interferon regulatory
factor 8 (IRF8) gene (P-value = 2.78×10(-16), ß = -0.22). Other monocyte
associations include novel missense variants in the chemokine-binding protein 2
(CCBP2) gene (P-value = 1.88×10(-7), ß = 0.30) and a region of replication found 
in ribophorin I (RPN1) (P-value = 2.63×10(-16), ß = -0.23) on chromosome 3. The
CCBP2 and RPN1 region is located near GATA binding protein2 gene that has been
previously shown to be associated with coronary heart disease. On chromosome 9,
we found a novel association in the prostaglandin reductase 1 gene (P-value =
2.29×10(-7), ß = 0.16), which is downstream from lysophosphatidic acid receptor
1. This region has previously been shown to be associated with monocyte count. We
also replicated monocyte associations of genome-wide significance (P-value =
5.68×10(-17), ß = -0.23) at the integrin, alpha 4 gene on chromosome 2. The novel
IRF8 results and further replications provide supporting evidence of genetic
regions associated with monocyte count.

PMCID: PMC3633369
PMID: 23314186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Exp Med. 2013 Jan 14;210(1):71-84. doi: 10.1084/jem.20120993. Epub 2012 Dec 24.

Hes repressors are essential regulators of hematopoietic stem cell development
downstream of Notch signaling.

Guiu J(1), Shimizu R, D'Altri T, Fraser ST, Hatakeyama J, Bresnick EH, Kageyama
R, Dzierzak E, Yamamoto M, Espinosa L, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Research, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute, IMIM,
Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Previous studies have identified Notch as a key regulator of hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) development, but the underlying downstream mechanisms remain unknown. 
The Notch target Hes1 is widely expressed in the aortic endothelium and
hematopoietic clusters, though Hes1-deficient mice show no overt hematopoietic
abnormalities. We now demonstrate that Hes is required for the development of HSC
in the mouse embryo, a function previously undetected as the result of functional
compensation by de novo expression of Hes5 in the aorta/gonad/mesonephros (AGM)
region of Hes1 mutants. Analysis of embryos deficient for Hes1 and Hes5 reveals
an intact arterial program with overproduction of nonfunctional hematopoietic
precursors and total absence of HSC activity. These alterations were associated
with increased expression of the hematopoietic regulators Runx1, c-myb, and the
previously identified Notch target Gata2. By analyzing the Gata2 locus, we have
identified functional RBPJ-binding sites, which mutation results in loss of Gata2
reporter expression in transgenic embryos, and functional Hes-binding sites,
which mutation leads to specific Gata2 up-regulation in the hematopoietic
precursors. Together, our findings show that Notch activation in the AGM triggers
Gata2 and Hes1 transcription, and next HES-1 protein represses Gata2, creating an
incoherent feed-forward loop required to restrict Gata2 expression in the
emerging HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3549704
PMID: 23267012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Blood. 2013 Jan 31;121(5):822-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-447367. Epub 2012 Dec
6.

High frequency of GATA2 mutations in patients with mild chronic neutropenia
evolving to MonoMac syndrome, myelodysplasia, and acute myeloid leukemia.

Pasquet M(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Tavitian S, Prade N, Beaupain B, Larochelle
O, Petit A, Rohrlich P, Ferrand C, Van Den Neste E, Poirel HA, Lamy T,
Ouachée-Chardin M, Mansat-De Mas V, Corre J, Récher C, Plat G, Bachelerie F,
Donadieu J, Delabesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Toulouse Purpan,
Toulouse, France.

Congenital neutropenia is a group of genetic disorders that involve chronic
neutropenia and susceptibility to infections. These neutropenias may be isolated 
or associated with immunologic defects or extra-hematopoietic manifestations.
Complications may occur as infectious diseases, but also less frequently as
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recently, the
transcription factor GATA2 has been identified as a new predisposing gene for
familial AML/MDS. In the present study, we describe the initial identification by
exome sequencing of a GATA2 R396Q mutation in a family with a history of chronic 
mild neutropenia evolving to AML and/or MDS. The subsequent analysis of the
French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry allowed the identification of 6
additional pedigrees and 10 patients with 6 different and not previously
reportedGATA2 mutations (R204X, E224X, R330X, A372T, M388V, and a complete
deletion of the GATA2 locus). The frequent evolution to MDS and AML in these
patients reveals the importance of screening GATA2 in chronic neutropenia
associated with monocytopenia because of the frequent hematopoietic
transformation, variable clinical expression at onset, and the need for
aggressive therapy in patients with poor clinical outcome.KEY POINTS: Mutations
of key transcription factor in myeloid malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3714670
PMID: 23223431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cell Rep. 2012 Dec 27;2(6):1722-35. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.003. Epub 2012 
Dec 7.

T lymphocyte potential marks the emergence of definitive hematopoietic
progenitors in human pluripotent stem cell differentiation cultures.

Kennedy M(1), Awong G, Sturgeon CM, Ditadi A, LaMotte-Mohs R, Zúñiga-Pflücker JC,
Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)McEwen Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

The efficient generation of hematopoietic stem cells from human pluripotent stem 
cells is dependent on the appropriate specification of the definitive
hematopoietic program during differentiation. In this study, we used T lymphocyte
potential to track the onset of definitive hematopoiesis from human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells differentiated with specific morphogens in serum- 
and stromal-free cultures. We show that this program develops from a progenitor
population with characteristics of hemogenic endothelium, including the
expression of CD34, VE-cadherin, GATA2, LMO2, and RUNX1. Along with T cells,
these progenitors display the capacity to generate myeloid and erythroid cells.
Manipulation of Activin/Nodal signaling during early stages of differentiation
revealed that development of the definitive hematopoietic progenitor population
is not dependent on this pathway, distinguishing it from primitive hematopoiesis.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that it is possible to generate T
lymphoid progenitors from pluripotent stem cells and that this lineage develops
from a population whose emergence marks the onset of human definitive
hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23219550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jan;27(1):74-91. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1182. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

GATA2-induced silencing and LIM-homeodomain protein-induced activation are
mediated by a bi-functional response element in the rat GnRH receptor gene.

Schang AL(1), Granger A, Quérat B, Bleux C, Cohen-Tannoudji J, Laverrière JN.

Author information: 
(1)University of Paris Diderot Paris 7, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Biologie
Fonctionnelle et Adaptative, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Equipe 
d'Accueil Conventionnée 4413, Physiologie de l'Axe Gonadotrope, Bâtiment Buffon, 
Case Courrier 7007, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

GATA2 transcription factor and LIM homeodomain proteins Islet1 (ISL1) and LIM
homeobox 3 (LHX3) are suspected to be involved in gonadotrope cell fate and
maintenance. The GnRH receptor gene (Gnrhr), crucial for gonadotrope function, is
expressed in the pituitary gland from embryonic day 13.5 onward, well before LH
and FSH ß-subunits. This expression pattern together with the presence of WGATAR 
and TAAT motifs in Gnrhr promoter sequences suggests the involvement of early
transcription factors in promoter activation. In this study, using a
well-characterized transgenic mouse model, GATA2 was found colocalized with Gnrhr
promoter activity in the pituitary. Transient transfection of Gnrhr promoter
luciferase fusion constructs together with either GATA2 expression vectors or
small interfering RNA in gonadotrope cell lines indicated that GATA2, which
typically acts as a trans-activator, unexpectedly repressed Gnrhr promoter
activity. Using DNA chromatography affinity and EMSA, we demonstrated that GATA2 
operates via a response element containing a peculiar palindromic GATA motif that
overlaps a critical TAAT motif involved in LHX3/ISL1 trans-activation. Indeed,
despite the inhibitory action of GATA2, this element displayed a clear-cut
enhancer activity in gonadotrope cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
indicated that GATA2, LHX3, and ISL1 interact with a Gnrhr promoter fragment
encompassing this element. The trans-repressive action of GATA2 on Gnrhr promoter
activity is likely balanced or even hindered by trans-activating effects of LIM
homeodomain proteins via this novel bifunctional LIM/GATA response element. Such 
a hierarchical interplay may contribute to finely adjust Gnrhr gene expression in
gonadotrope cell lineage during pituitary development as well as in the adult
animal.

PMID: 23211524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Respir Med. 2013 Mar;107(3):368-79. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.11.003. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

The role of SCCA1 in asthma related physiological events in the airway epithelium
and the effect of promoter variants on asthma and gene function.

Karaaslan C(1), Birben E, Keskin O, Sahiner U, Sackesen C, Kalayci O.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, 06800 Ankara,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Even though the systemic level of SCCA1, a serine protease inhibitor,
was shown to be elevated in asthma, its physiological role is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the effect of SCCA1 on apoptosis, cytokine
expression and mucus production by A549 cells and define the effect of promoter
variants on gene expression and association with asthma.
METHODS: SCCA levels were measured by ELISA. Promoter variants were determined by
direct sequencing. 442 asthmatic children and 191 controls were genotyped by
RFLP. The functional effect of the polymorphisms was assessed in transient
transfection experiments using reporter constructs. A transcription factor ELISA 
was used for differential binding of GATA proteins to the variant region. The
effects of SCCA1 on cytokine synthesis, mucus production and apoptosis were
determined in A549 cells transfected with SCCA1 pcDNA vector. MUC5AC expression
in A549 cells was determined with RT-PCR.
RESULTS: SCCA1 protein level was significantly higher in asthmatic children
compared to healthy controls. Four polymorphisms SCCA1 promoter that were in
linkage disequilibrium were associated with skin test positivity in asthmatic
children and showed higher promoter activity and higher binding of GATA-2 and
GATA-3 after IL-4 + IL-13 stimulation. IL-6, IL-8 levels were significantly
higher in cells transfected with SCCA1 whereas RANTES increased only after IL-4
stimulation. Transfection of A549 cells with SCCA1 resulted in decreased MUC5AC
expression and conferred protection against apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that SCCA1 has diverse effects on many of the
cellular events that characterize asthma and its role extends beyond protease
inhibition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Development. 2012 Nov;139(22):4232-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.081901.

Gata2 provides an early anterior bias and uncovers a global positioning system
for polarity in the amniote embryo.

Bertocchini F(1), Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street, London, UK. federica.bertocchini@unican.es

The first axis to be specified during vertebrate development is that between the 
site where gastrulation will begin and the opposite pole of the embryo
(dorsoventral axis in amphibians and fish, anteroposterior in amniotes). This
relies on Nodal activity, but different vertebrates differ in how this activity
is positioned. In chick, the earliest known asymmetry is posterior expression of 
the TGFß-related factor Vg1, close to the future Nodal expression domain. Here we
show that the transcription factor Gata2 is expressed anteriorly before this
stage. Gata2 influences the site of primitive streak formation and its role is
independent from, and upstream of, Vg1 and Wnt. However, although Vg1 is required
for streak formation, Gata2 does not act as an absolute anterior specifier, but
provides an anterior bias. These findings point to previously unsuspected global 
determinants of polarity of the early amniote embryo.

PMCID: PMC3565152
PMID: 23093427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047175. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

NF-Y recruits both transcription activator and repressor to modulate tissue- and 
developmental stage-specific expression of human <U+03B3>-globin gene.

Zhu X(1), Wang Y, Pi W, Liu H, Wickrema A, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia
and College of Graduate Studies, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA,
USA.

The human embryonic, fetal and adult ß-like globin genes provide a paradigm for
tissue- and developmental stage-specific gene regulation. The fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene
is expressed in fetal erythroid cells but is repressed in adult erythroid cells. 
The molecular mechanism underlying this transcriptional switch during erythroid
development is not completely understood. Here, we used a combination of in vitro
and in vivo assays to dissect the molecular assemblies of the active and the
repressed proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complexes in K562 human erythroleukemia cell
line and primary human fetal and adult erythroid cells. We found that the
proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complex is assembled by a developmentally regulated,
general transcription activator NF-Y bound strongly at the tandem CCAAT motifs
near the TATA box. NF-Y recruits to neighboring DNA motifs the developmentally
regulated, erythroid transcription activator GATA-2 and general repressor BCL11A,
which in turn recruit erythroid repressor GATA-1 and general repressor COUP-TFII 
to form respectively the NF-Y/GATA-2 transcription activator hub and the
BCL11A/COUP-TFII/GATA-1 transcription repressor hub. Both the activator and the
repressor hubs are present in both the active and the repressed <U+03B3>-globin promoter
complexes in fetal and adult erythroid cells. Through changes in their levels and
respective interactions with the co-activators and co-repressors during erythroid
development, the activator and the repressor hubs modulate erythroid- and
developmental stage-specific transcription of <U+03B3>-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC3468502
PMID: 23071749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):797-801. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2117-7. Epub 2012
Oct 14.

The methylation of C/EBP ß gene promoter and regulated by GATA-2 protein.

Rui W(1), Jin Z, Zhe G, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Shanghai Medical School, Fudan University,
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 200032,
China. wanrui_7@hotmail.com

Mammalian genomes are punctuated by DNA sequences containing an atypically high
frequency of CpG sites (CpG islands; CGIs) that are associated with the majority 
of annotated gene promoters. Methylated C bases of CpG sites inhibit the
expression of downstream genes. During the differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß gene plays an
important role. We studied the CpG island methylation status of the C/EBP ß
promoter and its relationship with the GATA-2 protein. We used computer analysis 
to determine that the C/EBP ß promoter sequence is rich in CGIs, and observed
that two of seven methylated C bases were demethylated during the preadipocyte
differentiation using bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP). This corresponded with the 
onset of notable C/EBP ß gene expression. Immunofluorescence and molecular
docking showed that the GATA-2 protein binds the C/EBP ß promoter in front of the
first demethylated CpG site. We also found that expression of GATA-2 and C/EBP ß 
proteins is negatively correlated. These results indicate that the methylated C
bases in the C/EBP ß promoter relate to expression of the C/EBP ß gene, and that 
its demethylation is linked with GATA-2 protein association.

PMID: 23065276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;130(5):1030-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.07.049.
Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Warts and all: human papillomavirus in primary immunodeficiencies.

Leiding JW(1), Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1684, USA.
jleiding@health.usf.edu

Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) is almost universal and eventually
asymptomatic, but pathologic infection with HPV is severe, recurrent, and
recalcitrant to therapy. It is also an underappreciated manifestation of primary 
immunodeficiency. Mutations in EVER1, EVER2, GATA2, CXCR4, and dedicator of
cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8) are typically associated with extensive HPV infections,
whereas several other primary immune defects result in severe HPV much less
frequently. We review immunodeficiencies with severe HPV infections and the
mechanisms underlying them.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3517887
PMID: 23036745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e40959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040959. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Gene expression profiling identifies HOXB4 as a direct downstream target of
GATA-2 in human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

Fujiwara T(1), Yokoyama H, Okitsu Y, Kamata M, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y, Fujimaki S, 
Takahashi S, Ishizawa K, Bresnick EH, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.

Aplastic anemia is characterized by a reduced hematopoietic stem cell number.
Although GATA-2 expression was reported to be decreased in CD34-positive cells in
aplastic anemia, many questions remain regarding the intrinsic characteristics of
hematopoietic stem cells in this disease. In this study, we identified HOXB4 as a
downstream target of GATA-2 based on expression profiling with human cord
blood-derived CD34-positive cells infected with control or GATA-2 lentiviral
shRNA. To confirm the functional link between GATA-2 and HOXB4, we conducted
GATA-2 gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments, and HOXB4 promoter
analysis, including luciferase assay, in vitro DNA binding analysis and
quantitative ChIP analysis, using K562 and CD34-positive cells. The analyses
suggested that GATA-2 directly regulates HOXB4 expression through the GATA
sequence in the promoter region. Furthermore, we assessed GATA-2 and HOXB4
expression in CD34-positive cells from patients with aplastic anemia (n = 10) and
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (n = 13), and demonstrated that the
expression levels of HOXB4 and GATA-2 were correlated in these populations (r =
0.6573, p<0.01). Our results suggested that GATA-2 directly regulates HOXB4
expression in hematopoietic stem cells, which may play an important role in the
development and/or progression of aplastic anemia.

PMCID: PMC3454409
PMID: 23028422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Genet Genomics. 2012 Sep 20;39(9):463-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2012.08.003. Epub 
2012 Sep 5.

Kzp regulates the transcription of gata2 and pu.1 during primitive hematopoiesis 
in zebrafish embryos.

Liu F(1), Yao S, Zhang T, Xiao C, Shang Y, Liu J, Mo X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Kaiso zinc finger-containing protein (Kzp), a maternally-derived transcription
factor, controls dorsoventral patterning during zebrafish gastrulation. Here, we 
uncovered a new function for Kzp in zebrafish embryonic primitive hematopoiesis. 
The depletion of kzp led to defects in primitive hematopoiesis including the
development of the erythroid and myeloid lineages. On the other hand,
overexpression of kzp caused the ectopic expression of gata1, gata2, and pu.1.
Chromosome immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Kzp protein directly binds to
gata1, gata2, and pu.1 promoters. Interestingly, the ectopic expression of gata2 
was able to rescue the erythroid, but not the myeloid lineage in kzp-depleted
zebrafish embryos. gata1 expression controlled by Kzp was dependent on gata2
during primitive erythropoiesis. Our results indicate that Kzp is a critical
transcriptional factor for the expression of gata2 and pu.1 to modulate primitive
hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23021546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1164-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.09.004. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Suspected leukemia oncoproteins CREB1 and LYL1 regulate Op18/STMN1 expression.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Liu J, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto ON, Canada.
s.san-marina@Biostatistix.com

Stathmin (STMN1) is a microtubule destabilizing protein with a key role in cell
cycle progression and cell migration that is up-regulated in several cancers and 
may contribute to the malignant phenotype. However, the factors that regulate its
expression are not well understood. Loss as well as gain-of-function p53
mutations up-regulate STMN1 and in acute myelogenous leukemia where p53 is
predominantly wild-type, STMN1 is also over-expressed. Here we show regulatory
control of STMN1 expression by the leucine zipper transcription factor (TF) CREB1
and the basic helix-loop-helix TF LYL1. By ChIP-chip experiments we demonstrate
in vivo the presence of LYL1 and CREB1 in close proximity on the STMN1 promoter
and using promoter assays we reveal co-regulation of STMN1 by CREB1 and LYL1. By 
contrast, TAL1, another suspected oncoprotein in leukemia and close relative of
LYL1, exerts no regulatory effect on the STMN1 promoter. NLI, LMO2 and GATA2 are 
previously described co-activators of Tal1/Lyl1-E47 transcriptional complexes and
potentiate Lyl1 activation of the STMN1 promoter while having no effect on TAL1
transactivation. Promoter mutations that abrogate CREB1 proximal binding or
mutations of the DNA-binding domain of CREB1 abolish LYL1 transcriptional
activation. These results show that CRE and Ebox sites function as coordinated
units and support previous evidence of joint CREB1-and LYL1 transcription events 
activating an aberrant subset of promoters in leukemia. CREB1 or LYL1 shRNA
knock-down down-regulate STMN1 expression. Because down-regulation of STMN1 has
been shown to have anti-proliferative effects, while CREB1 and LYL1 are suspected
oncoproteins, interference with CREB1-LYL1 interactions may complement standard
chemotherapy and yield additional beneficial effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Reprod Biomed Online. 2012 Nov;25(5):481-91. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.07.019.
Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Endometrial expression of selected genes in patients achieving pregnancy
spontaneously or after ICSI and patients failing at least two ICSI cycles.

Allegra A(1), Marino A, Peregrin PC, Lama A, García-Segovia A, Forte GI,
Núñez-Calonge R, Agueli C, Mazzola S, Volpes A.

Author information: 
(1)Andros Day Surgery, Reproductive Medicine Unit, 90144 Palermo, Italy.
allegra@centroandros.it

The objective of this study was to identify the endometrial gene expression
profile in receptive phase, which could represent a useful prognostic tool for
selecting IVF patients. Endometrial expression of 47 selected genes biopsied
during the window of implantation in natural cycles was compared between patients
who achieved a successful pregnancy spontaneously or after subsequent
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) cycles and patients who did not achieve a
pregnancy after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed 
significantly different levels of expression in 19 genes, five implicated in
apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity (LIF, SPP1,
C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11, GATA2), two
in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism (AOX1, ALDH1A3,
GPX3, NNMT). The evidence for these genes being differently expressed could
represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive endometrial gene 
expression profile, which could be used in the future as a prognostic tool for
IVF patients. Gene expression analysis technology has opened new important
perspectives on the study of the physiological processes of different tissues and
organs. Specifically for the endometrium, it would be really interesting to find 
out an endometrial gene expression profile of receptive phase, which could be
used in future as a useful prognostic tool for selecting IVF patients. To achieve
this aim, the objective of the present paper was the comparison of endometrial
expression in natural cycles of 47 selected genes between the biopsies of
patients who achieved a successful pregnancy, either spontaneously or after
subsequent ICSI cycles, and those of patients who did not achieve a pregnancy
after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed a
significant different expression in 19 genes: five implicated in programmed cell 
death, known as apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity 
(LIF, SPP1, C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11,
GATA2), two in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism
(AOX1, ALDH1A3, GPX3, NNMT). The evidence of these genes being differently
expressed could represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive
endometrial gene expression profile which could be used in the future as a
prognostic tool for IVF patients.

Copyright © 2012 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22999554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3705-17. doi: 10.1172/JCI61619. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Conditional Gata2 inactivation results in HSC loss and lymphatic mispatterning.

Lim KC(1), Hosoya T, Brandt W, Ku CJ, Hosoya-Ohmura S, Camper SA, Yamamoto M,
Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-2 plays vital roles in quite diverse developmental 
programs, including hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) survival and proliferation. We 
previously identified a vascular endothelial (VE) enhancer that regulates GATA-2 
activity in pan-endothelial cells. To more thoroughly define the in vivo
regulatory properties of this enhancer, we generated a tamoxifen-inducible Cre
transgenic mouse line using the Gata2 VE enhancer (Gata2 VECre) and utilized it
to temporally direct tissue-specific conditional loss of Gata2. Here, we report
that Gata2 VECre-mediated loss of GATA-2 led to anemia, hemorrhage, and eventual 
death in edematous embryos. We further determined that the etiology of anemia in 
conditional Gata2 mutant embryos involved HSC loss in the fetal liver, as
demonstrated by in vitro colony-forming and immunophenotypic as well as in vivo
long-term competitive repopulation experiments. We further documented that the
edema and hemorrhage in conditional Gata2 mutant embryos were due to defective
lymphatic development. Thus, we unexpectedly discovered that in addition to its
contribution to endothelial cell development, the VE enhancer also regulates
GATA-2 expression in definitive fetal liver and adult BM HSCs, and that GATA-2
function is required for proper lymphatic vascular development during
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461906
PMID: 22996665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3692-704. doi: 10.1172/JCI61623. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

Cis-element mutated in GATA2-dependent immunodeficiency governs hematopoiesis and
vascular integrity.

Johnson KD(1), Hsu AP, Ryu MJ, Wang J, Gao X, Boyer ME, Liu Y, Lee Y, Calvo KR,
Keles S, Zhang J, Holland SM, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical 
Research, UW Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Haploinsufficiency for GATA2 causes human immunodeficiency syndromes
characterized by mycobacterial infection, myelodysplasia, lymphedema, or aplastic
anemia that progress to myeloid leukemia. GATA2 encodes a master regulator of
hematopoiesis that is also linked to endothelial biology. Though the
disease-causing mutations commonly occur in the GATA-2 DNA binding domain, we
identified a patient with mycobacterial infection and myelodysplasia who had an
uncharacterized heterozygous deletion in a GATA2 cis-element consisting of an
E-box and a GATA motif. Targeted deletion of the equivalent murine element to
yield homozygous mutant mice revealed embryonic lethality later than occurred
with global Gata2 knockout, hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell depletion, and
impaired vascular integrity. Heterozygous mutant mice were viable, but embryos
exhibited deficits in definitive, but not primitive, hematopoietic
stem/progenitor activity and reduced expression of Gata2 and its target genes.
Mechanistic analysis revealed disruption of the endothelial cell transcriptome
and loss of vascular integrity. Thus, the composite element disrupted in a human 
immunodeficiency is essential for establishment of the murine hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cell compartment in the fetal liver and for essential vascular
processes.

PMCID: PMC3461907
PMID: 22996659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Development. 2012 Oct;139(20):3795-805.

Transcriptional regulatory mechanisms underlying the GABAergic neuron fate in
different diencephalic prosomeres.

Virolainen SM(1), Achim K, Peltopuro P, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, PO
Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Diverse mechanisms regulate development of GABAergic neurons in different regions
of the central nervous system. We have addressed the roles of a proneural gene,
Ascl1, and a postmitotic selector gene, Gata2, in the differentiation of
GABAergic neuron subpopulations in three diencephalic prosomeres: prethalamus
(P3), thalamus (P2) and pretectum (P1). Although the different proliferative
progenitor populations of GABAergic neurons commonly express Ascl1, they have
distinct requirements for it in promotion of cell-cycle exit and GABAergic neuron
identity. Subsequently, Gata2 is activated as postmitotic GABAergic precursors
are born. In P1, Gata2 regulates the neurotransmitter identity by promoting
GABAergic and inhibiting glutamatergic neuron differentiation. Interestingly,
Gata2 defines instead the subtype of GABAergic neurons in the rostral thalamus
(pTh-R), which is a subpopulation of P2. Without Gata2, the GABAergic precursors 
born in the pTh-R fail to activate subtype-specific markers, but start to express
genes typical of GABAergic precursors in the neighbouring P3 domain. Thus, our
results demonstrate diverse mechanisms regulating differentiation of GABAergic
neuron subpopulations and suggest a role for Gata2 as a selector gene of both
GABAergic neuron neurotransmitter and prosomere subtype identities in the
developing diencephalon. Our results demonstrate for the first time that neuronal
identities between distinct prosomeres can still be transformed in postmitotic
neuronal precursors.

PMID: 22991444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;32(23):4742-55. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00718-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
17.

Regulation of GATA factor expression is distinct between erythroid and mast cell 
lineages.

Ohmori S(1), Takai J, Ishijima Y, Suzuki M, Moriguchi T, Philipsen S, Yamamoto M,
Ohneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and Welfare, Gunma,
Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 participate in mast cell
development. Although the expression of these factors is regulated in a cell
lineage-specific and differentiation stage-specific manner, their regulation
during mast cell development has not been clarified. Here, we show that the GATA2
mRNA level was significantly increased while GATA1 was maintained at low levels
during the differentiation of mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow (BMMCs). 
Unlike in erythroid cells, forced expression or small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated knockdown of GATA1 rarely affected GATA2 expression, and vice
versa, in mast cells, indicating the absence of cross-regulation between Gata1
and Gata2 genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that both GATA
factors bound to most of the conserved GATA sites of Gata1 and Gata2 loci in
BMMCs. However, the GATA1 hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE) of the Gata1 gene, which 
is essential for GATA1 expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages, was
bound only weakly by both GATA factors in BMMCs. Furthermore, transgenic-mouse
reporter assays revealed that the G1HE is not essential for reporter expression
in BMMCs and peritoneal mast cells. Collectively, these results demonstrate that 
the expression of GATA factors in mast cells is regulated in a manner quite
distinct from that in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3497604
PMID: 22988301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. BMC Genomics. 2012 Sep 18;13:489. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-489.

Global endometrial transcriptomic profiling: transient immune activation precedes
tissue proliferation and repair in healthy beef cows.

Foley C(1), Chapwanya A, Creevey CJ, Narciandi F, Morris D, Kenny EM, Cormican P,
Callanan JJ, O'Farrelly C, Meade KG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal & Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Grange, Co, Meath, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: All cows experience bacterial contamination and tissue injury in the 
uterus postpartum, instigating a local inflammatory immune response. However
mechanisms that control inflammation and achieve a physiologically functioning
endometrium, while avoiding disease in the postpartum cow are not succinctly
defined. This study aimed to identify novel candidate genes indicative of
inflammation resolution during involution in healthy beef cows. Previous
histological analysis of the endometrium revealed elevated inflammation 15<U+2009>days
postpartum (DPP) which was significantly decreased by 30 DPP. The current study
generated a genome-wide transcriptomic profile of endometrial biopsies from these
cows at both time points using mRNA-Seq. The pathway analysis tool GoSeq
identified KEGG pathways enriched by significantly differentially expressed genes
at both time points. Novel candidate genes associated with inflammatory
resolution were subsequently validated in additional postpartum animals using
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: mRNA-Seq revealed 1,107 significantly differentially expressed genes, 73
of which were increased 15 DPP and 1,034 were increased 30 DPP. Early postpartum,
enriched immune pathways (adjusted P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.1) included the T cell receptor
signalling pathway, graft-versus-host disease and cytokine-cytokine receptor
interaction pathways. However 30 DPP, where the majority of genes were
differentially expressed, the enrichment (adjusted P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.1) of tissue repair and 
proliferative activity pathways was observed. Nineteen candidate genes selected
from mRNA-Seq results, were independently assessed by qRT-PCR in additional
postpartum cows (5 animals) at both time points. SAA1/2, GATA2, IGF1, SHC2, and
SERPINA14 genes were significantly elevated 30 DPP and are functionally
associated with tissue repair and the restoration of uterine homeostasis
postpartum.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study reveal an early activation of the immune
response which undergoes a temporal functional change toward tissue proliferation
and regeneration during endometrial involution in healthy postpartum cows. These 
molecular changes mirror the activation and resolution of endometrial
inflammation during involution previously classified by the degree of neutrophil 
infiltration. SAA1/2, GATA2, IGF1, SHC2, and SERPINA14 genes may become potential
markers for resolution of endometrial inflammation in the postpartum cow.

PMCID: PMC3544567
PMID: 22985206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36720-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378398. Epub
2012 Sep 16.

T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) regulation of erythropoietin receptor and
association with excessive erythrocytosis.

Rogers H(1), Wang L, Yu X, Alnaeeli M, Cui K, Zhao K, Bieker JJ, Prchal J, Huang 
S, Weksler B, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1822, USA.

During erythropoiesis, erythropoietin stimulates induction of erythroid
transcription factors that activate expression of erythroid genes including the
erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) that results in increased sensitivity to
erythropoietin. DNA binding of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
TAL1/SCL, is required for normal erythropoiesis. A link between elevated TAL1 and
excessive erythrocytosis is suggested by erythroid progenitor cells from a
patient that exhibits unusually high sensitivity to erythropoietin with
concomitantly elevated TAL1 and EPO-R expression. We found that TAL1 regulates
EPO-R expression mediated via three conserved E-box binding motifs (CAGCTG) in
the EPO-R 5' untranslated transcribed region. TAL1 increases association of the
GATA-1·TAL1·LMO2·LDB1 transcription activation complex to the region that
includes the transcription start site and the 5' GATA and 3' E-box motifs
flanking the EPO-R transcription start site suggesting that TAL1 promotes
accessibility of this region. Nucleosome shifting has been demonstrated to
facilitate TAL1 but not GATA-1 binding to regulate target gene expression.
Accordingly, we observed that with induced expression of EPO-R in hemotopoietic
progenitor cells, nucleosome phasing shifts to increase the linker region
containing the EPO-R transcription start site and TAL1 binds to the flanking 5'
GATA and 3' E-box regions of the promoter. These data suggest that TAL1 binds to 
the EPO-R promoter to activate EPO-R expression and provides a potential link to 
elevated EPO-R expression leading to hypersensitivity to erythropoietin and the
resultant excessive erythrocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3481276
PMID: 22982397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R50. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r50.

Functional analysis of transcription factor binding sites in human promoters.

Whitfield TW(1), Wang J, Collins PJ, Partridge EC, Aldred SF, Trinklein ND, Myers
RM, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology and Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

BACKGROUND: The binding of transcription factors to specific locations in the
genome is integral to the orchestration of transcriptional regulation in cells.
To characterize transcription factor binding site function on a large scale, we
predicted and mutagenized 455 binding sites in human promoters. We carried out
functional tests on these sites in four different immortalized human cell lines
using transient transfections with a luciferase reporter assay, primarily for the
transcription factors CTCF, GABP, GATA2, E2F, STAT, and YY1.
RESULTS: In each cell line, between 36% and 49% of binding sites made a
functional contribution to the promoter activity; the overall rate for observing 
function in any of the cell lines was 70%. Transcription factor binding resulted 
in transcriptional repression in more than a third of functional sites. When
compared with predicted binding sites whose function was not experimentally
verified, the functional binding sites had higher conservation and were located
closer to transcriptional start sites (TSSs). Among functional sites, repressive 
sites tended to be located further from TSSs than were activating sites. Our data
provide significant insight into the functional characteristics of YY1 binding
sites, most notably the detection of distinct activating and repressing classes
of YY1 binding sites. Repressing sites were located closer to, and often
overlapped with, translational start sites and presented a distinctive variation 
on the canonical YY1 binding motif.
CONCLUSIONS: The genomic properties that we found to associate with functional TF
binding sites on promoters -- conservation, TSS proximity, motifs and their
variations -- point the way to improved accuracy in future TFBS predictions.

PMCID: PMC3491394
PMID: 22951020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Bioinformatics. 2012 Nov 1;28(21):2747-54. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts526.
Epub 2012 Aug 31.

A robust model for read count data in exome sequencing experiments and
implications for copy number variant calling.

Plagnol V(1), Curtis J, Epstein M, Mok KY, Stebbings E, Grigoriadou S, Wood NW,
Hambleton S, Burns SO, Thrasher AJ, Kumararatne D, Doffinger R, Nejentsev S.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Genetics Institute, UCL, London, UK. v.plagnol@ucl.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Exome sequencing has proven to be an effective tool to discover the
genetic basis of Mendelian disorders. It is well established that copy number
variants (CNVs) contribute to the etiology of these disorders. However, calling
CNVs from exome sequence data is challenging. A typical read depth strategy
consists of using another sample (or a combination of samples) as a reference to 
control for the variability at the capture and sequencing steps. However,
technical variability between samples complicates the analysis and can create
spurious CNV calls.
RESULTS: Here, we introduce ExomeDepth, a new CNV calling algorithm designed to
control for this technical variability. ExomeDepth uses a robust model for the
read count data and uses this model to build an optimized reference set in order 
to maximize the power to detect CNVs. As a result, ExomeDepth is effective across
a wider range of exome datasets than the previously existing tools, even for
small (e.g. one to two exons) and heterozygous deletions. We used this new
approach to analyse exome data from 24 patients with primary immunodeficiencies. 
Depending on data quality and the exact target region, we find between 170 and
250 exonic CNV calls per sample. Our analysis identified two novel causative
deletions in the genes GATA2 and DOCK8.
AVAILABILITY: The code used in this analysis has been implemented into an R
package called ExomeDepth and is available at the Comprehensive R Archive Network
(CRAN).

PMCID: PMC3476336
PMID: 22942019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):631-42. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0313. Epub 2012
Oct 10.

Ex vivo reconstitution of arterial endothelium by embryonic stem cell-derived
endothelial progenitor cells in baboons.

Shi Q(1), Hodara V, Simerly CR, Schatten GP, VandeBerg JL.

Author information: 
(1)Southwest National Primate Research Center, Texas Biomedical Research
Institute, San Antonio, Texas 78245-0549, USA. qshi@txbiomedgenetics.org

There is an increasing need for an animal model that can be used to translate
basic research into clinical therapy. We documented the differentiation and
functional competence of embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived endothelial cells in
baboons. Baboon angioblasts were sequentially differentiated from embryoid body
cultures for 9 days in an angioblast differentiation medium with varying
concentrations of BMP-4, FLT-3 ligand, stem cell factor, thrombopoietin, basic
fibroblast growth factor (FGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and
knockout serum replacement. Real-time polymerase chain reaction results showed
that ESC-derived angioblasts downregulated NANOG and OCT3/4, upregulated
T-brachyury and GATA2, and moderately expressed CD34; they did not express CD144,
TEK, or VWF, and varied in levels of CD31 expression. Several populations of
putative angioblasts appeared 3 days and 9 days after differentiation, as
identified by flow cytometry. Angioblasts at this stage exhibited dual paths of
differentiation toward hematopoietic and vascular fates. To examine whether
derived angioblasts could reconstitute the endothelium, we built an ex vivo
culture system and seeded fluorescently labeled angioblast cultures onto a
denuded segment of the femoral artery. We found that the seeded cells were able
to grow into the endothelium on the interior surface of denuded artery segments
within 5 days after seeding. After 14 days of ex vivo culture, the transplanted
cells expressed CD31, an endothelial marker. The control arteries, seeded with
vehicle only, did not harbor cells with endothelial markers. We conclude that
ESC-derived angioblasts are promising therapeutic agents for repairing damaged
vasculature, and that the baboon model will be vital for optimizing therapies for
human clinical studies.

PMCID: PMC3564485
PMID: 22931470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 May;24(5):868-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.05.007. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

Omega-3 fatty acids suppress Th2-associated cytokine gene expressions and GATA
transcription factors in mast cells.

Park BK(1), Park S, Park JB, Park MC, Min TS, Jin M.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Pathology, College of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon University, Daejeon,
300-716, Korea.

Because the interaction between omega-3 fatty acids and mast cells has remained
largely unknown in allergies, we investigated whether omega-3 fatty acids affect 
the activation of mast cells by examining Th2-associated cytokine production and 
possible molecular mechanisms. Alpha-linolenic acid and its metabolites including
eicosapentaenoic acid and decosahexaenoic acid induced a dramatic decrease in the
production of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-13 in a dose-dependent manner, as
well as mRNA expression of their genes, in activated MC/9 mast cells and bone
marrow-derived mast cells. The effects were comparable to those of cyclosporin A 
(1 µM), a well-known immunosuppressive agent. Nuclear expression of GATA binding 
protein-1 (GATA-1) and GATA binding protein-2 (GATA-2), essential transcription
factors for mast cell activation, was also greatly suppressed. However, their
mRNA expressions were not affected. In P815 mast cells, which do not express
GATA-1, the suppressive effects on cytokines were abolished. On the contrary,
omega-3 fatty acids had less significant effects on IL-4 and IL-5 and resulted in
a slight decrease in IL-13 production in EL-4 T cells. Finally, oral
administration of fish oil containing high level of omega-3 fatty acids
significantly reduced the severity of dermatitis and the thickening of
epidermis/dermis in a NC/Nga murine atopic model. The number of cells expressing 
CD117(+) and FceRIa(+) was greatly decreased and GATA-1 expression in the cells
was also diminished. Taken together, omega-3 fatty acids might target mast cells 
to a greater extent than T cells to suppress Th2 cytokine expression by
inhibiting GATAs for alleviation of allergic disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Exp Hematol. 2012 Dec;40(12):1043-1054.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.08.003.
Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Valproic acid triggers erythro/megakaryocyte lineage decision through induction
of GFI1B and MLLT3 expression.

Zini R(1), Norfo R, Ferrari F, Bianchi E, Salati S, Pennucci V, Sacchi G, Carboni
C, Ceccherelli GB, Tagliafico E, Ferrari S, Manfredini R; AGIMM Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors represent a family of targeted anticancer
compounds that are widely used against hematological malignancies. So far little 
is known about their effects on normal myelopoiesis. Therefore, in order to
investigate the effect of histone deacetylase inhibitors on the myeloid
commitment of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, we treated CD34(+) cells with 
valproic acid (VPA). Our results demonstrate that VPA treatment induces H4
histone acetylation and hampers cell cycle progression in CD34(+) cells
sustaining high levels of CD34 protein expression. In addition, our data show
that VPA treatment promotes erythrocyte and megakaryocyte differentiation. In
fact, we demonstrate that VPA treatment is able to induce the expression of
growth factor-independent protein 1B (GFI1B) and of mixed-lineage leukemia
translocated to chromosome 3 protein (MLLT3), which are crucial regulators of
erythrocyte and megakaryocyte differentiation, and that the up-regulation of
these genes is mediated by the histone hyperacetylation at their promoter sites. 
Finally, we show that GFI1B inhibition impairs erythroid and megakaryocyte
differentiation induced by VPA, while MLLT3 silencing inhibits megakaryocyte
commitment only. As a whole, our data suggest that VPA sustains the expression of
stemness-related markers in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells and is able to
interfere with hematopoietic lineage commitment by enhancing erythrocyte and
megakaryocyte differentiation and by inhibiting the granulocyte and
mono-macrophage maturation.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22885124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Blood. 2012 Sep 20;120(12):2412-6. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

Dicer is selectively important for the earliest stages of erythroid development.

Buza-Vidas N(1), Cismasiu VB, Moore S, Mead AJ, Woll PS, Lutteropp M, Melchiori
L, Luc S, Bouriez-Jones T, Atkinson D, O'Carroll D, Jacobsen SE, Nerlov C.

Author information: 
(1)Haematopoietic Stem Cell Laboratory, MRC Molecular Haematology Unit,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.

MicroRNAs (miRs) are involved in many aspects of normal and malignant
hematopoiesis, including hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal,
proliferation, and terminal differentiation. However, a role for miRs in the
generation of the earliest stages of lineage committed progenitors from HSCs has 
not been identified. Using Dicer inactivation, we show that the miR complex is
not only essential for HSC maintenance but is specifically required for their
erythroid programming and subsequent generation of committed erythroid
progenitors. In bipotent pre-MegEs, loss of Dicer up-regulated transcription
factors preferentially expressed in megakaryocyte progenitors (Gata2 and Zfpm1)
and decreased expression of the erythroid-specific Klf1 transcription factor.
These results show a specific requirement for Dicer in acquisition of erythroid
lineage programming and potential in HSCs and their subsequent erythroid lineage 
differentiation, and in particular indicate a role for the miR complex in
achieving proper balance of lineage-specific transcriptional regulators necessary
for HSC multilineage potential to be maintained.

PMID: 22869792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32689-96. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

GATA2 is a critical transactivator for the human IL1RL1/ST2 promoter in mast
cells/basophils: opposing roles for GATA2 and GATA1 in human IL1RL1/ST2 gene
expression.

Baba Y(1), Maeda K, Yashiro T, Inage E, Kasakura K, Suzuki R, Niyonsaba F, Hara
M, Tanabe A, Ogawa H, Okumura K, Ohtsuka Y, Shimizu T, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

The IL1RL1/ST2 gene encodes a receptor for IL-33. Signaling from IL1RL1/ST2
induced by IL-33 binding was recently identified as a modulator of the Th2
response. The target cells for IL-33 are restricted in some hematopoietic
lineages, including mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, Th2 cells, natural killer
cells, and dendritic cells. To clarify the molecular mechanisms of cell
type-specific IL1RL1/ST2 expression in mast cells and basophils, transcriptional 
regulation of the human IL1RL1/ST2 promoter was investigated using the mast cell 
line LAD2 and the basophilic cell line KU812. Reporter assays suggested that two 
GATA motifs just upstream of the transcription start site in the ST2 promoter are
critical for transcriptional activity. These two GATA motifs possess the capacity
to bind GATA1 and GATA2 in EMSA. ChIP assay showed that GATA2, but not GATA1,
bound to the ST2 promoter in LAD2 cells and that histone H3 at the ST2 promoter
was acetylated in LAD2 cells, whereas binding of GATA1 and GATA2 to the ST2
promoter was detected in KU812 cells. Knockdown of GATA2 mRNA by siRNA reduced
ST2 mRNA levels in KU812 and LAD2 cells and ST2 protein levels in LAD2 cells; in 
contrast, GATA1 siRNA transfection up-regulated ST2 mRNA levels in KU812 cells.
The ST2 promoter was transactivated by GATA2 and repressed by GATA1 in
coexpression analysis. When these siRNAs were introduced into human peripheral
blood basophils, GATA2 siRNA reduced ST2 mRNA, whereas GATA1 siRNA up-regulated
ST2 mRNA. These results indicate that GATA2 and GATA1 positively and negatively
control human ST2 gene transcription, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3463314
PMID: 22865859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012 Dec;27(12):2233-41. doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2248-z. Epub
2012 Aug 2.

DNA methylation changes between relapse and remission of minimal change nephrotic
syndrome.

Kobayashi Y(1), Aizawa A, Takizawa T, Yoshizawa C, Horiguchi H, Ikeuchi Y,
Kakegawa S, Watanabe T, Maruyama K, Morikawa A, Hatada I, Arakawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan. kobayasu@gunma-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation of gene promoters is associated with transcriptional 
inactivation. Changes in DNA methylation can lead to differences in gene
expression levels and thereby influence disease development. We hypothesized that
epigenetics underlies the pathogenesis of minimal change nephrotic syndrome
(MCNS).
METHODS: Genome-wide DNA methylation changes between relapse and remission in
monocytes (n = 6) and naive T helper cells (Th0s) (n = 4) isolated from patients 
with MCNS were investigated using the microarray-based integrated analysis of
methylation by isochizomers (MIAMI) method. We confirmed the MIAMI results using 
bisulfite-pyrosequencing analysis. Expression analysis was performed using
quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Three gene loci (GATA2, PBX4, and NYX) were significantly less
methylated in Th0s during relapse than in remission, compared to none in
monocytes. In addition, the distance distribution from the regression line of all
probes in MIAMI was significantly different between monocytes and Th0s. The mRNA 
levels of the three genes in Th0s were not significantly different between
relapse and remission.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the change in DNA methylation patterns 
from remission to relapse in MCNS occurs predominantly in Th0s rather than in
monocytes and suggest that epigenetic regulation in Th0s underlies the
pathogenesis of MCNS.

PMCID: PMC3491205
PMID: 22855301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Leukemia. 2013 Feb;27(2):482-5. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.174. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

GATA2 mutations are frequent in intermediate-risk karyotype AML with biallelic
CEBPA mutations and are associated with favorable prognosis.

Fasan A, Eder C, Haferlach C, Grossmann V, Kohlmann A, Dicker F, Kern W,
Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

PMID: 22814295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040484. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Angiopoietin-2 is a direct transcriptional target of TAL1, LYL1 and LMO2 in
endothelial cells.

Deleuze V(1), El-Hajj R, Chalhoub E, Dohet C, Pinet V, Couttet P, Mathieu D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier UMR 5535 CNRS, Montpellier,
France.

The two related basic helix-loop-helix, TAL1 and LYL1, and their cofactor
LIM-only-2 protein (LMO2) are present in blood and endothelial cells. While their
crucial role in early hematopoiesis is well established, their function in
endothelial cells and especially in angiogenesis is less understood. Here, we
identified ANGIOPOIETIN-2 (ANG-2), which encodes a major regulator of
angiogenesis, as a direct transcriptional target of TAL1, LYL1 and LMO2.
Knockdown of any of the three transcription factors in human blood and lymphatic 
endothelial cells caused ANG-2 mRNA and protein down-regulation. Transient
transfections showed that the full activity of the ANG-2 promoter required the
integrity of a highly conserved Ebox-GATA composite element. Accordingly,
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that TAL1, LYL1, LMO2 and GATA2
occupied this region of ANG-2 promoter in human endothelial cells. Furthermore,
we showed that LMO2 played a central role in assembling TAL1-E47, LYL1-LYL1
or/and LYL1-TAL1 dimers with GATA2. The resulting complexes were able to activate
endogenous ANG-2 expression in endothelial cells as well as in non-endothelial
cells. Finally, we showed that ANG-2 gene activation during angiogenesis
concurred with the up-regulation of TAL1 and LMO2. Altogether, we identified
ANG-2 as a bona fide target gene of LMO2-complexes with TAL1 and/or LYL1,
highlighting a new function of the three hematopoietic factors in the endothelial
lineage.

PMCID: PMC3391236
PMID: 22792348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Blood. 2012 Sep 6;120(10):2064-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397083. Epub 2012
Jul 11.

High GATA2 expression is a poor prognostic marker in pediatric acute myeloid
leukemia.

Luesink M(1), Hollink IH, van der Velden VH, Knops RH, Boezeman JB, de Haas V,
Trka J, Baruchel A, Reinhardt D, van der Reijden BA, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM,
Zwaan CM, Jansen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre and Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life
Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), aberrant expression and mutations of
transcription factors have been correlated with disease outcome. In the present
study, we performed expression and mutation screening of GATA2, which is an
essential transcription factor for regulation of myeloid lineage determination,
in de novo pediatric AML patients. GATA2 mutations were detected in 5 of 230
patients, representing a frequency of 2.2% overall and 9.8% in cytogenetically
normal AML. GATA2 expression analysis demonstrated that in 155 of 237 diagnostic 
samples (65%), GATA2 expression was higher than in normal BM. In complete
remission, normalization of GATA2 expression was observed, whereas GATA2
expression levels stayed high in patients with resistant disease. High GATA2
expression at diagnosis was an independent poor prognostic factor for overall
survival (hazard ratio [HR] = 1.7, P = .045), event-free survival (HR = 2.1, P = 
.002), and disease-free survival (HR = 2.3, P = .004). The prognostic impact of
GATA2 was particularly evident in specific AML subgroups. In patients with
French-American-British M5 morphology, inv(16), or high WT1 expression,
significant differences in survival were observed between patients with high
versus normal GATA2 expression. We conclude that high GATA2 expression is a novel
poor prognostic marker in pediatric AML, which may contribute to better
risk-group stratification and risk-adapted therapy in the future.

PMID: 22786876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039327. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Ginger stimulates hematopoiesis via Bmp pathway in zebrafish.

Ferri-Lagneau KF(1), Moshal KS, Grimes M, Zahora B, Lv L, Sang S, Leung T.

Author information: 
(1)The Biomedical/Biotechnology Research Institute, North Carolina Central
University, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Anemia is a hematologic disorder with decreased number of
erythrocytes. Erythropoiesis, the process by which red blood cells differentiate,
are conserved in humans, mice and zebrafish. The only known agents available to
treat pathological anemia are erythropoietin and its biologic derivatives.
However, erythropoietin therapy elicits unwanted side-effects, high cost and
intravenous or subcutaneous injection, warranting the development of a more cost 
effective and non-peptide alternative. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) has been
widely used in traditional medicine; however, to date there is no scientific
research documenting the potential of ginger to stimulate hematopoiesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we utilized gata1:dsRed transgenic
zebrafish embryos to investigate the effect of ginger extract on hematopoiesis in
vivo and we identified its bioactive component, 10-gingerol. We confirmed that
ginger and 10-gingerol promote the expression of gata1 in erythroid cells and
increase the expression of hematopoietic progenitor markers cmyb and scl. We also
demonstrated that ginger and 10-gingerol can promote the hematopoietic recovery
from acute hemolytic anemia in zebrafish, by quantifying the number of
circulating erythroid cells in the dorsal aorta using video microscopy. We found 
that ginger and 10-gingerol treatment during gastrulation results in an increase 
of bmp2b and bmp7a expression, and their downstream effectors, gata2 and eve1. At
later stages ginger and 10-gingerol can induce bmp2b/7a, cmyb, scl and lmo2
expression in the caudal hematopoietic tissue area. We further confirmed that
Bmp/Smad pathway mediates this hematopoiesis promoting effect of ginger by using 
the Bmp-activated Bmp type I receptor kinase inhibitors dorsomorphin, LND193189
and DMH1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study provides a strong foundation to further
evaluate the molecular mechanism of ginger and its bioactive components during
hematopoiesis and to investigate their effects in adults. Our results will
provide the basis for future research into the effect of ginger during mammalian 
hematopoiesis to develop novel erythropoiesis promoting agents.

PMCID: PMC3382625
PMID: 22761764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039306. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Transcriptome analysis during human trophectoderm specification suggests new
roles of metabolic and epigenetic genes.

Assou S(1), Boumela I, Haouzi D, Monzo C, Dechaud H, Kadoch IJ, Hamamah S.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Montpellier, Institute for Research in Biotherapy, Hôpital Saint-Eloi,
INSERM U1040, Montpellier, France.

In humans, successful pregnancy depends on a cascade of dynamic events during
early embryonic development. Unfortunately, molecular data on these critical
events is scarce. To improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
govern the specification/development of the trophoblast cell lineage, the
transcriptome of human trophectoderm (TE) cells from day 5 blastocysts was
compared to that of single day 3 embryos from our in vitro fertilization program 
by using Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. Some of the microarray data were
validated by quantitative RT-PCR. The TE molecular signature included 2,196
transcripts, among which were genes already known to be TE-specific (GATA2, GATA3
and GCM1) but also genes involved in trophoblast invasion (MUC15), chromatin
remodeling (specifically the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3L) and steroid metabolism
(HSD3B1, HSD17B1 and FDX1). In day 3 human embryos 1,714 transcripts were
specifically up-regulated. Besides stemness genes such as NANOG and DPPA2, this
signature included genes belonging to the NLR family (NALP4, 5, 9, 11 and 13),
Ret finger protein-like family (RFPL1, 2 and 3), Melanoma Antigen family (MAGEA1,
2, 3, 5, 6 and 12) and previously unreported transcripts, such as MBD3L2 and
ZSCAN4. This study provides a comprehensive outlook of the genes that are
expressed during the initial embryo-trophectoderm transition in humans. Further
understanding of the biological functions of the key genes involved in
steroidogenesis and epigenetic regulation of transcription that are up-regulated 
in TE cells may clarify their contribution to TE specification and might also
provide new biomarkers for the selection of viable and competent blastocysts.

PMCID: PMC3382239
PMID: 22761758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(1):61-74. doi: 10.1159/000339048. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

AMP converted from intracellularly transported adenosine upregulates p53
expression to induce malignant pleural mesothelioma cell apoptosis.

Nogi Y(1), Kanno T, Nakano T, Fujita Y, Tabata C, Fukuoka K, Gotoh A, Nishizaki
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The present study investigated adenosine-induced apoptosis in
human malignant pleural mesothelioma cells.
METHODS: MTT assay, TUNEL staining, flow cytometry using propidium iodide and
annexin V-FITC, real-time RT-PCR, Western blotting, and assay of caspase-3, -8,
and -9 activities were carried out using malignant pleural mesothelioma cell
lines such as NCI-H28, NCI-H2052, NCI-H2452, and MSTO-211H cells, and p53 or A(3)
adenosine receptor was knocked-down by transfecting each siRNA into cells.
RESULTS: Adenosine induced apoptosis in all the malignant pleural mesothelioma
cells used here, independently of caspase activation. The adenosine effect was
prevented by the adenosine transporter inhibitor dipyridamole, the adenosine
kinase inhibitor ABT-702, or the A(3) adenosine receptor inhibitor MRS1191.
Adenosine upregulated expression of the p53 mRNA and protein, that is abolished
by ABT-702, but not by knocking-down A(3) adenosine receptor. Adenosine-induced
apoptosis in NCI-H28 cells was significantly inhibited by knocking-down p53 and
in part by knocking-down A(3) adenosine receptor.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study show that AMP converted from
intracellularly transported adenosine upregulates p53 expression to induce
caspase-independent apoptosis in malignant pleural mesothelioma cells and that
A(3) adenosine receptor also participates partially in the apoptosis by the
different mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22759956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Exp Hematol. 2012 Oct;40(10):837-46. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.06.007. Epub 2012
Jun 19.

Effect of endoglin overexpression during embryoid body development.

Baik J(1), Borges L, Magli A, Thatava T, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Increasing evidence points to endoglin (Eng), an accessory receptor for the
transforming growth factor-ß superfamily commonly associated with the endothelial
lineage, as an important regulator of the hematopoietic lineage. We have shown
that lack of Eng results in reduced numbers of primitive erythroid colonies as
well as downregulation of key hematopoietic genes. To determine the effect of Eng
overexpression in hematopoietic development, we generated a doxycycline-inducible
embryonic stem cell line. Our results demonstrate that induction of Eng during
embryoid body differentiation leads to a significant increase in the frequency of
hematopoietic progenitors, in particular, the erythroid lineage, which correlated
with upregulation of Scl, Gata1, Runx1, and embryonic globin. Interestingly,
activation of the hematopoietic program happened at the expense of endothelial
and cardiac cells, as differentiation into these mesoderm lineages was
compromised. Eng-induced enhanced erythroid activity was accompanied by high
levels of Smad1 phosphorylation. This effect was attenuated by addition of a bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibitor to these cultures. Among the
BMPs, BMP4 is well known for its role in hematopoietic specification from
mesoderm by promoting expression of several hematopoietic genes, including Scl.
Because Scl is considered the master regulator of the hematopoietic program, we
investigated whether Scl would be capable of rescuing the defective hematopoietic
phenotype observed in Eng(-/-) embryonic stem cells. Scl expression in
Eng-deficient embryonic stem cells resulted in increased erythroid colony-forming
activity and upregulation of Gata1 and Gata2, positioning Eng upstream of Scl.
Taken together, these findings support the premise that Eng modulates the
hematopoietic transcriptional network, most likely through regulation of BMP4
signaling.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447113
PMID: 22728030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 13;423(4):750-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.031. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Inhibition of erythropoiesis by Smad6 in human cord blood hematopoietic stem
cells.

Kang YJ(1), Shin JW, Yoon JH, Oh IH, Lee SP, Kim SY, Park SH, Mamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon
University, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) that belong to the transforming growth
factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily cytokines, play crucial roles in hematopoiesis.
However, roles of Smad6 in hematopoiesis remained unknown in contrast to the
other inhibitory Smad (I-Smad), Smad7. Here we show that Smad6 inhibits
erythropoiesis in human CD34(+) cord blood hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Smad6
was specifically expressed in CD34(+) cord blood HSCs, which was correlated with 
the expression of BMP2/4/6/7 and BMP type I receptor (BMPRI). BMP-specific
receptor-regulated Smads (R-Smads), Smad1 and Smad5 in cooperation with Smad4
induced transcription of the Smad6 gene. Instead of affecting cell cycle,
apoptosis, self-renewal, and stemness of CD34(+) cells, Smad6 knockdown enhanced,
whereas Smad6 overexpression suppressed erythropoiesis in stem cell culture and
colony formation assay. Consistently, Smad6 suppressed the expression of the
genes essential for erythropoiesis, such as Kruppel-like factor 1 (erythroid)
(KLF1/EKLF) and GATA binding protein 2 (GATA-2). Promoter analyses showed that
Smad6 repressed Smad5/4-induced transcription of the Klf1 gene. Thus, our data
suggest that Smad6 indirectly maintains stemness by preventing spontaneous
erythropoiesis in HSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Cell Int. 2012 Jun 7;12(1):25. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-12-25.

Acute myeloid leukemia and transcription factors: role of erythroid Krüppel-like 
factor (EKLF).

Ayala R(1), Martínez-López J, Gilsanz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
rayaladiaz@hematologia12octubre.com.

We have investigated the role of erythroid transcription factors mRNA expression 
in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in the context of cytogenetic and
other prognostic molecular markers, such as FMS-like Tyrosine Kinase 3 (FLT3),
Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), and CCAAT/enhance-binding protein a (CEBPA) mutations.
Further validation of Erythroid Krüppel-like Factor (EKLF) mRNA expression as a
prognostic factor was assessed.We evaluated GATA binding protein 1 (GATA1), GATA 
binding protein 2 (GATA2), EKLF and Myeloproliferative Leukemia virus oncogen
homology (cMPL) gene mRNA expression in the bone marrow of 65 AML patients at
diagnosis, and assessed any correlation with NPM1, FLT3 and CEBPA mutations.
EKLF-positive AML was associated with lower WBC in peripheral blood (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.049), 
a higher percentage of erythroblasts in bone marrow (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057), and secondary
AMLs (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.036). High expression levels of EKLF showed a trend to association
with T-cell antigen expression, such as CD7 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057). Patients expressing EKLF
had longer Overall Survival (OS) and Event Free Survival (EFS) than those
patients not expressing EKLF (median OS was 35.61 months and 19.31 months,
respectively, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0241; median EFS was 19.80 months and 8.03 months,
respectively, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0140). No correlation of GATA1, GATA2, EKLF and cMPL levels
was observed with FLT-3 or NPM1 mutation status. Four of four CEBPA mutated AMLs 
were EKLF positive versus 10 of 29 CEBPA wild-type AMLs; three of the CEBPA
mutated, EKLF-positive AMLs were also GATA2 positive. There were no cases of
CEBPA mutations in the EKLF-negative AML group. In conclusion, we have validated 
EKLF mRNA expression as an independent predictor of outcome in AML, and its
expression is not associated with FLT3-ITD and NPM1 mutations. EKLF mRNA
expression in AML patients may correlate with dysregulated CEBPA.

PMCID: PMC3407786
PMID: 22676581  [PubMed]


338. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7690-704. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Integration of Hi-C and ChIP-seq data reveals distinct types of chromatin
linkages.

Lan X(1), Witt H, Katsumura K, Ye Z, Wang Q, Bresnick EH, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, 460 W 12th Avenue, 212 BRT, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

We have analyzed publicly available K562 Hi-C data, which enable genome-wide
unbiased capturing of chromatin interactions, using a Mixture Poisson Regression 
Model and a power-law decay background to define a highly specific set of
interacting genomic regions. We integrated multiple ENCODE Consortium resources
with the Hi-C data, using DNase-seq data and ChIP-seq data for 45 transcription
factors and 9 histone modifications. We classified 12 different sets (clusters)
of interacting loci that can be distinguished by their chromatin modifications
and which can be categorized into two types of chromatin linkages. The different 
clusters of loci display very different relationships with transcription
factor-binding sites. As expected, many of the transcription factors show binding
patterns specific to clusters composed of interacting loci that encompass
promoters or enhancers. However, cluster 9, which is distinguished by marks of
open chromatin but not by active enhancer or promoter marks, was not bound by
most transcription factors but was highly enriched for three transcription
factors (GATA1, GATA2 and c-Jun) and three chromatin modifiers (BRG1, INI1 and
SIRT6). To investigate the impact of chromatin organization on gene regulation,
we performed ribonucleicacid-seq analyses before and after knockdown of GATA1 or 
GATA2. We found that knockdown of the GATA factors not only alters the expression
of genes having a nearby bound GATA but also affects expression of genes in
interacting loci. Our work, in combination with previous studies linking
regulation by GATA factors with c-Jun and BRG1, provides genome-wide evidence
that Hi-C data identify sets of biologically relevant interacting loci.

PMCID: PMC3439894
PMID: 22675074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Blood. 2012 Jul 12;120(2):395-403. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-403220. Epub 2012
May 30.

GATA2 zinc finger 1 mutations associated with biallelic CEBPA mutations define a 
unique genetic entity of acute myeloid leukemia.

Greif PA(1), Dufour A, Konstandin NP, Ksienzyk B, Zellmeier E, Tizazu B, Sturm J,
Benthaus T, Herold T, Yaghmaie M, Dörge P, Hopfner KP, Hauser A, Graf A, Krebs S,
Blum H, Kakadia PM, Schneider S, Hoster E, Schneider F, Stanulla M, Braess J,
Sauerland MC, Berdel WE, Büchner T, Woermann BJ, Hiddemann W, Spiekermann K,
Bohlander SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU)
Munich, Marchioninistrasse 25, Munich, Germany.

Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML) with biallelic CEBPA gene 
mutations (biCEPBA) represents a distinct disease entity with a favorable
clinical outcome. So far, it is not known whether other genetic alterations
cooperate with biCEBPA mutations during leukemogenesis. To identify additional
mutations, we performed whole exome sequencing of 5 biCEBPA patients and detected
somatic GATA2 zinc finger 1 (ZF1) mutations in 2 of 5 cases. Both GATA2 and CEBPA
are transcription factors crucial for hematopoietic development. Inherited or
acquired mutations in both genes have been associated with leukemogenesis.
Further mutational screening detected novel GATA2 ZF1 mutations in 13 of 33
biCEBPA-positive CN-AML patients (13/33, 39.4%). No GATA2 mutations were found in
38 CN-AML patients with a monoallelic CEBPA mutation and in 89 CN-AML patients
with wild-type CEBPA status. The presence of additional GATA2 mutations (n=10)
did not significantly influence the clinical outcome of 26 biCEBPA-positive
patients. In reporter gene assays, all tested GATA2 ZF1 mutants showed reduced
capacity to enhance CEBPA-mediated activation of transcription, suggesting that
the GATA2 ZF1 mutations may collaborate with biCEPBA mutations to deregulate
target genes during malignant transformation. We thus provide evidence for a
genetically distinct subgroup of CN-AML. The German AML cooperative group trials 
1999 and 2008 are registered with the identifiers NCT00266136 and NCT01382147 at 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

PMID: 22649106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Development. 2012 Jul;139(13):2360-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.076380. Epub 2012 May 23.

Distinct developmental origins and regulatory mechanisms for GABAergic neurons
associated with dopaminergic nuclei in the ventral mesodiencephalic region.

Achim K(1), Peltopuro P, Lahti L, Li J, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, PO Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

GABAergic neurons in the ventral mesodiencephalic region are highly important for
the function of dopaminergic pathways that regulate multiple aspects of behavior.
However, development of these neurons is poorly understood. We recently showed
that molecular regulation of differentiation of the GABAergic neurons associated 
with the dopaminergic nuclei in the ventral midbrain (VTA and SNpr) is distinct
from the rest of midbrain, but the reason for this difference remained elusive.
Here, we have analyzed the developmental origin of the VTA and SNpr GABAergic
neurons by genetic fate mapping. We demonstrate that the majority of these
GABAergic neurons originate outside the midbrain, from rhombomere 1, and move
into the ventral midbrain only as postmitotic neuronal precursors. We further
show that Gata2, Gata3 and Tal1 define a subpopulation of GABAergic precursors in
ventral rhombomere 1. A failure in GABAergic neuron differentiation in this
region correlates with loss of VTA and SNpr GABAergic neurons in Tal1 mutant
mice. In contrast to midbrain, GABAergic neurons of the anterior SNpr in the
diencephalon are not derived from the rhombomere 1. These results suggest unique 
migratory pathways for the precursors of important GABAergic neuron
subpopulations, and provide the basis for understanding diversity within midbrain
GABAergic neurons.

PMID: 22627282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):598-600. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.04.032.

Opening a new GATAway for treating KRAS-driven lung tumors.

Barbacid M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
(CNIO), E-28029 Madrid, Spain. mbarbacid@cnio.es

Comment on
    Cell. 2012 Apr 27;149(3):642-55.

In a recent issue of Cell, Kumar and colleagues uncovered a synthetic lethal
interaction between oncogenic KRAS and the transcription factor GATA2 in
non-small cell lung carcinoma. Pharmacological inhibition of GATA2-mediated
pathways with bortezomib and fasudil results in dramatic tumor inhibition. These 
observations unveil new armamentaria to fight this deadly disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22624710  [PubMed]


342. Cell Res. 2012 Aug;22(8):1227-45. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.82. Epub 2012 May 22.

Determination of synthetic lethal interactions in KRAS oncogene-dependent cancer 
cells reveals novel therapeutic targeting strategies.

Steckel M(1), Molina-Arcas M, Weigelt B, Marani M, Warne PH, Kuznetsov H, Kelly
G, Saunders B, Howell M, Downward J, Hancock DC.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.

Oncogenic mutations in RAS genes are very common in human cancer, resulting in
cells with well-characterized selective advantages, but also less well-understood
vulnerabilities. We have carried out a large-scale loss-of-function screen to
identify genes that are required by KRAS-transformed colon cancer cells, but not 
by derivatives lacking this oncogene. Top-scoring genes were then tested in a
larger panel of KRAS mutant and wild-type cancer cells. Cancer cells expressing
oncogenic KRAS were found to be highly dependent on the transcription factor
GATA2 and the DNA replication initiation regulator CDC6. Extending this analysis 
using a collection of drugs with known targets, we found that cancer cells with
mutant KRAS showed selective addiction to proteasome function, as well as
synthetic lethality with topoisomerase inhibition. Combination targeting of these
functions caused improved killing of KRAS mutant cells relative to wild-type
cells. These observations suggest novel targets and new ways of combining
existing therapies for optimal effect in RAS mutant cancers, which are
traditionally seen as being highly refractory to therapy.

PMCID: PMC3411175
PMID: 22613949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1521-31. doi: 10.1002/stem.1115.

The Flk1-Cre-mediated deletion of ETV2 defines its narrow temporal requirement
during embryonic hematopoietic development.

Wareing S(1), Mazan A, Pearson S, Göttgens B, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stem Cell Hematopoiesis Group, Paterson Institute for
Cancer Research, University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

During embryonic development, the emergence of hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis
is tightly associated, with many transcription factors implicated in both
developmental processes. Among those factors, ETV2 acts at the top of the
hierarchy and controls the formation of both lineages. However, it is not known
at which stage of mesoderm development ETV2 is acting and whether ETV2 activity
is further required once mesodermal precursors have been specified to the
hematopoietic and endothelial fates. In this study, we characterize the
developmental window during which ETV2 expression is required for hematopoietic
and endothelial development. Using cre-mediated deletion of ETV2, we demonstrate 
that ETV2 is acting prior to or at the time of FLK1 expression in mesodermal
precursors to initiate the hematopoietic and endothelial program. Using the in
vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells as a model system, we further show 
that ETV2 re-expression in Etv2(-/-) Flk1-negative precursors drives
hematopoiesis specification and switches on the expression of most genes known to
be implicated in hematopoietic and endothelial development. Among the downstream 
targets of ETV2, we identify the transcription factors SCL, GATA2, and FLI1 known
to operate a recursive loop controlling hematopoietic development. Surprisingly, 
SCL re-expression in Etv2(-/-) cells fully rescues hematopoiesis, while the
re-expression of FLI1 or GATA2 promotes only a very limited rescue. Altogether,
our data establish that ETV2 is required very transiently to specify mesodermal
precursors to hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis and that SCL is one of the key
downstream targets of ETV2 in controlling hematopoietic specification.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22570122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;26(6):1014-27. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1319. Epub 2012 Apr 
27.

The HMG-box transcription factor Sox4b is required for pituitary expression of
gata2a and specification of thyrotrope and gonadotrope cells in zebrafish.

Quiroz Y(1), Lopez M, Mavropoulos A, Motte P, Martial JA, Hammerschmidt M, Muller
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, University of
Cologne, D-50674 Cologne, Germany.

The pituitary is a complex gland comprising different cell types each secreting
specific hormones. The extensive network of signaling molecules and transcription
factors required for determination and terminal differentiation of specific cell 
types is still not fully understood. The SRY-like HMG-box (SOX) transcription
factor Sox4 plays important roles in many developmental processes and has two
homologs in zebrafish, Sox4a and Sox4b. We show that the sox4b gene is expressed 
in the pituitary anlagen starting at 24 h after fertilization (hpf) and later in 
the entire head region including the pituitary. At 48 hpf, sox4b mRNA colocalizes
with that for TSH (tshß), glycoprotein subunit a (gsua), and the Zn finger
transcription factor Gata2a. Loss of Sox4b function, using morpholino knockdown
or expression of a dominant-negative Sox4 mutant, leads to a drastic decrease in 
tshß and gsua expression and reduced levels of gh, whereas other anterior
pituitary gland markers including prl, slß, pomc, and lim3 are not affected.
Sox4b is also required for expression of gata2a in the pituitary. Knockdown of
gata2a leads to decreased tshß and gsua expression at 48 hpf, similar to sox4b
morphants. Injection of gata2a mRNA into sox4b morphants rescued tshß and gsua
expression in thyrotrope cells. Finally, sox4b or gata2a knockdown causes a
significant decrease of gonadotropin expression (lhß and fshß) at 4 d after
fertilization. In summary, our results indicate that Sox4b is expressed in
zebrafish during pituitary development and plays a crucial role in the
differentiation of thyrotrope and gonadotrope cells through induction of gata2a
expression in the developing pituitary.

PMID: 22543271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cell. 2012 Apr 27;149(3):642-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.02.059.

The GATA2 transcriptional network is requisite for RAS oncogene-driven non-small 
cell lung cancer.

Kumar MS(1), Hancock DC, Molina-Arcas M, Steckel M, East P, Diefenbacher M,
Armenteros-Monterroso E, Lassailly F, Matthews N, Nye E, Stamp G, Behrens A,
Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):598-600.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jun;12(6):373.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most frequent cause of cancer deaths
worldwide; nearly half contain mutations in the receptor tyrosine kinase/RAS
pathway. Here we show that RAS-pathway mutant NSCLC cells depend on the
transcription factor GATA2. Loss of GATA2 reduced the viability of NSCLC cells
with RAS-pathway mutations, whereas wild-type cells were unaffected. Integrated
gene expression and genome occupancy analyses revealed GATA2 regulation of the
proteasome, and IL-1-signaling, and Rho-signaling pathways. These pathways were
functionally significant, as reactivation rescued viability after GATA2
depletion. In a Kras-driven NSCLC mouse model, Gata2 loss dramatically reduced
tumor development. Furthermore, Gata2 deletion in established Kras mutant tumors 
induced striking regression. Although GATA2 itself is likely undruggable,
combined suppression of GATA2-regulated pathways with clinically approved
inhibitors caused marked tumor clearance. Discovery of the nononcogene addiction 
of KRAS mutant lung cancers to GATA2 presents a network of druggable pathways for
therapeutic exploitation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. BMC Genomics. 2012 Apr 26;13:153. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-153.

Characterization of the transcriptome profiles related to globin gene switching
during in vitro erythroid maturation.

Li B(1), Ding L, Li W, Story MD, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pediatrics, Georgia Health Sciences University, 1120 15th St,
CN-4112, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

BACKGROUND: The fetal and adult globin genes in the human ß-globin cluster on
chromosome 11 are sequentially expressed to achieve normal hemoglobin switching
during human development. The pharmacological induction of fetal <U+03B3>-globin (HBG)
to replace abnormal adult sickle ßS-globin is a successful strategy to treat
sickle cell disease; however the molecular mechanism of <U+03B3>-gene silencing after
birth is not fully understood. Therefore, we performed global gene expression
profiling using primary erythroid progenitors grown from human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells to characterize gene expression patterns during the <U+03B3>-globin to
ß-globin (<U+03B3>/ß) switch observed throughout in vitro erythroid differentiation.
RESULTS: We confirmed erythroid maturation in our culture system using cell
morphologic features defined by Giemsa staining and the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch by
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis. We observed maximal
<U+03B3>-globin expression at day 7 with a switch to a predominance of ß-globin
expression by day 28 and the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch occurred around day 21. Expression
patterns for transcription factors including GATA1, GATA2, KLF1 and NFE2
confirmed our system produced the expected pattern of expression based on the
known function of these factors in globin gene regulation. Subsequent gene
expression profiling was performed with RNA isolated from progenitors harvested
at day 7, 14, 21, and 28 in culture. Three major gene profiles were generated by 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). For profile-1 genes, where expression
decreased from day 7 to day 28, we identified 2,102 genes down-regulated >
1.5-fold. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) for profile-1 genes demonstrated
involvement of the Cdc42, phospholipase C, NF-Kß, Interleukin-4, and p38 mitogen 
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. Transcription factors known
to be involved in <U+03B3>-and ß-globin regulation were identified.The same approach was
used to generate profile-2 genes where expression was up-regulated over 28 days
in culture. IPA for the 2,437 genes with > 1.5-fold induction identified the
mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, aryl hydrocarbon receptor, cell cycle control,
and ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Protein) signaling pathways; transcription
factors identified included KLF1, GATA1 and NFE2 among others. Finally, profile-3
was generated from 1,579 genes with maximal expression at day 21, around the time
of the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch. IPA identified associations with cell cycle control,
ATM, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptome analysis completed with erythroid progenitors
grown in vitro identified groups of genes with distinct expression profiles,
which function in metabolic pathways associated with cell survival,
hematopoiesis, blood cells activation, and inflammatory responses. This study
represents the first report of a transcriptome analysis in human primary
erythroid progenitors to identify transcription factors involved in hemoglobin
switching. Our results also demonstrate that the in vitro liquid culture system
is an excellent model to define mechanisms of global gene expression and the
DNA-binding protein and signaling pathways involved in globin gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3353202
PMID: 22537182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Blood. 2012 Jun 7;119(23):5417-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-391896. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

A critical role for endoglin in the emergence of blood during embryonic
development.

Borges L(1), Iacovino M, Mayerhofer T, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Baik J, Garry DJ, Kyba 
M, Letarte M, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Much remains unknown about the signals that induce early mesoderm to initiate
hematopoietic differentiation. Here, we show that endoglin (Eng), a receptor for 
the TGFß superfamily, identifies all cells with hematopoietic fate in the early
embryo. These arise in an Eng(+)Flk1(+) mesodermal precursor population at
embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5), a cell fraction also endowed with endothelial
potential. In Eng-knockout embryos, hematopoietic colony activity and numbers of 
CD71(+)Ter119(+) erythroid progenitors were severely reduced. This coincided with
severely reduced expression of embryonic globin and key bone morphogenic protein 
(BMP) target genes, including the hematopoietic regulators Scl, Gata1, Gata2, and
Msx-1. To interrogate molecular pathways active in the earliest hematopoietic
progenitors, we applied transcriptional profiling to sorted cells from E7.5
embryos. Eng(+)Flk-1(+) progenitors coexpressed TGFß and BMP receptors and target
genes. Furthermore, Eng(+)Flk-1(+) cells presented high levels of
phospho-SMAD1/5, indicating active TGFß and/or BMP signaling. Remarkably, under
hematopoietic serum-free culture conditions, hematopoietic outgrowth of
Eng-expressing cells was dependent on the TGFß superfamily ligands BMP4, BMP2, or
TGF-ß1. These data demonstrate that the E(+)F(+) fraction at E7.5 represents
mesodermal cells competent to respond to TGFß1, BMP4, or BMP2, shaping their
hematopoietic development, and that Eng acts as a critical regulator in this
process by modulating TGF/BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC3369678
PMID: 22535663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Br J Haematol. 2012 Jul;158(2):242-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2012.09136.x. Epub
2012 Apr 26.

Marked genetic heterogeneity in familial myelodysplasia/acute myeloid leukaemia.

Holme H(1), Hossain U, Kirwan M, Walne A, Vulliamy T, Dokal I.

Author information: 
(1)Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University
of London, Barts and The London Children's Hospital, London, UK.
harrietholme@hotmail.com

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are heterogeneous and can evolve into acute
myeloid leukaemia (AML). Rare familial cases are reported in which five disease
genes have been identified to date (RUNX1, CEBPA, TERC, TERT and GATA2). Here we 
report the genetic categorization of 27 families with familial MDS/AML. All of
these families were screened for RUNX1, CEBPA, TERC, TERT and GATA2 as well as
TET2 and NPM1. Five of the 27 families had telomerase mutations; one had a RUNX1 
mutation, while none were found to have TET2, CEBPA or NPM1 mutations. We
identified four families with heterozygous GATA2 mutations, each associated with 
a different phenotype. While one of these mutations is novel, three have been
previously reported: one has been described in dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK
lymphoid (DCML) deficiency and one is in a family that has been reported in a
series with primary lymphoedema with a predisposition to AML (Emberger syndrome).
In summary, genetic characterization was shown in 10 (four GATA2, three TERT, two
TERC, one RUNX1) of these families; however 17 remain uncharacterized,
highlighting marked genetic heterogeneity in familial MDS/AML and the scope for
further functional pathways that could give rise to this group of disorders.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22533337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jun;32(6):1372-82. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.248583. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Downregulation of endothelial microRNA-200b supports cutaneous wound angiogenesis
by desilencing GATA binding protein 2 and vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2.

Chan YC(1), Roy S, Khanna S, Sen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRs) regulate angiogenesis by posttranscriptional
silencing of target genes. The significance of angiostatic miR-200b in switching 
on skin wound angiogenesis was tested.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Wounding caused imminent and transient downregulation of
miR-200b in dermal wound-edge endothelial cells. Derailing this injury response
by lentiviral delivery of miR-200b in vivo impaired wound angiogenesis.
Computational prediction, target reporter luciferase assay, and Western blot
analysis provided first evidence that miR-200b targets globin transcription
factor binding protein 2 (GATA2) and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 
2 (VEGFR2). Overexpression of GATA2 or VEGFR2 in endothelial cells rescued the
angiostatic effect of miR-200b in vitro. Downregulation of miR-200b derepressed
GATA2 and VEGFR2 expression to switch on wound angiogenesis, which was disrupted 
in diabetic wounds. Treatment of endothelial cells with tumor necrosis factor-a, 
a proinflammatory cytokine abundant in diabetic wounds, induced miR-200b
expression, silenced GATA2 and VEGFR2, and suppressed angiogenesis. These
outcomes were attenuated using anti-miR-200b strategy. Neutralization of tumor
necrosis factor-a in the diabetic wounds improved wound angiogenesis and closure,
which was accompanied by downregulation of miR-200b expression and desilencing of
GATA2 and VEGFR2.
CONCLUSIONS: Injury-induced repression of miR-200b turned on wound angiogenesis. 
In mice with diabetes mellitus,excessive tumor necrosis factor-a induced miR-200b
blunting proangiogenic functions of GATA2 and VEGFR2.

PMCID: PMC3399424
PMID: 22499991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2012 Mar;53(3):287-94.

[Genome-wide analysis of GATA transcription factor in hematopoietic cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujiwara T.

PMID: 22499044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;32(12):2312-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06699-11. Epub 2012 Apr 
9.

UG4 enhancer-driven GATA-2 and bone morphogenetic protein 4 complementation
remedies the CAKUT phenotype in Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice.

Ainoya K(1), Moriguchi T, Ohmori S, Souma T, Takai J, Morita M, Chandler KJ,
Mortlock DP, Shimizu R, Engel JD, Lim KC, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

During renal development, the proper emergence of the ureteric bud (UB) from the 
Wolffian duct is essential for formation of the urinary system. Previously, we
showed that expression of transcription factor GATA-2 in the urogenital
primordium was demarcated anteroposteriorly into two domains that were regulated 
by separate enhancers. While GATA-2 expression in the caudal urogenital
mesenchyme is controlled by the UG4 enhancer, its more-rostral expression is
regulated by UG2. We found that anteriorly displaced budding led to obstructed
megaureters in Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice, possibly due to reduced expression 
of the downstream effector bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4). Here, we report
that UG4-driven, but not UG2-driven, GATA-2 expression in the urogenital
mesenchyme significantly reverts the uropathy observed in the Gata2 hypomorphic
mutant mice. Furthermore, the data show that transgenic rescue by GATA-2 reverses
the rostral outgrowth of the UB. We also provide evidence for a GATA-2-BMP4
epistatic relationship by demonstrating that reporter gene expression from a Bmp4
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgene is altered in Gata2 hypomorphs;
furthermore, UG4-directed BMP4 expression in the mutants leads to reduced
incidence of megaureters. These results demonstrate that GATA-2 expression in the
caudal urogenital mesenchyme as directed by the UG4 enhancer is crucial for
proper development of the urinary tract and that its regulation of BMP4
expression is a critical aspect of this function.

PMCID: PMC3372261
PMID: 22493062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(13):5819-31. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks281. Epub 2012
Apr 5.

Master regulatory GATA transcription factors: mechanistic principles and emerging
links to hematologic malignancies.

Bresnick EH(1), Katsumura KR, Lee HY, Johnson KD, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, Paul Carbone Cancer Center,
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. ehbresni@wisc.edu

Numerous examples exist of how disrupting the actions of physiological regulators
of blood cell development yields hematologic malignancies. The master regulator
of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells GATA-2 was cloned almost 20 years ago, and
elegant genetic analyses demonstrated its essential function to promote
hematopoiesis. While certain GATA-2 target genes are implicated in
leukemogenesis, only recently have definitive insights emerged linking GATA-2 to 
human hematologic pathophysiologies. These pathophysiologies include
myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myeloid leukemia and an immunodeficiency syndrome
with complex phenotypes including leukemia. As GATA-2 has a pivotal role in the
etiology of human cancer, it is instructive to consider mechanisms underlying
normal GATA factor function/regulation and how dissecting such mechanisms may
reveal unique opportunities for thwarting GATA-2-dependent processes in a
therapeutic context. This article highlights GATA factor mechanistic principles, 
with a heavy emphasis on GATA-1 and GATA-2 functions in the hematopoietic system,
and new links between GATA-2 dysregulation and human pathophysiologies.

PMCID: PMC3401466
PMID: 22492510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Gene Expr Patterns. 2012 May-Jun;12(5-6):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

GATA2 is expressed at critical times in the mouse uterus during pregnancy.

Rubel CA(1), Franco HL, Jeong JW, Lydon JP, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)One Baylor Plaza, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

In mammals, such as mouse and human, timely production of the progesterone
receptor (PR) in the proper uterine compartments is critical for preparing the
uterus for the initiation and maintenance of pregnancy. Developmentally, the
expression of GATA2, a member of the six member zinc-finger family of
transcription factors, has been shown to be necessary for multiple non-related
tissues, such as the hematopoietic system, adipose maturation and the urogential 
system. We recently identified Gata2 as a potential progesterone target gene in
the mouse uterus; however, the expression of the GATA genes in the mouse uterus
during pregnancy has not been demonstrated. In the present study, we examined the
expression of GATA2 protein during the phases of pregnancy, including early
pregnancy where progesterone (P4) signaling is critical in order to facilitate
the window of receptivity for embryo implantation and during the decidualization 
of the uterine stroma, a process of cellular proliferation and differentiation
which is necessary for maintenance of the invading embryo until placentation
occurs. Here, we report that GATA2 protein is expressed in the uterine luminal
and glandular epithelium pre-implantation, spatio-temporally co-localizing with
that of the PR. Additionally, GATA2 continues to be expressed in the decidualized
stroma throughout early pregnancy indicating a role in the maintenance of
decidual cells. Based on these findings, we conclude that GATA2 is expressed
during critical phases of early pregnancy, similar to that of the PR, and that it
may play a major role in mediating P4 signaling in the mouse uterus.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22476030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Eur J Pediatr. 2012 Aug;171(8):1273-6. doi: 10.1007/s00431-012-1715-7. Epub 2012 
Mar 21.

GATA-2 anomaly and clinical phenotype of a sporadic case of lymphedema, dendritic
cell, monocyte, B- and NK-cell (DCML) deficiency, and myelodysplasia.

Ishida H(1), Imai K, Honma K, Tamura S, Imamura T, Ito M, Nonoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Blood and Marrow transplantation, Matsushita
Memorial Hospital, 5-55, Sotojima-cho, Moriguchi 570-8540, Japan.
ishida.hiroyuki002@jp.panasonic.com

A Japanese patient presented with lymphedema, severe Varicella zoster, and
Salmonella infection, recurrent respiratory infections, panniculitis,
monocytopenia, B- and NK-cell lymphopenia, and myelodysplasia. The phenotype was 
a mixture of the monocytopenia and mycobacterial infection (MonoMAC) and Emberger
syndromes. Sequencing of the GATA-2 cDNA revealed the heterozygous missense
mutation 1187 G<U+2009>><U+2009>A. This mutation resulted in the amino acid mutation Arg396Gln 
in the zinc fingers-2 domain, which is predicted to cause significant structural 
change and prevent a critical interaction with DNA. Functional analysis of the
patient's GATA-2 mutation is required to understand the relationship between
these distinctive syndromes.

PMID: 22430350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Genes Cancer. 2011 Aug;2(8):805-17. doi: 10.1177/1947601911428224.

Identification of c-Myb Target Genes in K562 Cells Reveals a Role for c-Myb as a 
Master Regulator.

Lorenzo PI(1), Brendeford EM, Gilfillan S, Gavrilov AA, Leedsak M, Razin SV,
Eskeland R, Sæther T, Gabrielsen OS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The c-Myb transcription factor is an important regulator of hematopoietic cell
development. c-Myb is expressed in immature hematopoietic cells and plays a
direct role in lineage fate selection, cell cycle progression, and
differentiation of myeloid as well as B- and T-lymphoid progenitor cells. As a
DNA-binding transcription factor, c-Myb regulates specific gene programs through 
activation of target genes. Still, our understanding of these programs is
incomplete. Here, we report a set of novel c-Myb target genes, identified using a
combined approach: specific c-Myb knockdown by 2 different siRNAs and subsequent 
global expression profiling, combined with the confirmation of direct binding of 
c-Myb to the target promoters by ChIP assays. The combination of these 2
approaches, as well as additional validation such as cloning and testing the
promoters in reporter assays, confirmed that MYADM, LMO2, GATA2, STAT5A, and
IKZF1 are target genes of c-Myb. Additional studies, using chromosome
conformation capture, demonstrated that c-Myb target genes may directly interact 
with each other, indicating that these genes may be coordinately regulated. Of
the 5 novel target genes identified, 3 are transcription factors, and one is a
transcriptional co-regulator, supporting a role of c-Myb as a master regulator
controlling the expression of other transcriptional regulators in the
hematopoietic system.

PMCID: PMC3278898
PMID: 22393465  [PubMed]


356. Genes Cells. 2012 Apr;17(4):285-301. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01588.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 5.

GATA transcription factors are involved in IgE-dependent mast cell degranulation 
by enhancing the expression of phospholipase C-<U+03B3>1.

Ishijima Y(1), Ohmori S, Uenishi A, Ohneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, 60 Nakaorui-machi, Takasaki, Gunma 370-0033, Japan.

Mast cell degranulation is a dynamic, highly organized process involving numerous
signaling molecules and enzymes. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying
antigen-mediated mast cell degranulation have been studied intensively, little is
known about the transcriptional control of this process. Here, we show that the
hematopoietic transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 are involved in mast cell
degranulation through the control of phospholipase C-<U+03B3>1 (PLC-<U+03B3>1) expression.
Knockdown of GATA1 and/or GATA2 by specific siRNA significantly reduced
antigen-induced degranulation and Ca(2+) mobilization in the rat basophilic
leukemia cell line RBL-2H3. RT-PCR analyses showed that PLC-<U+03B3>1 expression was
significantly decreased by this GATA factor repression. Other GATA factor
targets, such as the previously reported a and ß subunits of the high-affinity
IgE receptor (FceRI), were unaffected. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that GATA factors directly activate
PLC-<U+03B3>1 gene transcription through a conserved GATA-binding motif that resides in 
the 5'-upstream sequence. Furthermore, we show evidence that the PLC-<U+03B3>1
expression is regulated by GATA2 in mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow.
These data indicate that PLC-<U+03B3>1 is a target gene of GATA factors in mast cells
and provide evidence that GATA1 and GATA2 control antigen-mediated mast cell
degranulation by regulating the expression of PLC-<U+03B3>1.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22390417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Blood. 2012 Apr 19;119(16):3724-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-380634. Epub 2012 
Mar 1.

Chromatin occupancy analysis reveals genome-wide GATA factor switching during
hematopoiesis.

Doré LC(1), Chlon TM, Brown CD, White KP, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

There are many examples of transcription factor families whose members control
gene expression profiles of diverse cell types. However, the mechanism by which
closely related factors occupy distinct regulatory elements and impart lineage
specificity is largely undefined. Here we demonstrate on a genome wide scale that
the hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 bind overlapping sets of genes, 
often at distinct sites, as a means to differentially regulate target gene
expression and to regulate the balance between proliferation and differentiation.
We also reveal that the GATA switch, which entails a chromatin occupancy exchange
between GATA2 and GATA1 in the course of differentiation, operates on more than
one-third of GATA1 bound genes. The switch is equally likely to lead to
transcriptional activation or repression; and in general, GATA1 and GATA2 act
oppositely on switch target genes. In addition, we show that genomic regions
co-occupied by GATA2 and the ETS factor ETS1 are strongly enriched for regions
marked by H3K4me3 and occupied by Pol II. Finally, by comparing GATA1 occupancy
in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes, we find that the presence of ETS factor
motifs is a major discriminator of megakaryocyte versus red cell specification.

PMCID: PMC3335379
PMID: 22383799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3585-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-385989. Epub 2012 
Feb 24.

The zebrafish reveals dependence of the mast cell lineage on Notch signaling in
vivo.

Da'as SI(1), Coombs AJ, Balci TB, Grondin CA, Ferrando AA, Berman JN.

Author information: 
(1)Izaak Walton Killam Health Centre, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

We used the opportunities afforded by the zebrafish to determine upstream
pathways regulating mast cell development in vivo and identify their cellular
origin. Colocalization studies demonstrated zebrafish notch receptor expression
in cells expressing carboxypeptidase A5 (cpa5), a zebrafish mast cell-specific
marker. Inhibition of the Notch pathway resulted in decreased cpa5 expression in 
mindbomb mutants and wild-type embryos treated with the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor,
Compound E. A series of morpholino knockdown studies specifically identified
notch1b and gata2 as the critical factors regulating mast cell fate. Moreover,
hsp70::GAL4;UAS::nicd1a transgenic embryos overexpressing an activated form of
notch1, nicd1a, displayed increased cpa5, gata2, and pu.1 expression. This
increase in cpa5 expression could be reversed and reduced below baseline levels
in a dose-dependent manner using Compound E. Finally, evidence that cpa5
expression colocalizes with lmo2 in the absence of hematopoietic stem cells
revealed that definitive mast cells initially delineate from erythromyeloid
progenitors. These studies identify a master role for Notch signaling in
vertebrate mast cell development and establish developmental origins of this
lineage. Moreover, these findings postulate targeting the Notch pathway as a
therapeutic strategy in mast cell diseases.

PMCID: PMC3375148
PMID: 22368273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030865. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Retinoic acid signaling plays a restrictive role in zebrafish primitive
myelopoiesis.

Liang D(1), Jia W, Li J, Li K, Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center, MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease
Study, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Retinoic acid (RA) is known to regulate definitive myelopoiesis but its role in
vertebrate primitive myelopoiesis remains unclear. Here we report that zebrafish 
primitive myelopoiesis is restricted by RA in a dose dependent manner mainly
before 11 hpf (hours post fertilization) when anterior hemangioblasts are
initiated to form. RA treatment significantly reduces expressions of anterior
hemangioblast markers scl, lmo2, gata2 and etsrp in the rostral end of ALPM
(anterior lateral plate mesoderm) of the embryos. The result indicates that RA
restricts primitive myelopoiesis by suppressing formation of anterior
hemangioblasts. Analyses of ALPM formation suggest that the defective primitive
myelopoiesis resulting from RA treatment before late gastrulation may be
secondary to global loss of cells for ALPM fate whereas the developmental defect 
resulting from RA treatment during 10-11 hpf should be due to ALPM patterning
shift. Overexpressions of scl and lmo2 partially rescue the block of primitive
myelopoiesis in the embryos treated with 250 nM RA during 10-11 hpf, suggesting
RA acts upstream of scl to control primitive myelopoiesis. However, the RA
treatment blocks the increased primitive myelopoiesis caused by overexpressing
gata4/6 whereas the abolished primitive myelopoiesis in gata4/5/6 depleted
embryos is well rescued by 4-diethylamino-benzaldehyde, a retinal dehydrogenase
inhibitor, or partially rescued by knocking down aldh1a2, the major retinal
dehydrogenase gene that is responsible for RA synthesis during early development.
Consistently, overexpressing gata4/6 inhibits aldh1a2 expression whereas
depleting gata4/5/6 increases aldh1a2 expression. The results reveal that RA
signaling acts downstream of gata4/5/6 to control primitive myelopoiesis. But,
4-diethylamino-benzaldehyde fails to rescue the defective primitive myelopoiesis 
in either cloche embryos or lycat morphants. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that RA signaling restricts zebrafish primitive myelopoiesis through 
acting downstream of gata4/5/6, upstream of, or parallel to, cloche, and upstream
of scl.

PMCID: PMC3281886
PMID: 22363502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biol Reprod. 2012 May 10;86(5):144, 1-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.094904.
Print 2012 May.

The forkhead transcription factor, FOXP3, is required for normal pituitary
gonadotropin expression in mice.

Jung DO(1), Jasurda JS, Egashira N, Ellsworth BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale,
Carbondale, Illinois 62901-6523, USA.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis is central to normal reproductive
function. This pathway begins with the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
in systematic pulses by the hypothalamus. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is bound
by receptors on gonadotroph cells in the anterior pituitary gland and stimulates 
the synthesis and secretion of luteinizing hormone and, to some extent,
follicle-stimulating hormone. Once stimulated by these glycoprotein hormones, the
gonads begin gametogenesis and the synthesis of sex hormones. In humans,
mutations of the forkhead transcription factor, FOXP3, lead to an autoimmune
disorder known as immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy,
X-linked syndrome. Mice with a mutation in the Foxp3 gene have a similar
autoimmune syndrome and are infertile. To understand why FOXP3 is required for
reproductive function, we are investigating the reproductive phenotype of Foxp3
mutant mice (Foxp3(sf/Y)). Although the gonadotroph cells appear to be intact in 
Foxp3(sf/Y) mice, luteinizing hormone beta (Lhb) and follicle-stimulating hormone
beta (Fshb) expression are significantly decreased, demonstrating that these mice
exhibit a hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypothalamic expression of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone is not significantly decreased in Foxp3(sf/Y)
males. Treatment of Foxp3(sf/Y) males with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor agonist does not rescue expression of Lhb or Fshb. Interestingly, we do 
not detect Foxp3 expression in the pituitary or hypothalamus, suggesting that the
infertility seen in Foxp3(sf/Y) males is a secondary effect, possibly due to loss
of FOXP3 in immune cells. Pituitary expression of glycoprotein hormone alpha
(Cga) and prolactin (Prl) are significantly reduced in Foxp3(sf/Y) males, whereas
the precursor for adrenocorticotropic hormone, pro-opiomelanocortin (Pomc), is
increased. Human patients diagnosed with IPEX often exhibit thyroiditis due to
destruction of the thyroid gland by autoimmune cells. We find that Foxp3(sf/Y)
mice have elevated expression of thyroid-stimulating hormone beta (Tshb),
suggesting that they may suffer from thyroiditis as well. Expression of the
pituitary transcription factors, Pitx1, Pitx2, Lhx3, and Egr1, is normal;
however, expression of Foxl2 and Gata2 is elevated. These data are the first to
demonstrate a defect at the pituitary level in the absence of FOXP3, which
contributes to the infertility observed in mice with Foxp3 loss of function
mutations.

PMCID: PMC3364925
PMID: 22357547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1175-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.074468. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Differential distribution of competence for panplacodal and neural crest
induction to non-neural and neural ectoderm.

Pieper M(1), Ahrens K, Rink E, Peter A, Schlosser G.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Bremen, FB2, PO Box 330440, 28334
Bremen, Germany.

It is still controversial whether cranial placodes and neural crest cells arise
from a common precursor at the neural plate border or whether placodes arise from
non-neural ectoderm and neural crest from neural ectoderm. Using tissue grafting 
in embryos of Xenopus laevis, we show here that the competence for induction of
neural plate, neural plate border and neural crest markers is confined to neural 
ectoderm, whereas competence for induction of panplacodal markers is confined to 
non-neural ectoderm. This differential distribution of competence is established 
during gastrulation paralleling the dorsal restriction of neural competence. We
further show that Dlx3 and GATA2 are required cell-autonomously for panplacodal
and epidermal marker expression in the non-neural ectoderm, while ectopic
expression of Dlx3 or GATA2 in the neural plate suppresses neural plate, border
and crest markers. Overexpression of Dlx3 (but not GATA2) in the neural plate is 
sufficient to induce different non-neural markers in a signaling-dependent
manner, with epidermal markers being induced in the presence, and panplacodal
markers in the absence, of BMP signaling. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate a non-neural versus neural origin of placodes and neural crest,
respectively, strongly implicate Dlx3 in the regulation of non-neural competence,
and show that GATA2 contributes to non-neural competence but is not sufficient to
promote it ectopically.

PMID: 22318231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):3125-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113793109. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

MicroRNA-132 dysregulation in schizophrenia has implications for both
neurodevelopment and adult brain function.

Miller BH(1), Zeier Z, Xi L, Lanz TA, Deng S, Strathmann J, Willoughby D, Kenny
PJ, Elsworth JD, Lawrence MS, Roth RH, Edbauer D, Kleiman RJ, Wahlestedt C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute-Scripps
Florida, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

Schizophrenia is characterized by affective, cognitive, neuromorphological, and
molecular abnormalities that may have a neurodevelopmental origin. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA sequences critical to neurodevelopment and adult
neuronal processes by coordinating the activity of multiple genes within
biological networks. We examined the expression of 854 miRNAs in prefrontal
cortical tissue from 100 control, schizophrenic, and bipolar subjects. The cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding- and NMDA-regulated microRNA miR-132 was
significantly down-regulated in both the schizophrenic discovery cohort and a
second, independent set of schizophrenic subjects. Analysis of miR-132 target
gene expression in schizophrenia gene-expression microarrays identified 26 genes 
up-regulated in schizophrenia subjects. Consistent with NMDA-mediated
hypofunction observed in schizophrenic subjects, administration of an NMDA
antagonist to adult mice results in miR-132 down-regulation in the prefrontal
cortex. Furthermore, miR-132 expression in the murine prefrontal cortex exhibits 
significant developmental regulation and overlaps with critical
neurodevelopmental processes during adolescence. Adult prefrontal expression of
miR-132 can be down-regulated by pharmacologic inhibition of NMDA receptor
signaling during a brief postnatal period. Several key genes, including DNMT3A,
GATA2, and DPYSL3, are regulated by miR-132 and exhibited altered expression
either during normal neurodevelopment or in tissue from adult schizophrenic
subjects. Our data suggest miR-132 dysregulation and subsequent abnormal
expression of miR-132 target genes contribute to the neurodevelopmental and
neuromorphological pathologies present in schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3286960
PMID: 22315408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Eur Urol. 2012 Jun;61(6):1245-56. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.01.011. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Genome-wide analysis of CpG island methylation in bladder cancer identified TBX2,
TBX3, GATA2, and ZIC4 as pTa-specific prognostic markers.

Kandimalla R(1), van Tilborg AA, Kompier LC, Stumpel DJ, Stam RW, Bangma CH,
Zwarthoff EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation markers could serve as useful biomarkers, both as
markers for progression and for urine-based diagnostic assays.
OBJECTIVE: Identify bladder cancer (BCa)-specific methylated DNA sequences for
predicting pTa-specific progression and detecting BCa in voided urine.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Genome-wide methylation analysis was performed
on 44 bladder tumours using the Agilent 244K Human CpG Island Microarray (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Validation was done using a custom Illumina 
384-plex assay (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) in a retrospective group of 77
independent tumours. Markers for progression were identified in pTa (n = 24)
tumours and validated retrospectively in an independent series of 41 pTa tumours 
by the SNaPshot method (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
MEASUREMENTS: The percentage of methylation in tumour and urine samples was used 
to identify markers for detection and related to the end point of progression to 
muscle-invasive disease with Kaplan-Meier models and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: In the validation set, methylation of the T-box 2
(TBX2), T-box 3 (TBX3), GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2), and Zic family member 4
(ZIC4) genes was associated with progression to muscle-invasive disease in pTa
tumours (p = 0.003). Methylation of TBX2 alone showed a sensitivity of 100%, a
specificity of 80%, a positive predictive value of 78%, and a negative predictive
value of 100%, with an area under the curve of 0.96 (p<0.0001) for predicting
progression. Multivariate analysis showed that methylation of TBX3 and GATA2 are 
independent predictors of progression when compared to clinicopathologic
variables (p = 0.04 and p = 0.03, respectively). The predictive accuracy improved
by 23% by adding methylation of TBX2, TBX3, and GATA2 to the European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer risk scores. We further
identified and validated 110 CpG islands (CGIs) that are differentially
methylated between tumour cells and control urine. The limitation of this study
is the small number of patients analysed for testing and validating the
prognostic markers.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified four methylation markers that predict progression
in pTa tumours, thereby allowing stratification of patients for personalised
follow-up. In addition, we identified CGIs that will enable detection of bladder 
tumours in voided urine.

Copyright © 2012 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22284968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Haematologica. 2012 Jun;97(6):890-4. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.054361. Epub 2012
Jan 22.

Germ-line GATA2 p.THR354MET mutation in familial myelodysplastic syndrome with
acquired monosomy 7 and ASXL1 mutation demonstrating rapid onset and poor
survival.

Bödör C(1), Renneville A, Smith M, Charazac A, Iqbal S, Etancelin P, Cavenagh J, 
Barnett MJ, Kramarzová K, Krishnan B, Matolcsy A, Preudhomme C, Fitzgibbon J,
Owen C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of
London, London, UK.

While most myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia cases are sporadic,
rare familial cases occur and provide some insight into leukemogenesis. The most 
clearly defined familial cases result from inherited mutations in RUNX1 or CEBPA.
Recently, novel germline mutations in GATA2 have been reported. We, therefore,
investigated individuals from families with one or more first-degree relatives
with myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia with wild-type RUNX1 and
CEBPA, for GATA2 mutations. Screening for other recurrent mutations was also
performed. A GATA2 p.Thr354Met mutation was observed in a pedigree in which 2
first-degree cousins developed high-risk myelodys-plastic syndrome with monosomy 
7. They were also observed to have acquired identical somatic ASXL1 mutations and
both died despite stem cell transplantation. These findings confirm that germline
GATA2 mutations predispose to familial myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid
leukemia, and that monosomy 7 and ASXL1 mutations may be recurrent secondary
genetic abnormalities triggering overt malignancy in these families.

PMCID: PMC3366655
PMID: 22271902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2242-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-366070. Epub 2012
Jan 20.

GATA-3 regulates hematopoietic stem cell maintenance and cell-cycle entry.

Ku CJ(1), Hosoya T, Maillard I, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, USA.

Maintaining hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) quiescence is a critical property for
the life-long generation of blood cells. Approximately 75% of cells in a highly
enriched long-term repopulating HSC (LT-HSC) pool
(Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-Kit(hi)CD150(+)CD48(-)) are quiescent, with only a small
percentage of the LT-HSCs in cycle. Transcription factor GATA-3 is known to be
vital for the development of T cells at multiple stages in the thymus and for Th2
differentiation in the peripheral organs. Although it is well documented that
GATA-3 is expressed in HSCs, a role for GATA-3 in any prethymic progenitor cell
has not been established. In the present study, we show that Gata3-null mutant
mice generate fewer LT-HSCs and that fewer Gata3-null LT-HSCs are in cycle.
Furthermore, Gata3 mutant hematopoietic progenitor cells fail to be recruited
into an increased cycling state after 5-fluorouracil-induced myelosuppression.
Therefore, GATA-3 is required for the maintenance of a normal number of LT-HSCs
and for their entry into the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3311255
PMID: 22267605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1248-59. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0943. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

Targeting pioneering factor and hormone receptor cooperative pathways to suppress
tumor progression.

Shah S(1), Prasad S, Knudsen KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Nuclear receptors and pioneer factors drive the development and progression of
prostate cancer. In this disease, aggressive disease phenotypes and hormone
therapy failures result from resurgent activity of androgen receptor (AR) and the
upregulation of coactivator protein p300 and pioneer factors (e.g., GATA2 and
FOXA1). Thus, a major emphasis in the field is to identify mechanisms by which
castrate-resistant AR activity and pioneer factor function can be combinatorially
suppressed. Here we show that the turmeric spice isoflavone curcumin suppresses
p300 and CBP occupancy at sites of AR function. Curcumin reduced the association 
of histone acetylation and pioneer factors, thereby suppressing AR residence and 
downstream target gene expression. Histone deacetylase inhibitors reversed the
effects of curcumin on AR activity, further underscoring the impact of curcumin
on altering the chromatin landscape. These functions precluded pioneer factor
occupancy, leading ultimately to a suppression of ligand-dependent and
ligand-independent AR residence on chromatin. Moreover, these functions were
conserved even in cells with heightened pioneer factor activity, thus identifying
a potential strategy to manage this subclass of tumors. Biological relevance was 
further identified using in vivo xenograft models mimicking disease progression. 
Curcumin cooperated in vivo with androgen deprivation as indicated by a reduction
in tumor growth and delay to the onset of castrate-resistant disease. Together,
our results show the combinatorial impact of targeting AR and histone
modification in prostate cancer, thus setting the stage for further development
of curcumin as a novel agent to target AR signaling.

PMCID: PMC3294022
PMID: 22258452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Mar 15;185(6):620-7. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201108-1503OC. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

The clinical and environmental determinants of airway transcriptional profiles in
allergic asthma.

Yang IV(1), Tomfohr J, Singh J, Foss CM, Marshall HE, Que LG, McElvania-Tekippe
E, Florence S, Sundy JS, Schwartz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
ivana.yang@ucdenver.edu

RATIONALE: Gene expression profiling of airway epithelial and inflammatory cells 
can be used to identify genes involved in environmental asthma.
METHODS: Airway epithelia and inflammatory cells were obtained via bronchial
brush and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from 39 subjects comprising three
phenotypic groups (nonatopic nonasthmatic, atopic nonasthmatic, and atopic
asthmatic) 4 hours after instillation of LPS, house dust mite antigen, and saline
in three distinct subsegmental bronchi. RNA transcript levels were assessed using
whole genome microarrays.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Baseline (saline exposure) differences in gene
expression were related to airflow obstruction in epithelial cells (C3, ALOX5AP, 
CCL18, and others), and to serum IgE (innate immune genes and focal adhesion
pathway) and allergic-asthmatic phenotype (complement genes, histone
deacetylases, and GATA1 transcription factor) in inflammatory cells. LPS
stimulation resulted in pronounced transcriptional response across all subjects
in both airway epithelia and BAL cells, with strong association to nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B and IFN-inducible genes as well as signatures of other transcription
factors (NRF2, C/EBP, and E2F1) and histone proteins. No distinct transcriptional
profile to LPS was observed in the asthma and atopy phenotype. Finally, although 
no consistent expression changes were observed across all subjects in response to
house dust mite antigen stimulation, we observed subtle differences in gene
expression (e.g., GATA1 and GATA2) in BAL cells related to the asthma and atopy
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that among individuals with allergic asthma,
transcriptional changes in airway epithelia and inflammatory cells are influenced
by phenotype as well as environmental exposures.

PMCID: PMC3326287
PMID: 22246175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Aug 10;21(12):2288-97. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0608. Epub 2012
Feb 15.

Generation and characterization of LIF-dependent canine induced pluripotent stem 
cells from adult dermal fibroblasts.

Whitworth DJ(1), Ovchinnikov DA, Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Science, University of Queensland, Gatton, Queensland,
Australia. d.whitworth@uq.edu.au

Dogs provide a more clinically relevant model of human disease than rodents,
particularly with respect to hereditary diseases. Thus, the availability of
canine stem cells will greatly facilitate the use of the dog in the development
of stem cell-based gene therapies and regenerative medicine. In this study we
describe the production of canine induced pluripotent stem cells (ciPSCs) from
adult dermal fibroblasts. These cells have a morphology resembling previously
described canine embryonic stem cells, a normal karyotype, and express
pluripotency markers including alkaline phosphatase, Nanog, Oct4, Telomerase,
SSEA1, SSEA4, TRA1-60, TRA1-81, and Rex1. Furthermore, the inactive X chromosome 
is reactivated indicating a ground-state pluripotency. In culture they readily
form embryoid bodies, which in turn give rise to cell types from all 3 embryonic 
germ layers, as indicated by expression of the definitive endoderm markers Cxcr4 
and a-fetoprotein, mesoderm markers Collagen IIA and Gata2, and ectoderm markers 
ßIII-tubulin, Enolase, and Nestin. Of particular significance is the observation 
that these ciPSCs are dependent only on leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), making 
them similar to mouse and canine embryonic stem cells, but strikingly unlike the 
ciPSCs recently described in two other studies, which were dependent on both
basic fibroblast growth factor and LIF in order to maintain their pluripotency.
Thus, our ciPSCs closely resemble mouse ESCs derived from the inner cell mass of 
preimplantation embryos, while the previously described ciPSCs appear to be more 
representative of cells from the epiblast of mouse postimplantation embryos.

PMID: 22221227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;44(3):457-60. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.12.004. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

GATA-2 mediated regulation of normal hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell function,
myelodysplasia and myeloid leukemia.

Rodrigues NP(1), Tipping AJ, Wang Z, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health Center for Biomedical Research Excellence in
Stem Cell Biology, Roger Williams Medical Center, Boston University School of
Medicine, Providence, RI 02908, United States. neilr@bu.edu

Unremitting blood cell production throughout the lifetime of an organism is
reliant on hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). A rare and relatively quiescent cell 
type, HSCs are, on entry into cell cycle fated to self-renew, undergo apoptosis
or differentiate to progenitors (HPCs) that eventually yield specific classes of 
blood cells. Disruption of these HSC fate decisions is considered to be
fundamental to the development of leukemia. Much effort has therefore been placed
on understanding the molecular pathways that regulate HSC fate decisions and how 
these processes are undermined in leukemia. Transcription factors have emerged as
critical regulators in this respect. Here we review the participation of zinc
finger transcription factor GATA-2 in regulating normal hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell functionality, myelodysplasia and myeloid leukemia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319732
PMID: 22192845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(4):761-70. doi: 10.1159/000335770. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

Adenosine promotes GATA-2-regulated p53 gene transcription to induce HepG2 cell
apoptosis.

Yaguchi T(1), Nakano T, Gotoh A, Nishizaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In our earlier study, adenosine induced apoptosis in HepG2 human
hepatoma cells by tuning of apoptosis-mediator gene transcription. The present
study aimed at understanding the regulatory mechanism underlying the
apoptosis-mediator gene transcription under the control of adenosine.
METHODS: For HepG2 cells with and without knocking-down p53 or GATA-2, cell
viability, mitochondrial membrane potentials, caspase activity, and
transcriptional activity were monitored, and Western blotting, RT-PCR,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay were carried out.
RESULTS: Extracellular adenosine upregulated expression of the p53 mRNA and
protein in HepG2 human hepatoma cells. Adenosine induced apoptosis, disrupted
mitochondrial membrane potentials, and activated caspase-3, -8 and -9 in HepG2
cells, and those effects were inhibited by silencing the p53-targetd gene. In the
assay of transcriptional activity using full-length p53 gene promoter and 5'
deletion mutants combined with the luciferase reporter vector, adenosine enhanced
transcriptional activity for full-length p53 gene promoter, that was prevented by
deleting from -240 to -146 bp on the promoter. In the EMSA using a (32)P-labeled 
DNA probe to detect binding to the putative GATA-2 biding site on the p53 gene
promoter, adenosine produced (32)P-positive signals in nuclear extracts from
HepG2 cells. In the Western blot analysis, adenosine increased presence of GATA-2
in nuclear extracts. In the ChIP assay, adenosine increased PCR products for the 
p53 gene promoter in chromosomal extracts from HepG2 cells, immunoprecipitated
using an anti-GATA-2 antibody. Adenosine-induced upregulation of the p53 mRNA
expression was suppressed by knocking-down GATA-2.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study show that p53 is a transcriptional
target of GATA-2 and that adenosine upregulates GATA-2-regulated p53 expression, 
thereby activating caspase-3, -8, and -9 to induce HepG2 cell apoptosis.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22178888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1648-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr586. Epub 2011 Dec
13.

Post-genome wide association studies and functional analyses identify association
of MPP7 gene variants with site-specific bone mineral density.

Xiao SM(1), Kung AW, Gao Y, Lau KS, Ma A, Zhang ZL, Liu JM, Xia W, He JW, Zhao L,
Nie M, Fu WZ, Zhang MJ, Sun J, Kwan JS, Tso GH, Dai ZJ, Cheung CL, Bow CH, Leung 
AY, Tan KC, Sham PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Our previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) in a Hong Kong Southern Chinese
population with extreme bone mineral density (BMD) scores revealed suggestive
association with MPP7, which ranked second after JAG1 as a candidate gene for
BMD. To follow-up this suggestive signal, we replicated the top single-nucleotide
polymorphism rs4317882 of MPP7 in three additional independent Asian-descent
samples (n= 2684). The association of rs4317882 reached the genome-wide
significance in the meta-analysis of all available subjects (P(meta)= 4.58 ×
10(-8), n= 4204). Site heterogeneity was observed, with a larger effect on spine 
than hip BMD. Further functional studies in a zebrafish model revealed that
vertebral bone mass was lower in an mpp7 knock-down model compared with the
wide-type (P= 9.64 × 10(-4), n= 21). In addition, MPP7 was found to have
constitutive expression in human bone-derived cells during osteogenesis.
Immunostaining of murine MC3T3-E1 cells revealed that the Mpp7 protein is
localized in the plasma membrane and intracytoplasmic compartment of osteoblasts.
In an assessment of the function of identified variants, an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay demonstrated the binding of transcriptional factor GATA2 to 
the risk allele 'A' but not the 'G' allele of rs4317882. An mRNA expression study
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells confirmed that the low BMD-related
allele 'A' of rs4317882 was associated with lower MPP7 expression (P= 9.07 ×
10(-3), n= 135). Our data suggest a genetic and functional association of MPP7
with BMD variation.

PMID: 22171069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1283-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-08-374363. Epub 2011
Dec 6.

Loss-of-function germline GATA2 mutations in patients with MDS/AML or MonoMAC
syndrome and primary lymphedema reveal a key role for GATA2 in the lymphatic
vasculature.

Kazenwadel J(1), Secker GA, Liu YJ, Rosenfeld JA, Wildin RS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J,
Hsu AP, Dyack S, Fernandez CV, Chong CE, Babic M, Bardy PG, Shimamura A, Zhang
MY, Walsh T, Holland SM, Hickstein DD, Horwitz MS, Hahn CN, Scott HS, Harvey NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide,
5000 SA, Australia.

Recent work has established that heterozygous germline GATA2 mutations predispose
carriers to familial myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)/acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
"MonoMAC" syndrome, and DCML deficiency. Here, we describe a previously
unreported MDS family carrying a missense GATA2 mutation (p.Thr354Met), one
patient with MDS/AML carrying a frameshift GATA2 mutation (p.Leu332Thrfs*53),
another with MDS harboring a GATA2 splice site mutation, and 3 patients
exhibiting MDS or MDS/AML who have large deletions encompassing the GATA2 locus. 
Intriguingly, 2 MDS/AML or "MonoMAC" syndrome patients with GATA2 deletions and
one with a frameshift mutation also have primary lymphedema. Primary lymphedema
occurs as a result of aberrations in the development and/or function of lymphatic
vessels, spurring us to investigate whether GATA2 plays a role in the lymphatic
vasculature. We demonstrate here that GATA2 protein is present at high levels in 
lymphatic vessel valves and that GATA2 controls the expression of genes important
for programming lymphatic valve development. Our data expand the phenotypes
associated with germline GATA2 mutations to include predisposition to primary
lymphedema and suggest that complete haploinsufficiency or loss of function of
GATA2, rather than missense mutations, is the key predisposing factor for
lymphedema onset. Moreover, we reveal a crucial role for GATA2 in lymphatic
vascular development.

PMCID: PMC3277359
PMID: 22147895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jan;79(1):64-73. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21409. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Expression of GATA1 in the ovine conceptus and endometrium during the
peri-attachment period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA1 is known to play an essential role in
hematopoiesis, but its other roles have not been well characterized. The purpose 
of this study was to determine relationships between GATA1 and GATA2 and/or
GATA3, and to identify their possible functions in ovine development. GATA1 mRNA 
was found in ovine conceptuses and endometrial epithelial regions of Day 15 (Day 
0=day of estrus) cyclic and Days 15, 17, and 21 pregnant ovine uteri. GATA1 mRNA 
was strongly expressed in conceptuses on Day 21, when trophoblast attachment to
the maternal endometrium progressed. Similarly, GATA1 protein expression was
relatively high on Day 21. To localize GATA1 mRNA, ovine conceptuses and pregnant
uteri were subjected to in situ hybridization on Days 15, 17, and 21, confirming 
that GATA1 mRNA was expressed in trophoblasts and uterine endometrial epithelial 
cells in these gestation days. The presence of GATA1 protein was further
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Because high GATA1 expression appeared to
coincide with reduced GATA2/3 expression, a potential role of GATA1 was examined 
through transfection of a mouse Gata1 expression plasmid into bovine trophoblast 
F3 cells. This over-expression resulted in the down-regulation of endogenous
GATA2 transcripts. These observations indicate that GATA1 exists in the ovine
conceptus and uterus during the peri-attachment period, and suggest that GATA1 is
integral to conceptus and endometrial development through the regulation of GATA2
and possibly other developmentally important genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22102538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Am J Pathol. 2012 Jan;180(1):351-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.09.030. Epub 2011
Nov 7.

Notch-induced hIL-6 production facilitates the maintenance of self-renewal of
hCD34+ cord blood cells through the activation of Jak-PI3K-STAT3 pathway.

Choi B(1), Chun E, Kim SY, Kim M, Lee KY, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Ex vivo expansion of CD34(+) stem cells in contact culture between
hCD34(+)CD38(-)Lin(-) cord blood stem cells and human delta-like-expressing
AFT024 feeder cells revealed increased amounts of stemness-related proteins such 
as HoxB4, GATA2, Bmi-1, and p21 and anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2,
Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, and phospho-Bad, when compared with control or noncontact culture.
Production of human IL-6 (hIL-6) was markedly elevated in the culture, but was
profoundly inhibited by treatment with <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor. In addition,
Notch-induced activation of STAT3 was directly involved in gene expression of
hIL-6 and soluble hIL-6Ra, indicating the close linkage between Notch signaling
and hIL-6 production. Furthermore, depletion of soluble hIL-6 (with
hIL-6-specific antibodies) and inhibition of IL-6-mediated signals (with a Jak1
inhibitor and wortmannin) severely affected the maintenance of self-renewal of
hCD34(+) cord blood cells. It was also observed that the ex vivo expanded CD34(+)
cord blood cells were induced to reconstitute human immune cells in nonobese
diabetic mice with severe combined immunodeficiency when compared with freshly
isolated CD34(+) cord blood cells. Together, these results strongly demonstrate
that Notch signaling in the "cell-to-cell contact" between hCD34(+) cord blood
and delta-like-expressing AFT024 feeder cells facilitates maintenance of
self-renewal of hCD34(+) cord blood cells through direct regulation of hIL-6
production.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22062221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):569-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr491. Epub 2011 Oct
21.

GATA2 negatively regulates PTEN by preventing nuclear translocation of androgen
receptor and by androgen-independent suppression of PTEN transcription in breast 
cancer.

Wang Y(1), He X, Ngeow J, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The tumor suppressor gene PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on
chromosome 10) plays important roles in tumor development and progression. Among 
many functions, PTEN negatively regulates the AKT anti-apoptotic signaling
pathway, while nuclear PTEN affects the cell cycle by repressing the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. However, the regulation of PTEN
expression is still not well understood. We previously reported that androgen
receptor (AR) activates PTEN transcription in breast cancer cells. Here, we found
that the transcription factor GATA2 (GATA binding protein 2) is overexpressed in 
non-cultured human breast carcinomas and is negatively correlated with PTEN
expression. We then showed GATA2 promotes breast cancer cell growth and
stimulates AKT phosphorylation by inhibiting PTEN transcription. We mapped a
GATA2-binding site in the PTEN promoter, whereby GATA2 not only blocks AR-induced
PTEN expression by preventing AR nuclear translocation, but also directly
represses PTEN transcription independent of AR. Most importantly, for the first
time, we have discovered a novel reverse regulation within the traditional
PTEN/AKT signaling pathway, whereby AKT induces GATA2 with consequent decreased
PTEN transcription, likely germane in tumor invasion and metastases but not
initiation.

PMID: 22021428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;31(23):4648-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05934-11. Epub 2011 Oct 
3.

Dynamic nucleosome-depleted regions at androgen receptor enhancers in the absence
of ligand in prostate cancer cells.

Andreu-Vieyra C(1), Lai J, Berman BP, Frenkel B, Jia L, Jones PA, Coetzee GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.

Nucleosome positioning at transcription start sites is known to regulate gene
expression by altering DNA accessibility to transcription factors; however, its
role at enhancers is poorly understood. We investigated nucleosome positioning at
the androgen receptor (AR) enhancers of TMPRSS2, KLK2, and KLK3/PSA in prostate
cancer cells. Surprisingly, a population of enhancer modules in androgen-deprived
cultures showed nucleosome-depleted regions (NDRs) in all three loci. Under
androgen-deprived conditions, NDRs at the TMPRSS2 enhancer were maintained by the
pioneer AR transcriptional collaborator GATA-2. Androgen treatment resulted in AR
occupancy, an increased number of enhancer modules with NDRs without changes in
footprint width, increased levels of histone H3 acetylation (AcH3), and
dimethylation (H3K4me2) at nucleosomes flanking the NDRs. Our data suggest that, 
in the absence of ligand, AR enhancers exist in an equilibrium in which a
percentage of modules are occupied by nucleosomes while others display NDRs. We
propose that androgen treatment leads to the disruption of the equilibrium toward
a nucleosome-depleted state, rather than to enhancer de novo "remodeling." This
allows the recruitment of histone modifiers, chromatin remodelers, and ultimately
gene activation. The "receptive" state described here could help explain AR
signaling activation under very low ligand concentrations.

PMCID: PMC3232925
PMID: 21969603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 28;43(10):926-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.949.

GATA2 mutations lead to MDS and AML.

Hyde RK, Liu PP.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2011 Oct;43(10):1012-7.
    Nat Genet. 2011 Oct;43(10):929-31.

PMID: 21956389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;31(23):4692-705. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05979-11. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Osteoclast progenitors reside in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
<U+03B3>-expressing bone marrow cell population.

Wei W(1), Zeve D, Wang X, Du Y, Tang W, Dechow PC, Graff JM, Wan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA.

Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells essential for skeletal development,
homeostasis, and regeneration. They derive from hematopoietic progenitors in the 
monocyte/macrophage lineage and differentiate in response to RANKL. However, the 
precise nature of osteoclast progenitors is a longstanding and important
question. Using inducible peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>)-tTA TRE-GFP (green fluorescent protein) reporter mice, we show that
osteoclast progenitors reside specifically in the PPAR<U+03B3>-expressing hematopoietic 
bone marrow population and identify the quiescent PPAR<U+03B3>(+) cells as osteoclast
progenitors. Importantly, two PPAR<U+03B3>-tTA TRE-Cre-controlled genetic models provide
compelling functional evidence. First, Notch activation in PPAR<U+03B3>(+) cells causes 
high bone mass due to impaired osteoclast precursor proliferation. Second,
selective ablation of PPAR<U+03B3>(+) cells by diphtheria toxin also causes high bone
mass due to decreased osteoclast numbers. Furthermore, PPAR<U+03B3>(+) cells respond to 
both pathological and pharmacological resorption-enhancing stimuli.
Mechanistically, PPAR<U+03B3> promotes osteoclast progenitors by activating GATA2
transcription. These findings not only identify the long-sought-after osteoclast 
progenitors but also establish unprecedented tools for their visualization,
isolation, characterization, and genetic manipulation.

PMCID: PMC3232921
PMID: 21947280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Development. 2011 Oct;138(20):4555-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.066779.

Evaluation and application of modularly assembled zinc-finger nucleases in
zebrafish.

Zhu C(1), Smith T, McNulty J, Rayla AL, Lakshmanan A, Siekmann AF, Buffardi M,
Meng X, Shin J, Padmanabhan A, Cifuentes D, Giraldez AJ, Look AT, Epstein JA,
Lawson ND, Wolfe SA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) allow targeted gene inactivation in a wide range of 
model organisms. However, construction of target-specific ZFNs is technically
challenging. Here, we evaluate a straightforward modular assembly-based approach 
for ZFN construction and gene inactivation in zebrafish. From an archive of 27
different zinc-finger modules, we assembled more than 70 different zinc-finger
cassettes and evaluated their specificity using a bacterial one-hybrid assay. In 
parallel, we constructed ZFNs from these cassettes and tested their ability to
induce lesions in zebrafish embryos. We found that the majority of zinc-finger
proteins assembled from these modules have favorable specificities and nearly
one-third of modular ZFNs generated lesions at their targets in the zebrafish
genome. To facilitate the application of ZFNs within the zebrafish community we
constructed a public database of sites in the zebrafish genome that can be
targeted using this archive. Importantly, we generated new germline mutations in 
eight different genes, confirming that this is a viable platform for heritable
gene inactivation in vertebrates. Characterization of one of these mutants,
gata2a, revealed an unexpected role for this transcription factor in vascular
development. This work provides a resource to allow targeted germline gene
inactivation in zebrafish and highlights the benefit of a definitive reverse
genetic strategy to reveal gene function.

PMCID: PMC3177320
PMID: 21937602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2011 Dec 22;118(26):6975-86. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-352658. Epub 2011 
Sep 12.

Etv2/ER71 induces vascular mesoderm from Flk1+PDGFRa+ primitive mesoderm.

Kataoka H(1), Hayashi M, Nakagawa R, Tanaka Y, Izumi N, Nishikawa S, Jakt ML,
Tarui H, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Japan. kataokah@cdb.riken.jp

Etv2 (Ets Variant 2) has been shown to be an indispensable gene for the
development of hematopoietic cells (HPCs)/endothelial cells (ECs). However, how
Etv2 specifies the mesoderm-generating HPCs/ECs remains incompletely understood. 
In embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation culture and Etv2-null embryos, we
show that Etv2 is dispensable for generating primitive Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+)
mesoderm but is required for the progression of Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) cells into
vascular/hematopoietic mesoderm. Etv2-null ESCs and embryonic cells were arrested
as Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) and failed to generate Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(-) mesoderm.
Flk-1(+)/Etv2(+) early embryonic cells showed significantly higher
hemato-endothelial potential than the Flk-1(+)/Etv2(-) population, suggesting
that Etv2 specifies a hemato-endothelial subset of Flk-1(+) mesoderm. Critical
hemato-endothelial genes were severely down-regulated in Etv2-null Flk-1(+)
cells. Among those genes Scl, Fli1, and GATA2 were expressed simultaneously with 
Etv2 in early embryos and seemed to be critical targets. Etv2 reexpression in
Etv2-null cells restored the development of CD41(+), CD45(+), and VE-cadherin(+) 
cells. Expression of Scl or Fli1 alone could also restore HPCs/ECs in the
Etv2-null background, indicating that these 2 genes are critical downstream
targets. Furthermore, VEGF induced Etv2 potently and rapidly in Flk-1(+)
mesoderm. We propose that Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) primitive mesoderm is committed into
Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(-) vascular mesoderm through Etv2 and that up-regulation of Etv2 
by VEGF promotes this commitment.

PMID: 21911838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Leukemia. 2012 Mar;26(3):550-4. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.235. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Overexpression of GATA2 predicts an adverse prognosis for patients with acute
myeloid leukemia and it is associated with distinct molecular abnormalities.

Vicente C, Vazquez I, Conchillo A, García-Sánchez MA, Marcotegui N, Fuster O,
González M, Calasanz MJ, Lahortiga I, Odero MD.

PMID: 21904383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2647-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-362772.

GATA2 finds its macrophage niche.

Migliaccio AR(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2656-8.
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2653-5.

PMID: 21903902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):e139-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355107. Epub 2011 
Sep 6.

Genome-wide ChIP-Seq reveals a dramatic shift in the binding of the transcription
factor erythroid Kruppel-like factor during erythrocyte differentiation.

Pilon AM(1), Ajay SS, Kumar SA, Steiner LA, Cherukuri PF, Wincovitch S, Anderson 
SM; NISC Comparative Sequencing Center, Mullikin JC, Gallagher PG, Hardison RC,
Margulies EH, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Erythropoiesis is dependent on the activity of transcription factors, including
the erythroid-specific erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF). ChIP followed by
massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is a powerful, unbiased method to map
trans-factor occupancy. We used ChIP-Seq to study the interactome of EKLF in
mouse erythroid progenitor cells and more differentiated erythroblasts. We
correlated these results with the nuclear distribution of EKLF, RNA-Seq analysis 
of the transcriptome, and the occupancy of other erythroid transcription factors.
In progenitor cells, EKLF is found predominantly at the periphery of the nucleus,
where EKLF primarily occupies the promoter regions of genes and acts as a
transcriptional activator. In erythroblasts, EKLF is distributed throughout the
nucleus, and erythroblast-specific EKLF occupancy is predominantly in intragenic 
regions. In progenitor cells, EKLF modulates general cell growth and cell cycle
regulatory pathways, whereas in erythroblasts EKLF is associated with repression 
of these pathways. The EKLF interactome shows very little overlap with the
interactomes of GATA1, GATA2, or TAL1, leading to a model in which EKLF directs
programs that are independent of those regulated by the GATA factors or TAL1.

PMCID: PMC3208289
PMID: 21900194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 4;43(10):1012-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.913.

Heritable GATA2 mutations associated with familial myelodysplastic syndrome and
acute myeloid leukemia.

Hahn CN(1), Chong CE, Carmichael CL, Wilkins EJ, Brautigan PJ, Li XC, Babic M,
Lin M, Carmagnac A, Lee YK, Kok CH, Gagliardi L, Friend KL, Ekert PG, Butcher CM,
Brown AL, Lewis ID, To LB, Timms AE, Storek J, Moore S, Altree M, Escher R, Bardy
PG, Suthers GK, D'Andrea RJ, Horwitz MS, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Oct;43(10):926-7.

We report the discovery of GATA2 as a new myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) predisposition gene. We found the same, previously
unidentified heterozygous c.1061C>T (p.Thr354Met) missense mutation in the GATA2 
transcription factor gene segregating with the multigenerational transmission of 
MDS-AML in three families and a GATA2 c.1063_1065delACA (p.Thr355del) mutation at
an adjacent codon in a fourth MDS family. The resulting alterations reside within
the second zinc finger of GATA2, which mediates DNA-binding and protein-protein
interactions. We show differential effects of the mutations on the
transactivation of target genes, cellular differentiation, apoptosis and global
gene expression. Identification of such predisposing genes to familial forms of
MDS and AML is critical for more effective diagnosis and prognosis, counseling,
selection of related bone marrow transplant donors and development of therapies.

PMCID: PMC3184204
PMID: 21892162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 4;43(10):929-31. doi: 10.1038/ng.923.

Mutations in GATA2 cause primary lymphedema associated with a predisposition to
acute myeloid leukemia (Emberger syndrome).

Ostergaard P(1), Simpson MA, Connell FC, Steward CG, Brice G, Woollard WJ, Dafou 
D, Kilo T, Smithson S, Lunt P, Murday VA, Hodgson S, Keenan R, Pilz DT,
Martinez-Corral I, Makinen T, Mortimer PS, Jeffery S, Trembath RC, Mansour S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Biomedical Sciences, St. George's University of London,
London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Oct;43(10):926-7.

We report an allelic series of eight mutations in GATA2 underlying Emberger
syndrome, an autosomal dominant primary lymphedema associated with a
predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia. GATA2 is a transcription factor that
plays an essential role in gene regulation during vascular development and
hematopoietic differentiation. Our findings indicate that haploinsufficiency of
GATA2 underlies primary lymphedema and predisposes to acute myeloid leukemia in
this syndrome.

PMID: 21892158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Dev Growth Differ. 2011 Sep;53(7):870-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2011.01293.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 28.

Identification of a yolk sac cell population with hematopoietic activity in view 
of CD45/c-Kit expression.

Yamasaki S(1), Nobuhisa I, Ramadan A, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 
Honjo, Kumamoto, Japan.

During murine embryonic development, primitive hematopoiesis occurs in the yolk
sac (YS). Recent studies have shown that the YS also harbors definitive
hematopoietic activity. However, the population of YS cells contributing to
definitive hematopoiesis has not been identified. In this study, we characterized
the hematopoietic cell populations in the YS of mouse embryos from E9.5 to E14.5 
in view of the expression profiles of CD45 and c-Kit. The YS cells from E9.5 to
E11.5 could be divided into six populations: CD45(-) c-Kit(-) , CD45(-)
c-Kit(low) , CD45(-) c-Kit(high) , CD45(low) c-Kit(high) , CD45(high) c-Kit(high)
and CD45(high) c-Kit(very low) . Among these populations, CD45(low) c-Kit(high)
cells showed the highest multilineage hematopoietic colony-forming activity.
Later in development, the YS cells from E12.5 to E14.5 lost the second and fourth
populations (i.e., they retained CD45(-) c-Kit(-) , CD45(-) c-Kit(high) ,
CD45(high) c-Kit(high) and CD45(high) c-Kit(very low) cells), and concurrently
with the disappearance of the CD45(low) c-Kit(high) population, no significant
hematopoietic activity was found in any of the populations on and after E12.5.
CD45(low) c-Kit(high) YS cells, which had a round morphology with a large
nucleus, possessed the ability to differentiate into myeloid and B lymphoid cells
when cultured with stromal cells. These findings suggest that CD45(low)
c-Kit(high) YS cells include more undifferentiated cells than the other YS cell
populations and possess in vitro potency to differentiate into multilineage
hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, this cell population disappears from the YS at 
around E12.5, when the site of hematopoiesis has already shifted to the fetal
liver and the placenta.

© 2011 The Authors. Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2011 Japanese Society
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 21883169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;31(23):4706-19. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05980-11. Epub 2011 Aug 
29.

Biphasic and dosage-dependent regulation of osteoclastogenesis by ß-catenin.

Wei W(1), Zeve D, Suh JM, Wang X, Du Y, Zerwekh JE, Dechow PC, Graff JM, Wan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is a critical regulator of skeletal physiology. However, 
previous studies have mainly focused on its roles in osteoblasts, while its
specific function in osteoclasts is unknown. This is a clinically important
question because neutralizing antibodies against Wnt antagonists are promising
new drugs for bone diseases. Here, we show that in osteoclastogenesis, ß-catenin 
is induced during the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)-mediated
quiescence-to-proliferation switch but suppressed during the RANKL-mediated
proliferation-to-differentiation switch. Genetically, ß-catenin deletion blocks
osteoclast precursor proliferation, while ß-catenin constitutive activation
sustains proliferation but prevents osteoclast differentiation, both causing
osteopetrosis. In contrast, ß-catenin heterozygosity enhances osteoclast
differentiation, causing osteoporosis. Biochemically, Wnt activation attenuates
whereas Wnt inhibition stimulates osteoclastogenesis. Mechanistically, ß-catenin 
activation increases GATA2/Evi1 expression but abolishes RANKL-induced c-Jun
phosphorylation. Therefore, ß-catenin exerts a pivotal biphasic and
dosage-dependent regulation of osteoclastogenesis. Importantly, these findings
suggest that Wnt activation is a more effective treatment for skeletal fragility 
than previously recognized that confers dual anabolic and anti-catabolic
benefits.

PMCID: PMC3232928
PMID: 21876000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022621. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Direct response elements of BMP within the PV.1A promoter are essential for its
transcriptional regulation during early Xenopus development.

Lee HS(1), Lee SY, Lee H, Hwang YS, Cha SW, Park S, Lee JY, Park JB, Kim S, Park 
MJ, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hallym University, ChunCheon,
Kangwon-Do, Korea.

Xvent homeobox genes encode transcription factors that repress organizer genes
and are essential for dorsoventral specification during early embryogenesis in
Xenopus. In contrast to the Xvent-2 gene subfamily, Xvent-1 subfamily members,
including PV.1A, have been proposed as indirect targets of Bone Morphogenetic
Protein-4 (BMP-4) signaling. Because PV.1A is a critical downstream mediator of, 
and tightly regulated by, BMP-4 signaling, we hypothesized that its promoter
contains a direct BMP-4 response element to effect this transcriptional
regulation. We demonstrate that direct regulation by BMP-4 is necessary for
transcription of PV.1A: its proximal promoter contains cis-acting binding
elements for Smads and Oaz crucial to induction in response to BMP-4 signaling.
In addition to these direct cis-acting BMP-4 responsive elements, an indirect
Xvent-2 response element and several repressive elements exist in the PV.1A
promoter to regulate its transcription. In summary, PV.1A undergoes combinatorial
regulation during early Xenopus development as both the direct target of BMP-4
signaling and as the direct and indirect target of positive and negative
regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC3153937
PMID: 21857938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Aug 19;11(9):575-83. doi: 10.1038/nri3046.

Human dendritic cell deficiency: the missing ID?

Collin M(1), Bigley V, Haniffa M, Hambleton S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2
4HH, UK. matthew.collin@ncl.ac.uk

Animal models and human in vitro systems indicate that dendritic cells (DCs) have
a crucial role in priming naive T cells, but just how important are they in the
intact human? Recent descriptions of human DC deficiency have begun to shed light
on this question and to illuminate other puzzles of human DC biology, including
their haematopoietic origin, developmental regulation and homeostatic equilibrium
with other leukocytes. In this Review, we explore the recently described DC
deficiency syndromes, discussing what these have taught us with regard to DC
function in humans and the important issues that remain unsolved.

PMID: 21852794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Blood. 2011 Sep 29;118(13):3715-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-365049. Epub 2011 
Aug 3.

Successful allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for GATA2
deficiency.

Cuellar-Rodriguez J(1), Gea-Banacloche J, Freeman AF, Hsu AP, Zerbe CS, Calvo KR,
Wilder J, Kurlander R, Olivier KN, Holland SM, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Cancer Institute (NCI), USA.

We performed nonmyeloablative HSCT in 6 patients with a newly described genetic
immunodeficiency syndrome caused by mutations in GATA2-a disease characterized by
nontuberculous mycobacterial infection, monocytopenia, B- and NK-cell deficiency,
and the propensity to transform to myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myelogenous
leukemia. Two patients received peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) from
matched-related donors, 2 received PBSCs from matched-unrelated donors, and 2
received stem cells from umbilical cord blood (UCB) donors. Recipients of
matched-related and -unrelated donors received fludarabine and 200 cGy of total
body irradiation (TBI); UCB recipients received cyclophosphamide in addition to
fludarabine and TBI as conditioning. All patients received tacrolimus and
sirolimus posttransplantation. Five patients were alive at a median follow-up of 
17.4 months (range, 10-25). All patients achieved high levels of donor
engraftment in the hematopoietic compartments that were deficient
pretransplantation. Adverse events consisted of delayed engraftment in the
recipient of a single UCB, GVHD in 4 patients, and immune-mediated pancytopenia
and nephrotic syndrome in the recipient of a double UCB transplantation.
Nonmyeloablative HSCT in GATA2 deficiency results in reconstitution of the
severely deficient monocyte, B-cell, and NK-cell populations and reversal of the 
clinical phenotype. Registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00923364.

PMCID: PMC3186343
PMID: 21816832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 16;108(33):13641-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108440108. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Genetic framework for GATA factor function in vascular biology.

Linnemann AK(1), O'Geen H, Keles S, Farnham PJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical 
Research, University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Vascular endothelial dysfunction underlies the genesis and progression of
numerous diseases. Although the GATA transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in 
endothelial cells and is implicated in coronary heart disease, it has been
studied predominantly as a master regulator of hematopoiesis. Because many
questions regarding GATA-2 function in the vascular biology realm remain
unanswered, we used ChIP sequencing and loss-of-function strategies to define the
GATA-2-instigated genetic network in human endothelial cells. In contrast to
erythroid cells, GATA-2 occupied a unique target gene ensemble consisting of
genes encoding key determinants of endothelial cell identity and inflammation.
GATA-2-occupied sites characteristically contained motifs that bind activator
protein-1 (AP-1), a pivotal regulator of inflammatory genes. GATA-2 frequently
occupied the same chromatin sites as c-JUN and c-FOS, heterodimeric components of
AP-1. Although all three components were required for maximal AP-1 target gene
expression, GATA-2 was not required for AP-1 chromatin occupancy. GATA-2
conferred maximal phosphorylation of chromatin-bound c-JUN at Ser-73, which
stimulates AP-1-dependent transactivation, in a chromosomal context-dependent
manner. This work establishes a link between a GATA factor and inflammatory
genes, mechanistic insights underlying GATA-2-AP-1 cooperativity and a rigorous
genetic framework for understanding GATA-2 function in normal and
pathophysiological vascular states.

PMCID: PMC3158141
PMID: 21808000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1659-71. doi: 10.1101/gr.125088.111. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Dynamics of the epigenetic landscape during erythroid differentiation after GATA1
restoration.

Wu W(1), Cheng Y, Keller CA, Ernst J, Kumar SA, Mishra T, Morrissey C, Dorman CM,
Chen KB, Drautz D, Giardine B, Shibata Y, Song L, Pimkin M, Crawford GE, Furey
TS, Kellis M, Miller W, Taylor J, Schuster SC, Zhang Y, Chiaromonte F, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Interplays among lineage-specific nuclear proteins, chromatin modifying enzymes, 
and the basal transcription machinery govern cellular differentiation, but their 
dynamics of action and coordination with transcriptional control are not fully
understood. Alterations in chromatin structure appear to establish a permissive
state for gene activation at some loci, but they play an integral role in
activation at other loci. To determine the predominant roles of chromatin states 
and factor occupancy in directing gene regulation during differentiation, we
mapped chromatin accessibility, histone modifications, and nuclear factor
occupancy genome-wide during mouse erythroid differentiation dependent on the
master regulatory transcription factor GATA1. Notably, despite extensive changes 
in gene expression, the chromatin state profiles (proportions of a gene in a
chromatin state dominated by activating or repressive histone modifications) and 
accessibility remain largely unchanged during GATA1-induced erythroid
differentiation. In contrast, gene induction and repression are strongly
associated with changes in patterns of transcription factor occupancy. Our
results indicate that during erythroid differentiation, the broad features of
chromatin states are established at the stage of lineage commitment, largely
independently of GATA1. These determine permissiveness for expression, with
subsequent induction or repression mediated by distinctive combinations of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3202283
PMID: 21795386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Circulation. 2011 Aug 9;124(6):720-30. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.039008.
Epub 2011 Jul 25.

MicroRNA-24 regulates vascularity after myocardial infarction.

Fiedler J(1), Jazbutyte V, Kirchmaier BC, Gupta SK, Lorenzen J, Hartmann D,
Galuppo P, Kneitz S, Pena JT, Sohn-Lee C, Loyer X, Soutschek J, Brand T, Tuschl
T, Heineke J, Martin U, Schulte-Merker S, Ertl G, Engelhardt S, Bauersachs J,
Thum T.

Author information: 
(1)Hannover Medical School, Institute for Molecular and Translational Therapeutic
Strategies, Hannover, Germany. Thum.Thomas@mh-hannover.de

BACKGROUND: Myocardial infarction leads to cardiac remodeling and development of 
heart failure. Insufficient myocardial capillary density after myocardial
infarction has been identified as a critical event in this process, although the 
underlying mechanisms of cardiac angiogenesis are mechanistically not well
understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that the small noncoding RNA microRNA-24
(miR-24) is enriched in cardiac endothelial cells and considerably upregulated
after cardiac ischemia. MiR-24 induces endothelial cell apoptosis, abolishes
endothelial capillary network formation on Matrigel, and inhibits cell sprouting 
from endothelial spheroids. These effects are mediated through targeting of the
endothelium-enriched transcription factor GATA2 and the p21-activated kinase
PAK4, which were identified by bioinformatic predictions and validated by
luciferase gene reporter assays. Respective downstream signaling cascades
involving phosphorylated BAD (Bcl-XL/Bcl-2-associated death promoter) and
Sirtuin1 were identified by transcriptome, protein arrays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses. Overexpression of miR-24 or silencing of its
targets significantly impaired angiogenesis in zebrafish embryos. Blocking of
endothelial miR-24 limited myocardial infarct size of mice via prevention of
endothelial apoptosis and enhancement of vascularity, which led to preserved
cardiac function and survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that miR-24 acts as a critical regulator of
endothelial cell apoptosis and angiogenesis and is suitable for therapeutic
intervention in the setting of ischemic heart disease.

PMID: 21788589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2656-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-360313. Epub 2011
Jul 15.

Exome sequencing identifies GATA-2 mutation as the cause of dendritic cell,
monocyte, B and NK lymphoid deficiency.

Dickinson RE(1), Griffin H, Bigley V, Reynard LN, Hussain R, Haniffa M, Lakey JH,
Rahman T, Wang XN, McGovern N, Pagan S, Cookson S, McDonald D, Chua I, Wallis J, 
Cant A, Wright M, Keavney B, Chinnery PF, Loughlin J, Hambleton S,
Santibanez-Koref M, Collin M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2647-9.

The human syndrome of dendritic cell, monocyte, B and natural killer lymphoid
deficiency presents as a sporadic or autosomal dominant trait causing
susceptibility to mycobacterial and other infections, predisposition to
myelodysplasia and leukemia, and, in some cases, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. 
Seeking a genetic cause, we sequenced the exomes of 4 unrelated persons, 3 with
sporadic disease, looking for novel, heterozygous, and probably deleterious
variants. A number of genes harbored novel variants in person, but only one gene,
GATA2, was mutated in all 4 persons. Each person harbored a different mutation,
but all were predicted to be highly deleterious and to cause loss or mutation of 
the C-terminal zinc finger domain. Because GATA2 is the only common mutated gene 
in 4 unrelated persons, it is highly probable to be the cause of dendritic cell, 
monocyte, B, and natural killer lymphoid deficiency. This disorder therefore
constitutes a new genetic form of heritable immunodeficiency and leukemic
transformation.

PMID: 21765025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Br J Haematol. 2011 Oct;155(1):93-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08800.x.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Resveratrol ameliorates TNFa-mediated suppression of erythropoiesis in human
CD34(+) cells via modulation of NF-<U+03BA>B signalling.

Jeong JY(1), Silver M, Parnes A, Nikiforow S, Berliner N, Vanasse GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tumour necrosis factor
alpha (TNFa), has been implicated in the pathogenesis of anaemia of inflammation.
TNFa suppresses erythroid colony formation via both direct and indirect effects
on haematopoietic progenitors, often involving activation of nuclear factor
(NF)-<U+03BA>B signalling resulting in downregulation of transcription factors critical 
for erythropoiesis. There is a dearth of effective and safe therapies for many
patients with inflammatory anaemia. Resveratrol is a flavanol found in red wine
grapes that possesses potent anti-inflammatory properties, but studies of its
impact on human erythropoiesis have proven contradictory. We investigated whether
resveratrol ameliorates TNFa-mediated suppression of erythropoiesis in human
CD34(+) haematopoietic progenitors. We found that resveratrol partially reverses 
the erythroid suppressive effects of TNFa, leading to significant recovery in
burst forming unit-erythroid colony formation in human CD34(+) cells. CD34(+)
cells pre-incubated with resveratrol for 72 h in the presence of TNFa inhibited
NF-<U+03BA>B activation via decreased NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear localization without altering total 
NF-<U+03BA>B protein levels and independent of I<U+03BA>B degradation. Resveratrol also
significantly restored the baseline expression of erythroid transcription factors
NFE2 and the GATA1/GATA2 ratio in CD34(+) cells treated with TNFa. In conclusion,
resveratrol may inhibit TNFa-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and promote erythropoiesis
in primary human CD34(+) cells.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3169745
PMID: 21762122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Stem Cell Rev. 2012 Mar;8(1):150-62. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9301-3.

Dissecting the first transcriptional divergence during human embryonic
development.

Bai Q(1), Assou S, Haouzi D, Ramirez JM, Monzo C, Becker F, Gerbal-Chaloin S,
Hamamah S, De Vos J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1040, Montpellier, 34000, France.

The trophoblast cell lineage is specified early at the blastocyst stage, leading 
to the emergence of the trophectoderm and the pluripotent cells of the inner cell
mass. Using a double mRNA amplification technique and a comparison with
transcriptome data on pluripotent stem cells, placenta, germinal and adult
tissues, we report here some essential molecular features of the human mural
trophectoderm. In addition to genes known for their role in placenta (CGA, PGF,
ALPPL2 and ABCG2), human trophectoderm also strongly expressed Laminins, such as 
LAMA1, and the GAGE Cancer/Testis genes. The very high level of ABCG2 expression 
in trophectoderm, 7.9-fold higher than in placenta, suggests a major role of this
gene in shielding the very early embryo from xenobiotics. Several genes,
including CCKBR and DNMT3L, were specifically up-regulated only in trophectoderm,
indicating that the trophoblast cell lineage shares with the germinal lineage a
transient burst of DNMT3L expression. A trophectoderm core transcriptional
regulatory circuitry formed by 13 tightly interconnected transcription factors
(CEBPA, GATA2, GATA3, GCM1, KLF5, MAFK, MSX2, MXD1, PPARD, PPARG, PPP1R13L,
TFAP2C and TP63), was found to be induced in trophectoderm and maintained in
placenta. The induction of this network could be recapitulated in an in vitro
trophoblast differentiation model.

PMCID: PMC3285757
PMID: 21750961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002067. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

Identification of nine novel loci associated with white blood cell subtypes in a 
Japanese population.

Okada Y(1), Hirota T, Kamatani Y, Takahashi A, Ohmiya H, Kumasaka N, Higasa K,
Yamaguchi-Kabata Y, Hosono N, Nalls MA, Chen MH, van Rooij FJ, Smith AV, Tanaka
T, Couper DJ, Zakai NA, Ferrucci L, Longo DL, Hernandez DG, Witteman JC, Harris
TB, O'Donnell CJ, Ganesh SK, Matsuda K, Tsunoda T, Tanaka T, Kubo M, Nakamura Y, 
Tamari M, Yamamoto K, Kamatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research, Yokohama, Japan. yokada@src.riken.jp

White blood cells (WBCs) mediate immune systems and consist of various subtypes
with distinct roles. Elucidation of the mechanism that regulates the counts of
the WBC subtypes would provide useful insights into both the etiology of the
immune system and disease pathogenesis. In this study, we report results of
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and a replication study for the counts of 
the 5 main WBC subtypes (neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, basophils, and
eosinophils) using 14,792 Japanese subjects enrolled in the BioBank Japan
Project. We identified 12 significantly associated loci that satisfied the
genome-wide significance threshold of P<5.0×10(-8), of which 9 loci were novel
(the CDK6 locus for the neutrophil count; the ITGA4, MLZE, STXBP6 loci, and the
MHC region for the monocyte count; the SLC45A3-NUCKS1, GATA2, NAALAD2, ERG loci
for the basophil count). We further evaluated associations in the identified loci
using 15,600 subjects from Caucasian populations. These WBC subtype-related loci 
demonstrated a variety of patterns of pleiotropic associations within the WBC
subtypes, or with total WBC count, platelet count, or red blood cell-related
traits (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>30,454), which suggests unique and common functional roles of these
loci in the processes of hematopoiesis. This study should contribute to the
understanding of the genetic backgrounds of the WBC subtypes and hematological
traits.

PMCID: PMC3128095
PMID: 21738478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jul 15;10(14):2241-2. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

The dynamic interplay between a PTK (Kit) and a PTP (Shp2) in hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells.

Zhu HH, Feng GS.

PMCID: PMC3322470
PMID: 21701261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Sep;48(1):29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.06.002. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Rho GTPase regulation of a-synuclein and VMAT2: implications for pathogenesis of 
Parkinson's disease.

Zhou Z(1), Kim J, Insolera R, Peng X, Fink DJ, Mata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan and VA Ann Arbor Healthcare
System, 5031 BSRB, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. zhouzhigang8@gmail.com

Accumulation of a-synuclein (Asyn) in neuronal perikarya and dystrophic neurites 
is characteristic of idiopathic and familial Parkinson's disease. In this study, 
we investigated the relationship between a-synuclein expression and neurite
outgrowth-maturation using MN9D dopaminergic cells and demonstrated key features 
of Asyn regulation in hippocampal neurons. Neurite elongation elicited by
inhibition of Rho GTPase activity with C3 transferase or by db-cAMP treatment was
associated with marked reduction of a-synuclein mRNA and protein expression. Rho 
inhibition resulted in reduction of transcription factor SRF in the nuclear
fraction and retention of MKL-1 - the SRF co-transactivator of SRE - in cytosol, 
indicating that these effects of Rho inhibition may be mediated though reduction 
of SRF-SRE transcription. Inhibition of Rho GTPase activity led to decreased
nuclear localization of GATA2, a key regulator of a-synuclein promoter activity. 
Rho inhibition-induced neurite extension was associated with increased VMAT2 and 
SNARE proteins synaptophysin and synapsin I. These results indicate that in the
MN9D dopaminergic cell line, a-synuclein transcription and levels of synaptic
vesicle associated proteins are inversely correlated with neurite growth. We
confirm that in mature hippocampal neurons inhibition of RhoA and knock down of
SRF by siRNA also lead to decrease GATA2 and Asyn. The results suggest that RhoA 
signaling may be potential therapeutic target for the treatment of
synucleinopathies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163163
PMID: 21699982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2653-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352. Epub 2011
Jun 13.

Mutations in GATA2 are associated with the autosomal dominant and sporadic
monocytopenia and mycobacterial infection (MonoMAC) syndrome.

Hsu AP(1), Sampaio EP, Khan J, Calvo KR, Lemieux JE, Patel SY, Frucht DM, Vinh
DC, Auth RD, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zerbe CS, Spalding C, Pittaluga S,
Raffeld M, Kuhns DB, Ding L, Paulson ML, Marciano BE, Gea-Banacloche JC, Orange
JS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD
20892-1684, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2647-9.

The syndrome of monocytopenia, B-cell and NK-cell lymphopenia, and mycobacterial,
fungal, and viral infections is associated with myelodysplasia, cytogenetic
abnormalities, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, and myeloid leukemias. Both
autosomal dominant and sporadic cases occur. We identified 12 distinct mutations 
in GATA2 affecting 20 patients and relatives with this syndrome, including
recurrent missense mutations affecting the zinc finger-2 domain (R398W and
T354M), suggesting dominant interference of gene function. Four discrete
insertion/deletion mutations leading to frame shifts and premature termination
implicate haploinsufficiency as a possible mechanism of action as well. These
mutations were found in hematopoietic and somatic tissues, and several were
identified in families, indicating germline transmission. Thus, GATA2 joins RUNX1
and CEBPA not only as a familial leukemia gene but also as a cause of a complex
congenital immunodeficiency that evolves over decades and combines predisposition
to infection and myeloid malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3172785
PMID: 21670465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 5;286(31):27761-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.248435. Epub 2011 
Jun 13.

Ankrd26 gene disruption enhances adipogenesis of mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Fei Z(1), Bera TK, Liu X, Xiang L, Pastan I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

We previously reported that partial disruption of the Ankrd26 gene in mice leads 
to hyperphagia and leptin-resistant obesity. To determine whether the Ankrd26
mutation can affect the development of adipocytes, we studied mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEFs) from the mutant mice. We found that Ankrd26(-/-) MEFs have a
higher rate of spontaneous adipogenesis than normal MEFs and that adipocyte
formation is greatly increased when the cells are induced with troglitazone alone
or with a mixture of troglitazone, insulin, dexamethasone, and
methylisobutylxanthine. Increased adipogenesis was detected as an increase in
lipid droplet formation and in the expression of several markers of adipogenesis.
There was an increase in expression of early stage adipogenesis genes such as
Krox20, KLF5, C/EBPß, C/EBPd, and late stage adipogenesis regulators KLF15,
C/EBPa, PPAR<U+03B3>, and aP2. There was also an increase in adipocyte stem cell markers
CD34 and Sca-1 and preadipocyte markers Gata2 and Pref-1, indicating an increase 
in both stem cells and progenitor cells in the mutant MEFs. Furthermore, ERK was 
found constitutively activated in Anrd26(-/-) MEFs, and the addition of MEK
inhibitors to mutant cells blocked ERK activation, decreased adipogenesis
induction, and significantly reduced expression of C/EBPd, KLF15, PPAR<U+03B3>2, CD34,
and Pref-1 genes. We conclude that Ankrd26 gene disruption promotes adipocyte
differentiation at both the progenitor commitment and differentiation steps and
that ERK activation plays a role in this process.

PMCID: PMC3149366
PMID: 21669876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 10;30(13):2582-95. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.173.

Epigenetically coordinated GATA2 binding is necessary for endothelium-specific
endomucin expression.

Kanki Y(1), Kohro T, Jiang S, Tsutsumi S, Mimura I, Suehiro J, Wada Y, Ohta Y,
Ihara S, Iwanari H, Naito M, Hamakubo T, Aburatani H, Kodama T, Minami T.

Author information: 
(1)LSBM, The Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

GATA2 is well recognized as a key transcription factor and regulator of cell-type
specificity and differentiation. Here, we carried out comparative chromatin
immunoprecipitation with comprehensive sequencing (ChIP-seq) to determine
genome-wide occupancy of GATA2 in endothelial cells and erythroids, and compared 
the occupancy to the respective gene expression profile in each cell type.
Although GATA2 was commonly expressed in both cell types, different GATA2
bindings and distinct cell-specific gene expressions were observed. By using the 
ChIP-seq with epigenetic histone modifications and chromatin conformation capture
assays; we elucidated the mechanistic regulation of endothelial-specific
GATA2-mediated endomucin gene expression, that was regulated by the
endothelial-specific chromatin loop with a GATA2-associated distal enhancer and
core promoter. Knockdown of endomucin markedly attenuated endothelial cell
growth, migration and tube formation. Moreover, abrogation of GATA2 in
endothelium demonstrated not only a reduction of endothelial-specific markers,
but also induction of mesenchymal transition promoting gene expression. Our
findings provide new insights into the correlation of endothelial-expressed GATA2
binding, epigenetic modification, and the determination of endothelial cell
specificity.

PMCID: PMC3155306
PMID: 21666600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Oct 1;92(1):132-40. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr161. Epub 2011 Jun
2.

Direct and differential effects of stem cell factor on the neovascularization
activity of endothelial progenitor cells.

Kim KL(1), Meng Y, Kim JY, Baek EJ, Suh W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Ajou University, San 5, Woncheon-Dong, Yeongtong-Gu,
Suwon 443-749, Korea.

AIMS: Previous studies on the role of stem cell factor (SCF) in endothelial
progenitor cell (EPC)-mediated neovascularization have focused on the EPC
mobilization and homing process. However, the direct effects of SCF on
neovascularization activity of EPCs have not been characterized. We sought to
determine whether SCF regulates the neovascularization ability of EPCs by
comparing its roles in mature endothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In vitro and in vivo assays revealed that SCF substantially 
increased the neovascularization activity of human EPCs through the c-Kit
receptor. Notably, the SCF-induced increase in neovascularization activity was
substantially greater in EPCs than that in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). SCF-induced phosphorylation of c-Kit and downstream signalling
molecules was consistently found to be more potent and longer-lasting in EPCs
than in HUVECs. This high responsiveness of EPCs to SCF was explained by the
finding that the cell-surface expression of c-Kit is far higher in EPCs than in
HUVECs. A c-Kit promoter assay revealed that the increased expression of c-Kit in
EPCs could be attributed to the greater expression of stem cell leukaemia,
LIM-only 2, and GATA-binding protein 2.
CONCLUSION: In addition to its documented role in the mobilization and
recruitment of EPCs, our findings show that SCF directly enhances the
neovascularization activity of EPCs. Furthermore, the present study provides
further evidence that EPCs exhibit differentially greater responsiveness to
hypoxia-inducible cytokines, including SCF, than mature endothelial cells,
suggesting that EPCs in ischaemic tissues function differently from mature
endothelial cells, although they exhibit very similar phenotypes.

PMID: 21636540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Sep;57(4):518-25. Epub 2011 May 23.

Regulation of trophoblast-specific factors by GATA2 and GATA3 in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Someya Y, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Numerous transcription factors that regulate trophoblast developmental processes 
have been identified; however, the regulation of trophoblast-specific gene
expression has not been definitively characterized. While a new role of Gata3 in 
trophoblast development was being demonstrated in mice, we examined effects of
GATA transcription factors on conceptus interferon tau (IFNT), a major
trophectoderm factor in ruminants. In this study, expression patterns of
trophoblast ASCL2, CDX2, CSH1, ELF5, HAND1, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were initially 
examined, from which ASCL2, CDX2, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were found to be similar 
to those of GATA2 and GATA3 in days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0=day of estrus) bovine
conceptuses. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that
endogenous GATA2 and GATA3 occupied GATA binding sites on the upstream regions of
CSH1, IFNT, and TKDP1 genes and on the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells. In transient transfection analyses of the upstream region
of bovine CSH1, and IFNT or the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene, over-expression of 
GATA2 induced transactivation of these trophoblast-specific genes in bovine
non-trophoblast ear fibroblast EF cells, but over-expression of GATA3 did not
substantially affect their transactivation. In CT-1 cells, endogenous CDX2 and
IFNT mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA2 siRNA, while endogenous ASCL2 and CDX2
mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA3 siRNA. Our results indicate that in addition
to trophectoderm lineage specification, GATA2 and/or GATA3 are involved in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific gene transcription in bovine trophoblast CT-1 
cells.

PMID: 21606631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Apr;82(1):1-17. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.04.007. Epub 2011 May 24.

The role of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Vicente C(1), Conchillo A, García-Sánchez MA, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research, Department of
Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Hematopoiesis involves an elaborate regulatory network of transcription factors
that coordinates the expression of multiple downstream genes, and maintains
homeostasis within the hematopoietic system through the accurate orchestration of
cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival. As a result, defects in the
expression levels or the activity of these transcription factors are intimately
linked to hematopoietic disorders, including leukemia. The GATA family of nuclear
regulatory proteins serves as a prototype for the action of lineage-restricted
transcription factors. GATA1 and GATA2 are expressed principally in hematopoietic
lineages, and have essential roles in the development of multiple hematopoietic
cells, including erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. Moreover, GATA2 is crucial for 
the proliferation and maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and multipotential 
progenitors. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding the
biological properties and functions of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal
and malignant hematopoiesis.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21605981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Blood. 2011 Jul 7;118(1):88-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325019. Epub 2011 May 
20.

Modulation of TGF-ß signaling by endoglin in murine hemangioblast development and
primitive hematopoiesis.

Zhang L(1), Magli A, Catanese J, Xu Z, Kyba M, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Endoglin (Eng), an accessory receptor for the transforming growth factor ß
(TGF-ß) superfamily, is required for proper hemangioblast and primitive
hematopoietic development. However the mechanism by which endoglin functions at
this early developmental stage is currently unknown. Transcriptional analyses of 
differentiating eng(-/-) and eng(+/+) ES cells revealed that lack of endoglin
leads to profound reductions in the levels of key hematopoietic regulators,
including Scl, Lmo2, and Gata2. We also detected lower levels of phosphorylated
Smad1 (pSmad1), a downstream target signaling molecule associated with the TGF-ß 
pathway. Using doxycycline-inducible ES cell lines, we interrogated the TGF-ß
signaling pathway by expressing activated forms of ALK-1 and ALK-5, type I
receptors for TGF-ß. Our results indicate that ALK-1 signaling promotes
hemangioblast development and hematopoiesis, as evidenced by colony assays, gene 
expression and FACS analyses, whereas signaling by ALK-5 leads to the opposite
effect, inhibition of hemangioblast and hematopoietic development. In Eng(-/-) ES
cells, ALK-1 rescued both the defective hemangioblast development, and primitive 
erythropoiesis, indicating that ALK-1 signaling can compensate for the absence of
endoglin. We propose that endoglin regulates primitive hematopoiesis by
modulating the activity of the Smad1/5 signaling pathway in early stages of
development.

PMCID: PMC3139390
PMID: 21602526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(14):2817-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01305-10. Epub 2011 May 
16.

A Runx1-Smad6 rheostat controls Runx1 activity during embryonic hematopoiesis.

Knezevic K(1), Bee T, Wilson NK, Janes ME, Kinston S, Polderdijk S,
Kolb-Kokocinski A, Ottersbach K, Pencovich N, Groner Y, de Bruijn M, Göttgens B, 
Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

The oncogenic transcription factor Runx1 is required for the specification of
definitive hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in the developing embryo. The activity 
of this master regulator is tightly controlled during development. The
transcription factors that upregulate the expression of Runx1 also upregulate the
expression of Smad6, the inhibitory Smad, which controls Runx1 activity by
targeting it to the proteasome. Here we show that Runx1, in conjunction with
Fli1, Gata2, and Scl, directly regulates the expression of Smad6 in the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region in the developing embryo, where HSCs
originate. Runx1 regulates Smad6 activity via a novel upstream enhancer, and
Runx1 null embryos show reduced Smad6 transcripts in the yolk-sac and
c-Kit-positive fetal liver cells. By directly regulating the expression of Smad6,
Runx1 sets up a functional rheostat to control its own activity. The perturbation
of this rheostat, using a proteasomal inhibitor, results in an increase in Runx1 
and Smad6 levels that can be directly attributed to increased Runx1 binding to
tissue-specific regulatory elements of these genes. Taken together, we describe a
scenario in which a key hematopoietic transcription factor controls its own
expression levels by transcriptionally controlling its controller.

PMCID: PMC3133398
PMID: 21576367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul 18;47(1):45-58. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0137. Print 2011
Aug.

GATA transcription factors regulate LHß gene expression.

Lo A(1), Zheng W, Gong Y, Crochet JR, Halvorson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75390-9032, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors are critical determinants of cell
differentiation as well as regulation of adult gene expression throughout the
reproductive axis. Within the anterior pituitary gland, GATA factors have been
shown to increase glycoprotein a-subunit gene promoter activity; however, nothing
has been known about the impact of these factors on expression of the
gonadotropin ß-subunits. In this study, we demonstrate expression of both GATA2
and GATA4 in primary mouse gonadotropes and the gonadotrope cell line, LßT2.
Based on the transient transfection in fibroblast cells, GATA factors increase LH
ß-subunit gene (LHß) promoter activity alone and in synergy with the orphan
nuclear receptors steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and liver receptor homologue-1
(LRH-1). The GATA response was localized to a DNA regulatory region at position
-101 in the rat LHß gene promoter which overlaps with a previously described
cis-element for pituitary homeobox-1 (Pitx1) and is flanked by two SF-1/LRH-1
regulatory sites. As determined by gel shift, GATA and Pitx1 can compete for
binding to this element. Furthermore, mutation analysis revealed a requirement
for both the GATA/Pitx1 and the SF-1/LRH-1 cis-elements in order to achieve
synergy. These studies identify a novel role for GATA transcription factors in
the pituitary and reveal additional molecular mechanisms by which precise
modulation of LHß gene expression can be achieved.

PMID: 21571865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Dev Cell. 2011 May 17;20(5):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.008.

Genome-wide analysis of simultaneous GATA1/2, RUNX1, FLI1, and SCL binding in
megakaryocytes identifies hematopoietic regulators.

Tijssen MR(1), Cvejic A, Joshi A, Hannah RL, Ferreira R, Forrai A, Bellissimo DC,
Oram SH, Smethurst PA, Wilson NK, Wang X, Ottersbach K, Stemple DL, Green AR,
Ouwehand WH, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Hematopoietic differentiation critically depends on combinations of
transcriptional regulators controlling the development of individual lineages.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding sites for the five key hematopoietic
transcription factors--GATA1, GATA2, RUNX1, FLI1, and TAL1/SCL--in primary human 
megakaryocytes. Statistical analysis of the 17,263 regions bound by at least one 
factor demonstrated that simultaneous binding by all five factors was the most
enriched pattern and often occurred near known hematopoietic regulators. Eight
genes not previously appreciated to function in hematopoiesis that were bound by 
all five factors were shown to be essential for thrombocyte and/or erythroid
development in zebrafish. Moreover, one of these genes encoding the PDZK1IP1
protein shared transcriptional enhancer elements with the blood stem cell
regulator TAL1/SCL. Multifactor ChIP-Seq analysis in primary human cells coupled 
with a high-throughput in vivo perturbation screen therefore offers a powerful
strategy to identify essential regulators of complex mammalian differentiation
processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3145975
PMID: 21571218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jan;21(1):121-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0539. Epub 2011 Jun 
17.

Polycomb group protein Bmi1 promotes hematopoietic cell development from
embryonic stem cells.

Ding X(1), Lin Q, Ensenat-Waser R, Rose-John S, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Engineering, RWTH Aachen 
University Medical School, Aachen, Germany.

Bmi1 is a component of the Polycomb repressive complexes and essential for
maintaining the pool of adult stem cells. Polycomb repressive complexes are key
regulators for embryonic development by modifying chromatin architecture and
maintaining gene repression. To assess the role of Bmi1 in pluripotent stem cells
and on exit from pluripotency during differentiation, we studied forced Bmi1
expression in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESC). We found that ESC do not express 
detectable levels of Bmi1 RNA and protein and that forced Bmi1 expression had no 
obvious influence on ESC self-renewal. However, upon ESC differentiation, Bmi1
effectively enhanced development of hematopoietic cells. Global transcriptional
profiling identified a large array of genes that were differentially regulated
during ESC differentiation by Bmi1. Importantly, we found that Bmi1 induced a
prominent up-regulation of Gata2, a zinc finger transcription factor, which is
essential for primitive hematopoietic cell generation from mesoderm. In addition,
Bmi1 caused sustained growth and a >100-fold expansion of ESC-derived
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells within 2-3 weeks of culture. The enhanced
proliferative capacity was associated with reduced Ink4a/Arf expression in
Bmi1-transduced cells. Taken together, our experiments demonstrate distinct
activities of Bmi1 in ESC and ESC-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells. In
addition, Bmi1 enhances the propensity of ESC in differentiating toward the
hematopoietic lineage. Thus, Bmi1 could be a candidate gene for engineered adult 
stem cell derivation from ESC.

PMID: 21545235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Endocrinology. 2011 Jul;152(7):2716-21. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1443. Epub 2011 May 
3.

Prenatal glucocorticoid overexposure causes permanent increases in renal
erythropoietin expression and red blood cell mass in the rat offspring.

Tang JI(1), Seckl JR, Nyirenda MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4 TJ,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Glucocorticoids promote maturation of fetal systems, including erythropoiesis, in
preparation for extrauterine life. However, recent studies have shown that
prenatal glucocorticoid excess can cause long-term deleterious cardiometabolic
and other consequences to the offspring. Here, we examined the effect of prenatal
treatment with the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone (DEX) during the last
week of gestation on red blood cell (RBC) mass in the rat offspring. DEX-treated 
offspring at 9 months of age had significantly higher RBC count (9.4 ± 0.1 vs.
8.8 ± 0.2 × 10(12) liter; P = 0.02), hematocrit (50.0 ± 0.5 vs. 46.7 ± 0.7%;
P=0.004), hemoglobin (17.3 ± 0.2 vs. 16.2 ± 0.2 g/dl; P = 0.02) and number of
reticulocytes (258.2 ± 8.8 vs. 235.7 ± 5.6 × 10(9) liter; P = 0.04), compared
with offspring of vehicle-treated control pregnancies. White blood cells and
platelets were unaltered. Renal mRNA expression and plasma concentrations of
erythropoietin, the main regulator of erythropoiesis, were increased by nearly
100% in both newborn and adult DEX-treated rats (P < 0.01). This increase was
accompanied by marked elevation in renal expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 
4a mRNA, whereas other erythropoietin-regulating transcription factors, such as
hypoxia-inducible factor 1, hypoxia-inducible factor 2, and GATA2 were unchanged.
These data indicate that RBC mass can be programmed by prenatal glucocorticoid
excess, and if extrapolatable to humans, provide a novel mechanism for fetal
origins of polycythemia and its associated complications.

PMID: 21540288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 14;6(4):e18667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018667.

GATA2 mediates thyrotropin-releasing hormone-induced transcriptional activation
of the thyrotropin ß gene.

Ohba K(1), Sasaki S, Matsushita A, Iwaki H, Matsunaga H, Suzuki S, Ishizuka K,
Misawa H, Oki Y, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) activates not only the secretion of
thyrotropin (TSH) but also the transcription of TSHß and a-glycoprotein (aGSU)
subunit genes. TSHß expression is maintained by two transcription factors, Pit1
and GATA2, and is negatively regulated by thyroid hormone (T3). Our prior studies
suggest that the main activator of the TSHß gene is GATA2, not Pit1 or unliganded
T3 receptor (TR). In previous studies on the mechanism of TRH-induced activation 
of the TSHß gene, the involvements of Pit1 and TR have been investigated, but the
role of GATA2 has not been clarified. Using kidney-derived CV1 cells and
pituitary-derived GH3 and TaT1 cells, we demonstrate here that TRH signaling
enhances GATA2-dependent activation of the TSHß promoter and that TRH-induced
activity is abolished by amino acid substitution in the GATA2-Zn finger domain or
mutation of GATA-responsive element in the TSHß gene. In CV1 cells transfected
with TRH receptor expression plasmid, GATA2-dependent transactivation of aGSU and
endothelin-1 promoters was enhanced by TRH. In the gel shift assay, TRH signal
potentiated the DNA-binding capacity of GATA2. While inhibition by T3 is dominant
over TRH-induced activation, unliganded TR or the putative negative T3-responsive
element are not required for TRH-induced stimulation. Studies using GH3 cells
showed that TRH-induced activity of the TSHß promoter depends on protein kinase C
but not the mitogen-activated protein kinase, suggesting that the signaling
pathway is different from that in the prolactin gene. These results indicate that
GATA2 is the principal mediator of the TRH signaling pathway in TSHß expression.

PMCID: PMC3077393
PMID: 21533184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Jul;31(7):1589-97. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.226969. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Endothelial fate and angiogenic properties of human CD34+ progenitor cells in
zebrafish.

Pozzoli O(1), Vella P, Iaffaldano G, Parente V, Devanna P, Lacovich M, Lamia CL, 
Fascio U, Longoni D, Cotelli F, Capogrossi MC, Pesce M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Medicina Rigenerativa, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Via Parea 4, 20138 
Milan, Italy. ombretta.pozzoli@ccfm.it

OBJECTIVE: The vascular competence of human-derived hematopoietic progenitors for
postnatal vascularization is still poorly characterized. It is unclear whether,
in the absence of ischemia, hematopoietic progenitors participate in
neovascularization and whether they play a role in new blood vessel formation by 
incorporating into developing vessels or by a paracrine action.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the present study, human cord blood-derived CD34(+)
(hCD34(+)) cells were transplanted into pre- and postgastrulation zebrafish
embryos and in an adult vascular regeneration model induced by caudal fin
amputation. When injected before gastrulation, hCD34(+) cells cosegregated with
the presumptive zebrafish hemangioblasts, characterized by Scl and Gata2
expression, in the anterior and posterior lateral mesoderm and were involved in
early development of the embryonic vasculature. These morphogenetic events
occurred without apparent lineage reprogramming, as shown by CD45 expression.
When transplanted postgastrulation, hCD34(+) cells were recruited into developing
vessels, where they exhibited a potent paracrine proangiogenic action. Finally,
hCD34(+) cells rescued vascular defects induced by Vegf-c in vivo targeting and
enhanced vascular repair in the zebrafish fin amputation model.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate an unexpected developmental ability of
human-derived hematopoietic progenitors and support the hypothesis of an
evolutionary conservation of molecular pathways involved in endothelial
progenitor differentiation in vivo.

PMID: 21527751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Jul 15;82(2):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.03.030. Epub
2011 Apr 9.

Tumor necrosis factor a-mediated inhibition of erythropoiesis involves
GATA-1/GATA-2 balance impairment and PU.1 over-expression.

Grigorakaki C(1), Morceau F, Chateauvieux S, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, Rue Edward Steichen, Luxembourg.

Many physiological perturbations can cause anemia. In cancer patients, activation
of the immune system leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines
including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), that have been shown to inhibit
red-cell production via poorly understood mechanisms. Treatment of anemia by
human recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) is strongly suspected to induce tumor
growth. This study focuses on the mechanisms involved in TNFa-mediated inhibition
of erythropoiesis. CD34(+) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) were
isolated from human cord blood. Erythropoiesis was achieved in vitro by
stimulating cells with EPO. We show that TNFa clearly affected erythroid
development, as assessed by May-Grünwald/Giemsa staining, flow cytometry analysis
and fluorescent microscopy. The amount of hemoglobin-producing cells as well as
the expression of GATA-1 target erythro-specific genes (EPO receptor, glycophorin
A and globins) was found decreased after TNFa treatment of HSPC. In correlation, 
TNFa induced the expression of the transcription factors GATA-2 and PU.1,
described as inhibitors of erythropoiesis. In this regard, TNFa promoted the
formation of the GATA-1/PU.1 complex that has been reported to block the
transcriptional activity of GATA-1. Our results clearly demonstrate that TNFa
prevents EPO-mediated erythropoiesis of HSPC as an early event, by directly
affecting erythroid cell development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Immunol. 2011 May;48(9-10):1224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.03.007. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

Distribution and expression analysis of transcription factors in tissues and
progenitor cell populations of the goldfish (Carassius auratus L.) in response to
growth factors and pathogens.

Katzenback BA(1), Karpman M, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

We report on the mRNA levels of a panel of transcription factors in the kidney
and spleen tissues, and in the cell populations from the blood, the spleen, and
in the sorted kidney progenitor cells. The mRNA levels of cebpa, cjun, cmyb,
egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1 were assessed in
healthy goldfish as well as in fish challenged with two different pathogens,
Aeromonas salmonicida A449 or Trypanosoma carassii. Spleen tissue from healthy
goldfish showed higher expression of myeloid (cjun), erythroid (gata1) and
lymphoid (gata3, pax5) transcription factors, and lower expression of the myeloid
transcription factor cebpa when compared to that of kidney. Splenocytes and PBLs 
had significantly higher mRNA levels of the transcription factors involved in
myeloid (pu.1, mafb, cjun, egr1, cebpa), erythroid (gata1, lmo2), and lymphoid
pathways (gata3 and pax5) compared to sorted kidney R1 progenitor cells, while R1
progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of early progenitor transcription factors
(runx1 and cmyb). Furthermore, the R1 progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of 
the transcription factors involved in early progenitor cells (egr1, gata2) and
the lymphoid lineage progenitors (gata3, pax5) compared to those in kidney. The
mRNA levels of the transcription factors (gata2, mafb, cjun, gata1, lmo2, gata3, 
and pax5) in R1 progenitor cells changed during cultivation; they were elevated
in day 2 R1 cells and down-regulated by day 6 of cultivation, when compared to
those of day 0 R1 cells. Treatment of day 2 R1 progenitor cells with rgCSF-1
resulted in an up-regulation of transcription factors important for myeloid cell 
development (cjun and egr1). Similarly, rgkitla up-regulated the expressions of
myeloid (mafb, egr1 and cebpa) transcription factors. Changes in the expression
of transcription factors in the R1 progenitor cells were related to the observed 
developmental processes of myeloid progenitor cells during cultivation or
treatment with recombinant growth factors in vitro. We also observed differential
expressions of the transcription factors in R1 progenitor cells following
exposure of the goldfish to either prokaryotic (heat-killed A. salmonicida A449) 
or eukaryotic (T. carassii) pathogens.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21474183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Stem Cells. 2011 Jun;29(6):928-39. doi: 10.1002/stem.640.

Directed expression of Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 synergize to induce the
serotonergic neuron phenotype during in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Nefzger CM(1), Haynes JM, Pouton CW.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Action, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Monash University (Parkville Campus), Melbourne, Australia.

Investigation of serotonergic neuronal activity and its relationship to disease
has been limited by a lack of physiologically relevant in vitro cell models.
Serotonergic neurons derived from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could provide a
platform for such studies and provide models for use in drug discovery. Here, we 
report enhancement of serotonergic differentiation using a genetic approach.
Expression of Gata2 increased the yield of serotonergic neurons. Enhancement was 
only achieved when Gata2 was expressed under the control of the tissue-specific
promoter of the transcription factor Nkx6.1. High levels of Gata2 expression in
ESCs compromised pluripotency and induced non-neuronal differentiation. Combined 
directed expression of Gata2, proneural gene Mash1, and forkhead transcription
factor Foxa2 further enhanced serotonergic neural differentiation, resulting in a
10-fold increase in serotonin content. These neurons were also capable of
depolarization (KCl, 30 mM)-induced elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) . The
presence of sonic hedgehog during differentiation produced a further modest
increase in numbers (1.5-fold). Transgene expression did not influence the number
of tyrosine hydroxylase positive neurons in the cultures after 20 days, implying 
that Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 modulate in vitro differentiation at a time beyond
the decision-point for dopaminergic or nondopaminergic commitment. This study
demonstrates that the directed expression of specific transcription factors
enhances serotonergic neuron differentiation in vitro and highlights the
importance of transgene expression at the right stage of ESC differentiation to
effect the generation of a desired neural subtype.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21472823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Blood. 2011 May 19;117(20):5350-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-333476. Epub 2011 
Mar 30.

Kit-Shp2-Kit signaling acts to maintain a functional hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell pool.

Zhu HH(1), Ji K, Alderson N, He Z, Li S, Liu W, Zhang DE, Li L, Feng GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Section of Molecular Biology,
Division of Biological Sciences, University of California-San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The stem cell factor (SCF)/Kit system has served as a classic model in
deciphering molecular signaling events in the hematopoietic compartment, and Kit 
expression is a most critical marker for hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
progenitors. However, it remains to be elucidated how Kit expression is regulated
in HSCs. Herein we report that a cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase Shp2, acting
downstream of Kit and other RTKs, promotes Kit gene expression, constituting a
Kit-Shp2-Kit signaling axis. Inducible ablation of PTPN11/Shp2 resulted in severe
cytopenia in BM, spleen, and peripheral blood in mice. Shp2 removal suppressed
the functional pool of HSCs/progenitors, and Shp2-deficient HSCs failed to
reconstitute lethally irradiated recipients because of defects in homing,
self-renewal, and survival. We show that Shp2 regulates coordinately multiple
signals involving up-regulation of Kit expression via Gata2. Therefore, this
study reveals a critical role of Shp2 in maintenance of a functional
HSC/progenitor pool in adult mammals, at least in part through a
kinase-phosphatase-kinase cascade.

PMCID: PMC3109710
PMID: 21450902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Blood. 2011 May 26;117(21):5643-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325332. Epub 2011 
Mar 29.

TIP110/p110nrb/SART3/p110 regulation of hematopoiesis through CMYC.

Liu Y(1), Timani K, Mantel C, Fan Y, Hangoc G, Cooper S, He JJ, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. yliu2@iupui.edu

Intracellular factors are involved in and essential for hematopoiesis. HIV-1
Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa (TIP110; p110(nrb)/SART3/p110) is an
RNA-binding nuclear protein implicated in the regulation of HIV-1 gene and host
gene transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and cancer immunology. In the present
study, we demonstrate a role for TIP110 in the regulation of hematopoiesis.
TIP110 was expressed in human CD34(+) cells and decreased with differentiation of
CD34(+) cells. TIP110 mRNA was also expressed in phenotyped mouse marrow
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs). Using 
TIP110 transgenic (TIP110(TG)) and haploinsufficient (TIP110(+/-)) mice, we found
that increased TIP110 expression enhanced HPC numbers, survival, and cell
cycling, whereas decreased TIP110 expression had the opposite effects. Moreover, 
TIP110(+/-) bone marrow HPCs responded more effectively, and TIP110(TG) HPCs less
effectively, than those of wild-type control mice to recovery from the
cell-cycle-active drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Unexplained sex differences were
noted in HSC competitive repopulating ability, but not HPC numbers, in TIP110(TG)
mice. Intracellularly, TIP110 regulated CMYC and GATA2 expression at the
transcriptional level, and TIP110 and CMYC reciprocally regulated the expression 
of each other. These results demonstrate a role for TIP110 in the regulation of
hematopoiesis, effects that are likely linked to TIP110 regulation of CMYC.

PMCID: PMC3110023
PMID: 21447833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2011 Jul;17(7):970-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2011.03.005. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Spontaneous autologous graft-versus-host disease in plasma cell myeloma autograft
recipients: flow cytometric analysis of hematopoietic progenitor cell grafts.

Lazarus HM(1), Sommers SR, Arfons LM, Fu P, Ataergin SA, Kaye NM, Liu F,
Kindwall-Keller TL, Cooper BW, Laughlin MJ, Creger RJ, Barr PM, Gerson SL, Kaplan
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,
USA. hillard.lazarus@case.edu

Nine plasma cell myeloma patients spontaneously developed histologically proven
autologous graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) limited predominantly to the
gastrointestinal tract within 1 month of initial autologous hematopoietic cell
transplantation (AHCT) using high-dose melphalan conditioning. All recipients
responded promptly to systemic and nonabsorbable oral corticosteroid therapy. All
patients previously received systemic therapy with thalidomide, lenalidomide, or 
bortezomib before AHCT. Using enzymatic amplification staining-enhanced flow
cytometry, we evaluated expression of selected transcription regulators, pathway 
molecules, and surface receptors on samples of the infused hematopoietic cell
grafts. We demonstrated significantly enhanced expression of GATA-2, CD130, and
CXCR4 on CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells of affected patients compared
with 42 unaffected AHCT controls. These 3 overexpressed markers have not been
previously implicated in autologous GVHD. Although we did not specifically
evaluate T cells, we postulate that exposure over time to the various
immunomodulating therapies used for induction treatment affected not only the
CD34(+) cells but also T cells or relevant T cell subpopulations capable of
mediating GVHD. After infusion, the affected hematopoietic progenitor cells then 
encounter a host that has been further altered by the high-dose melphalan
preparative regimen; such a situation leads to the syndrome. These surface
markers could be used to develop a model to predict development of this syndrome.
Autologous GVHD potentially is a serious complication of AHCT and should be
considered in plasma cell myeloma patients with otherwise unexplained
gastrointestinal symptoms in the immediate post-AHCT period. Prompt recognition
of this condition and protracted treatment with nonabsorbable or systemic
corticosteroids or the combination may lead to resolution.

2011 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21440080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 23;31(12):4444-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4616-10.2011.

Gata2 is required for migration and differentiation of retinorecipient neurons in
the superior colliculus.

Willett RT(1), Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The superior colliculus (SC)/optic tectum of the dorsal mesencephalon plays a
major role in responses to visual input, yet regulation of neuronal
differentiation within this layered structure is only partially understood. Here,
we show that the zinc finger transcription factor Gata2 is required for normal SC
development. Starting at embryonic day 15 (E15) (corresponding to the times at
which neurons of the outer and intermediate layers of the SC are generated),
Gata2 is transiently expressed in the rat embryonic dorsal mesencephalon within a
restricted region between proliferating cells of the ventricular zone and the
deepest neuronal layers of the developing SC. The Gata2-positive cells are
postmitotic and lack markers of differentiated neurons, but express markers for
immature neuronal precursors including Ascl1 and Pax3/7. In utero electroporation
with Gata2 small hairpin RNAs at E16 into cells along the dorsal mesencephalic
ventricle interferes with their normal migration into the SC and maintains them
in a state characterized by retention of Pax3 expression and the absence of
mature neuronal markers. Collectively, these findings indicate that Gata2 plays a
required role in the transition of postmitotic neuronal precursor cells of the
retinorecipient layers of the SC into mature neurons and that loss of Gata2
arrests them at an intermediate stage of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3076930
PMID: 21430145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Jun 24;203(3):190-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.03.012. Epub
2011 Mar 23.

Phenolic metabolites of benzene inhibited the erythroid differentiation of K562
cells.

Wu XR(1), Xue M, Li XF, Wang Y, Wang J, Han QL, Yi ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education,
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing
100191, China.

Benzene is a common occupational hazard and a ubiquitous environmental pollutant.
Benzene exposure at the levels even below 1ppm still showed hematotoxicity. It is
widely accepted that the metabolites of benzene play important roles in the
benzene toxicity to the hematopoietic system, but little is known about the
effects of benzene metabolites on erythropoiesis. In present study, erythroid
progenitor-like K562 cells were used to determine the effects of phenolic
metabolites of benzene, including phenol, hydroquinone and 1,2,4-benzenetriol, on
the erythroid differentiation. After the treatment with these benzene metabolites
at the concentrations with no obvious cytotoxicity, the hemin-induced hemoglobin 
synthesis in K562 cells decreased in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, 
and the expression of CD71 and GPA protein on the surface of K562 cells was also 
inhibited. The reverse transcription-PCR was used to determine the mRNA level of 
the erythroid related genes in the K562 cells that were treated with benzene
metabolites. The hemin-induced expression of globin genes, including a-, ß- and
<U+03B3>-globin genes, and the gene encoding the heme synthesis enzyme porphobilinogen
deaminase was inhibited by benzene metabolites. When the K562 cells were
pretreated with benzene metabolites, the hemin-induced expression of two
transcription factor genes GATA-1 and NF-E2 was distinctly reduced, and the
pre-treatment with benzene metabolites promoted the decrease of the mRNA level of
transcription factor gene GATA-2 by hemin. These results indicated that benzene
metabolites inhibited the hemin-induced erythroid differentiation through
affecting the transcription of the erythroid related genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21414390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4769-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-313031. Epub 2011
Mar 11.

Context-dependent function of "GATA switch" sites in vivo.

Snow JW(1), Trowbridge JJ, Johnson KD, Fujiwara T, Emambokus NE, Grass JA, Orkin 
SH, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.

Master transcriptional regulators of development often function through dispersed
cis elements at endogenous target genes. While cis-elements are routinely studied
in transfection and transgenic reporter assays, it is challenging to ascertain
how they function in vivo. To address this problem in the context of the locus
encoding the critical hematopoietic transcription factor Gata2, we engineered
mice lacking a cluster of GATA motifs 2.8 kb upstream of the Gata2
transcriptional start site. We demonstrate that the -2.8 kb site confers maximal 
Gata2 expression in hematopoietic stem cells and specific hematopoietic
progenitors. By contrast to our previous demonstration that a palindromic GATA
motif at the neighboring -1.8 kb site maintains Gata2 repression in terminally
differentiating erythroid cells, the -2.8 kb site was not required to initiate or
maintain repression. These analyses reveal qualitatively distinct functions of 2 
GATA motif-containing regions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3100688
PMID: 21398579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mamm Genome. 2011 Apr;22(3-4):249-59. doi: 10.1007/s00335-011-9318-6. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

DNA methylation changes in murine breast adenocarcinomas allow the identification
of candidate genes for human breast carcinogenesis.

Acosta D(1), Suzuki M, Connolly D, Thompson RF, Fazzari MJ, Greally JM, Montagna 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Epigenetic inactivation due to aberrant promoter methylation is a key process in 
breast tumorigenesis. Murine models for human breast cancer have been established
for nearly every important human oncogene or tumor suppressor gene.
Mouse-to-human comparative gene expression and cytogenetic profiling have been
widely investigated for these models; however, little is known about the
conservation of epigenetic alterations during tumorigenesis. To determine if this
key process in human breast tumorigenesis is also mirrored in a murine breast
cancer model, we mapped cytosine methylation changes in primary adenocarcinomas
and paired lung metastases derived from the polyomavirus middle T antigen mouse
model. Global changes in methylcytosine levels were observed in all tumors when
compared to the normal mammary gland. Aberrant methylation and associated gene
silencing was observed for Hoxa7, a gene that is differentially methylated in
human breast tumors, and Gata2, a novel candidate gene. Analysis of HOXA7 and
GATA2 expression in a bank of human primary tumors confirms that the expression
of these genes is also reduced in human breast cancer. In addition, HOXA7
hypermethylation is observed in breast cancer tissues when compared to adjacent
tumor-free tissue. Based on these studies, we present a model in which
comparative epigenetic techniques can be used to identify novel candidate genes
important for human breast tumorigenesis, in both primary and metastatic tumors.

PMID: 21373886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1374-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.12.012.

Murine leukemia retrovirus integration induces the formation of transcription
factor complexes on palindromic sequences in the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription factor 5a gene during the development of pre-B lymphomagenesis.

Tsuruyama T(1), Hiratsuka T, Jin G, Imai Y, Takeuchi H, Maruyama Y, Kanaya K,
Ozeki M, Takakuwa T, Haga H, Tamaki K, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. tsuruyam@fp.med-u.ac.jp

Murine leukemia retrovirus (MLV) vectors are highly effective tools for
introducing a foreign gene into a target host genome. However, it remains unclear
how integrated retroviral promoter activity is influenced by the upstream or
downstream sequences and how the host cell phenotype is influenced by the
integrated promoter activity. Herein, we analyzed a set of pre-B lymphoma clones 
in which the MLV genome was integrated into the signal transducer and activator
of transcription factor 5a (Stat5a) gene. Among the clones, the lymphoma clones
with a provirus integrating into the middle position of the palindromic target
sequences showed significantly higher transcription of the Stat5a gene; and p300 
and other transcriptional factors formed complexes, with binding to the
proviral-host junctional DNA segment. By using a luciferase assay, the upstream
and downstream sequences of the provirus contributed to the up-regulation of
proviral promoter activity. In concomitance with the higher Stat5a transcription,
the immunoglobulin gene recombination was arrested. Antiapoptotic activity was
significantly higher, with an increase in Bcl-xL, one of the targets of STAT5A,
when IL-7 was supplied. Thus, a minute difference between MLV integration sites
can lead to large differences in the host phenotype through the formation of
transcription factor complexes on the proviral-host junctional DNA segment,
suggesting that caution is necessary in monitoring integration sites when working
with MLV vectors.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070561
PMID: 21356387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Neurochem Int. 2011 Sep;59(3):413-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.02.016. Epub
2011 Feb 22.

Midbrain and forebrain patterning delivers immunocytochemically and functionally 
similar populations of neuropeptide Y containing GABAergic neurons.

Khaira SK(1), Nefzger CM, Beh SJ, Pouton CW, Haynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University (Parkville
Campus), Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Neurons differentiated in vitro from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have the
potential to serve both as models of disease states and in drug discovery
programs. In this study, we use sonic hedgehog (SHH) and fibroblast growth factor
8 (FGF-8) to enrich for forebrain and midbrain phenotypes from mouse ESCs. We
then investigate, using Ca(2+) imaging and [(3)H]-GABA release studies, whether
the GABAergic neurons produced exhibit distinct functional phenotypes. At day 24 
of differentiation, reverse transcriptase-PCR showed the presence of both
forebrain (Bf-1, Hesx1, Pgc-1a, Six3) and midbrain (GATA2, GATA3) selective mRNA 
markers in developing forebrain-enriched cultures. All markers were present in
midbrain cultures except for Bf-1 and Pgc-1a. Irrespective of culture conditions 
all GABA immunoreactive neurons were also immunoreactive to neuropeptide Y (NPY) 
antibodies. Forebrain and midbrain GABAergic neurons responded to ATP (1 mM),
L-glutamate (30 µM), noradrenaline (30 µM), acetylcholine (30 µM) and dopamine
(30 µM), with similar elevations of intracellular Ca(2+)([Ca(2+)](i)). The
presence of GABA(A) and GABA(B) antagonists, bicuculline (30 µM) and CGP55845 (1 
µM), increased the elevation of [Ca(2+)](i) in response to dopamine (30 µM) in
midbrain, but not forebrain GABAergic neurons. All agonists, except dopamine,
elicited similar [(3)H]-GABA release from forebrain and midbrain cultures.
Dopamine (30 µM) did not stimulate significant [(3)H]-GABA release in midbrain
cultures, although it was effective in forebrain cultures. This study shows that 
differentiating neurons toward a midbrain fate restricts the expression of
forebrain markers. Forebrain differentiation results in the expression of
forebrain and midbrain markers. All GABA(+) neurons contain NPY, and show similar
agonist-induced elevations of [Ca(2+)](i) and [(3)H]-GABA release. This study
indicates that the pharmacological phenotype of these particular neurons may be
independent of the addition of the patterning factors that direct neurons toward 
forebrain and midbrain fates.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):e142-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-323212. Epub 2011 
Feb 22.

Genome-wide analysis of target genes regulated by HoxB4 in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells developing from embryonic stem cells.

Oshima M(1), Endoh M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Nakajima-Takagi Y, Sugiyama F, Koseki H,
Kyba M, Iwama A, Osawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Forced expression of the transcription factor HoxB4 has been shown to enhance the
self-renewal capacity of mouse bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
confer a long-term repopulating capacity to yolk sac and embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived hematopoietic precursors. The fact that ES cell-derived precursors
do not repopulate bone marrow without HoxB4 underscores an important role for
HoxB4 in the maturation of ES-derived hematopoietic precursors into long-term
repopulating HSCs. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying this
process is barely understood. In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis 
of HoxB4 using ES cell-derived hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The results
revealed many of the genes essential for HSC development to be direct targets of 
HoxB4, such as Runx1, Scl/Tal1, Gata2, and Gfi1. The expression profiling also
showed that HoxB4 indirectly affects the expression of several important genes,
such as Lmo2, Erg, Meis1, Pbx1, Nov, AhR, and Hemgn. HoxB4 tended to activate the
transcription, but the down-regulation of a significant portion of direct targets
suggested its function to be context-dependent. These findings indicate that
HoxB4 reprograms a set of key regulator genes to facilitate the maturation of
developing HSCs into repopulating cells. Our list of HoxB4 targets also provides 
novel candidate regulators for HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3296623
PMID: 21343615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 15;25(4):289-93. doi: 10.1101/gad.2031511.

The ERGonomics of hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal.

Lacadie SA(1), Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 1;25(3):251-62.

Stem cells make more of themselves by self-renewing cell divisions. In the
February 1, 2011, issue of Genes & Development, Taoudi and colleagues (pp.
251-262) show an essential role for the ETS transcription factor ERG in the
self-renewal of embryonic hematopoietic stem cells. A model is presented in which
the redundant functions of GATA2 and RUNX1 in self-renewal are under direct
control of ERG.

PMCID: PMC3042152
PMID: 21325129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12042-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.138966. Epub 2011 
Feb 14.

Notch1-mediated signaling induces MHC class II expression through activation of
class II transactivator promoter III in mast cells.

Nakano N(1), Nishiyama C, Yagita H, Koyanagi A, Ogawa H, Okumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Allergy Research Center, Department of Immunology, Juntendo Univesity
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. nbnakano@juntendo.ac.jp

Mast cells constitutively express Notch1 and Notch2 on the cell surface. Notch
ligand Dll1 (Delta-like 1) stimulation induces MHC class II expression in mast
cells and renders them as antigen-presenting cells. However, nothing is known
about the mechanism by which Notch signaling induces MHC class II expression in
mast cells. MHC class II genes are regulated by the class II transactivator
(CIITA). In mice, transcription of the CIITA gene is controlled by three cell
type-specific promoters (pI, pIII, and pIV). Here, we show that CIITA expression 
induced by Dll1 stimulation in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs)
depends critically on the signal mediated by Notch1 and that the most dominant
promoter in Notch signaling-mediated CIITA expression in BMMCs is pIII, which is 
a lymphoid lineage-specific promoter. ChIP assays indicated that Notch signaling 
increased the binding of the transcription factor PU.1 to CIITA pIII in BMMCs.
The knockdown of PU.1 expression using a specific siRNA suppressed Notch
signaling-mediated CIITA expression, suggesting that PU.1 contributes to the
expression of MHC class II induced by Notch signaling in mast cells. Furthermore,
we show that a portion of freshly isolated splenic mast cells express MHC class
II and that the most dominant promoter of CIITA in mast cells is pIII. These
findings indicate that activation of CIITA pIII plays an important role in MHC
class II expression in mast cells.

PMCID: PMC3069407
PMID: 21321116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 28;6(1):e16330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016330.

Genome-wide analysis of transcriptional reprogramming in mouse models of acute
myeloid leukaemia.

Bonadies N(1), Foster SD, Chan WI, Kvinlaug BT, Spensberger D, Dawson MA,
Spooncer E, Whetton AD, Bannister AJ, Huntly BJ, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Acute leukaemias are commonly caused by mutations that corrupt the
transcriptional circuitry of haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. However, the
mechanisms underlying large-scale transcriptional reprogramming remain largely
unknown. Here we investigated transcriptional reprogramming at genome-scale in
mouse retroviral transplant models of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) using both
gene-expression profiling and ChIP-sequencing. We identified several thousand
candidate regulatory regions with altered levels of histone acetylation that were
characterised by differential distribution of consensus motifs for key
haematopoietic transcription factors including Gata2, Gfi1 and Sfpi1/Pu.1. In
particular, downregulation of Gata2 expression was mirrored by abundant GATA
motifs in regions of reduced histone acetylation suggesting an important role in 
leukaemogenic transcriptional reprogramming. Forced re-expression of Gata2 was
not compatible with sustained growth of leukaemic cells thus suggesting a
previously unrecognised role for Gata2 in downregulation during the development
of AML. Additionally, large scale human AML datasets revealed significantly
higher expression of GATA2 in CD34+ cells from healthy controls compared with AML
blast cells. The integrated genome-scale analysis applied in this study
represents a valuable and widely applicable approach to study the transcriptional
control of both normal and aberrant haematopoiesis and to identify critical
factors responsible for transcriptional reprogramming in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3030562
PMID: 21297973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Mar;52(3):502-14. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.543712. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Random small interfering RNA library screen identifies siRNAs that induce human
erythroleukemia cell differentiation.

Fan C(1), Xiong Y, Zhu N, Lu Y, Zhang J, Wang S, Liang Z, Shen Y, Chen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences/School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, National
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Beijing, China.

Cancers are characterized by poor differentiation. Differentiation therapy is a
strategy to alleviate malignant phenotypes by inducing cancer cell
differentiation. Here we carried out a combinatorial high-throughput screen with 
a random siRNA library on human erythroleukemia K-562 cell differentiation. Two
siRNAs screened from the library were validated to be able to induce erythroid
differentiation to varying degrees, determined by CD235 and globin up-regulation,
GATA-2 down-regulation, and cell growth inhibition. The screen we performed here 
is the first trial of screening cancer differentiation-inducing agents from a
random siRNA library, demonstrating that a random siRNA library can be considered
as a new resource in efforts to seek new therapeutic agents for cancers. As a
random siRNA library has a broad coverage for the entire genome, including
known/unknown genes and protein coding/non-coding sequences, screening using a
random siRNA library can be expected to greatly augment the repertoire of
therapeutic siRNAs for cancers.

PMID: 21281224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Int J Hematol. 2011 Feb;93(2):150-5. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0770-6. Epub 2011
Feb 1.

Transcriptional regulation by GATA1 and GATA2 during erythropoiesis.

Suzuki M(1), Shimizu R, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA1 regulates multiple genes in erythroid lineage
cells. However, the means by which GATA1 regulates the expression of target genes
during erythropoiesis remains to be elucidated. Three mechanisms have been
postulated for the regulation of genes by GATA1. First, individual target genes
may have multiple discrete thresholds for cellular GATA1. GATA1 has a dynamic
expression profile during erythropoiesis, thus the expression of a set of GATA1
target genes may be triggered at a given stage of differentiation by cellular
GATA1. Second, the expression of GATA1 target genes may be modified, at least in 
part, by GATA2 occupying the GATA-binding motifs. GATA2 is expressed earlier in
erythropoiesis than GATA1, and prior GATA2 binding may afford GATA1 access to
GATA motifs through epigenetic remodeling and thus facilitate target gene
expression. Third, other regulatory molecules specific to each target gene may
function cooperatively with GATA1. If GATA1 is required for the expression of
such cofactors, a regulatory network will be formed and relevant gene expression 
will be delayed. We propose that the stage-specific regulation of erythroid genes
by GATA1 is tightly controlled through a combination of these mechanisms in vivo.

PMID: 21279818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 1;25(3):251-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.2009211. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

ERG dependence distinguishes developmental control of hematopoietic stem cell
maintenance from hematopoietic specification.

Taoudi S(1), Bee T, Hilton A, Knezevic K, Scott J, Willson TA, Collin C, Thomas
T, Voss AK, Kile BT, Alexander WS, Pimanda JE, Hilton DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. taoudi@wehi.edu.au

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 15;25(4):289-93.

Although many genes are known to be critical for early hematopoiesis in the
embryo, it remains unclear whether distinct regulatory pathways exist to control 
hematopoietic specification versus hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) emergence and
function. Due to their interaction with key regulators of hematopoietic
commitment, particular interest has focused on the role of the ETS family of
transcription factors; of these, ERG is predicted to play an important role in
the initiation of hematopoiesis, yet we do not know if or when ERG is required.
Using in vitro and in vivo models of hematopoiesis and HSC development, we
provide strong evidence that ERG is at the center of a distinct regulatory
program that is not required for hematopoietic specification or differentiation
but is critical for HSC maintenance during embryonic development. We show that,
from the fetal period, ERG acts as a direct upstream regulator of Gata2 and Runx1
gene activity. Without ERG, physiological HSC maintenance fails, leading to the
rapid exhaustion of definitive hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3034900
PMID: 21245161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 12;12:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-23.

Genome-wide patterns of promoter sharing and co-expression in bovine skeletal
muscle.

Gu Q(1), Nagaraj SH, Hudson NJ, Dalrymple BP, Reverter A.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology, CSIRO Food Futures Flagship and CSIRO
Livestock Industries, 306 Carmody Rd, St. Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland 4067,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Gene regulation by transcription factors (TF) is species, tissue and 
time specific. To better understand how the genetic code controls gene expression
in bovine muscle we associated gene expression data from developing Longissimus
thoracis et lumborum skeletal muscle with bovine promoter sequence information.
RESULTS: We created a highly conserved genome-wide promoter landscape comprising 
87,408 interactions relating 333 TFs with their 9,242 predicted target genes
(TGs). We discovered that the complete set of predicted TGs share an average of
2.75 predicted TF binding sites (TFBSs) and that the average co-expression
between a TF and its predicted TGs is higher than the average co-expression
between the same TF and all genes. Conversely, pairs of TFs sharing predicted TGs
showed a co-expression correlation higher that pairs of TFs not sharing TGs.
Finally, we exploited the co-occurrence of predicted TFBS in the context of
muscle-derived functionally-coherent modules including cell cycle, mitochondria, 
immune system, fat metabolism, muscle/glycolysis, and ribosome. Our findings
enabled us to reverse engineer a regulatory network of core processes, and
correctly identified the involvement of E2F1, GATA2 and NFKB1 in the regulation
of cell cycle, fat, and muscle/glycolysis, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The pivotal implication of our research is two-fold: (1) there exists
a robust genome-wide expression signal between TFs and their predicted TGs in
cattle muscle consistent with the extent of promoter sharing; and (2) this signal
can be exploited to recover the cellular mechanisms underpinning transcription
regulation of muscle structure and development in bovine. Our study represents
the first genome-wide report linking tissue specific co-expression to
co-regulation in a non-model vertebrate.

PMCID: PMC3025955
PMID: 21226902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Theriogenology. 2011 Apr 1;75(6):995-1004. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.11.006. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Effect of different culture media on the temporal gene expression in the bovine
developing embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1), Kim B, Lee B, Jang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

We have previously shown that the in vitro embryonic development and the yield of
viable calves were increased by using a two-step chemically defined medium for
post-fertilization culture of bovine embryos. In this study, we explored the
embryonic development and the temporal behavioral interaction of the genes
involved in IFNt gene expression and how they behave in an orchestrated manner to
increase the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos by culturing in the
chemically defined medium. Behavior of genes included ETS2, CDX2, GATA2, GATA3,
OCT4 and NANOG was analyzed in early bovine IVF produced embryos, (from compact
morulae to the blastocyst hatching stages), by semi- and relative quantitative
PCR and compared between two in vitro culture (IVC) systems, two-step chemically 
defined medium and modified synthetic oviductal fluid (mSOF) containing 8 mg/mL, 
BSA. Early embryonic development was found to be better in two-step chemically
defined culture system than that of mSOF as indicated by the increment of
blastocyst yield, 33.1% in two-step culture system vs 18.8% in mSOF medium, and
the blastocyst hatching, 52.3% in two-step culture system vs 33.5% in mSOF
medium. Relative quantitative gene expression showed harmonic behavior in the
two-step culture system rather than the culture in mSOF, IFNt showed even
increase throughout the embryonic development in the two-step culture medium
while it decreased with blastocyst hatching in mSOF culture condition. Temporal
dominance of OCT4 over all the transcription factors was found in regulation of
IFNt expression (the major factor of expression regulation but in inverse
manner). However, ETS2, CDX2, GATA2 and GATA3 are potent IFNt stimulator in
cumulative manner but in case of OCT4 decrement. CDX2 directly related with IFNt,
but still under OCT4 dominance and also regulated by the subservient of OCT4
which is NANOG. In conclusion, this study confirmed our previous results about
the usefulness of using the two-step chemically defined culture medium for
increasing the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos and elucidated
the dominance of OCT4 over the other genes implicated in regulation of IFNt
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Genes Cells. 2011 Feb;16(2):231-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01481.x. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Erythropoiesis is regulated by the transcription elongation factor Foggy/Spt5
through gata1 gene regulation.

Taneda T(1), Zhu W, Cao Q, Watanabe H, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Wada T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8503, Japan.

Recent studies have showed that transcription elongation factors regulate early
development. Foggy/Spt5 is a subunit of DRB sensitivity-inducing factor, which
negatively and positively regulates transcription elongation. Here, we report
that the positive function of Foggy/Spt5 is required for gata1 expression during 
zebrafish embryonic hematopoiesis. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
(MO)-mediated knockdown of foggy/spt5 has led to a reduction in the expression of
gata1 and the gata1 target genes alas2 and hbae3 and inhibited proper hemoglobin 
production. By contrast, expression of hematopoietic stem cell and endothelial
markers, including scl, lmo2, gata2, fli-1, and flk-1, and expression of biklf,
whose product directs gata1 expression via its direct binding to the gata1
promoter, were unaltered, suggesting that gata1 is a functionally important
target gene of Foggy/Spt5. The MO-mediated gata1 repression was relieved by
forced expression of wild-type foggy/spt5, but not by a mutant lacking the
positive function. Therefore, this study provides evidence that Foggy/Spt5 plays 
an important role in gata1 gene expression and erythropoiesis through its
transcriptional activation domain.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21205096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):872-83. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.023.

Integration of light- and brassinosteroid-signaling pathways by a GATA
transcription factor in Arabidopsis.

Luo XM(1), Lin WH, Zhu S, Zhu JY, Sun Y, Fan XY, Cheng M, Hao Y, Oh E, Tian M,
Liu L, Zhang M, Xie Q, Chong K, Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Light and brassinosteroid (BR) antagonistically regulate the developmental switch
from etiolation in the dark to photomorphogenesis in the light in plants. Here,
we identify GATA2 as a key transcriptional regulator that mediates the crosstalk 
between BR- and light-signaling pathways. Overexpression of GATA2 causes
constitutive photomorphogenesis in the dark, whereas suppression of GATA2 reduces
photomorphogenesis caused by light, BR deficiency, or the constitutive
photomorphogenesis mutant cop1. Genome profiling and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments show that GATA2 directly regulates genes that
respond to both light and BR. BR represses GATA2 transcription through the
BR-activated transcription factor BZR1, whereas light causes accumulation of
GATA2 protein and feedback inhibition of GATA2 transcription. Dark-induced
proteasomal degradation of GATA2 is dependent on the COP1 E3 ubiquitin ligase,
and COP1 can ubiquitinate GATA2 in vitro. This study illustrates a molecular
framework for antagonistic regulation of gene expression and seedling
photomorphogenesis by BR and light.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3022420
PMID: 21145502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Genomics. 2011 Feb;97(2):121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.11.006. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

Mapping of equine cerebellar abiotrophy to ECA2 and identification of a potential
causative mutation affecting expression of MUTYH.

Brault LS(1), Cooper CA, Famula TR, Murray JD, Penedo MC.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Equine Cerebellar Abiotrophy (CA) is a neurological disease found in Arabian
horses. CA is characterized by post-natal degeneration of the Purkinje cells of
the cerebellum. Signs of CA include ataxia, head tremors, and a lack of balance
equilibrium. We have discovered a linkage of the CA phenotype to a microsatellite
marker on ECA2 and identified a region of conserved homozygosity spanning
approximately 142 kb. Complete sequencing of the four genes in this region
identified one SNP found only in Arabian horses, located in exon 4 of TOE1 and
approximately 1200 base pairs upstream of MUTYH, adjacent to a possible binding
site for the transcription factor GATA2. qPCR analysis of cDNA from the cerebella
of affected and unaffected horses suggested that MUTYH expression is
down-regulated in affected horses. This SNP may therefore have a function effect 
on TOE1, or a regulatory effect on MUTYH by negatively affecting the binding
affinity of GATA2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21126570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):427-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.10.011. Epub 2010 Nov
12.

CDDO-Im, an antitumor molecule that also improves platetet production.

Sardina JL, López-Ruano G, Sánchez-Sánchez B, Hernández-Hernández A.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):534-44.

PMID: 21074266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. IET Syst Biol. 2010 Nov;4(6):393-408. doi: 10.1049/iet-syb.2010.0010.

Thermodynamic models of combinatorial gene regulation by distant enhancers.

Narula J(1), Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Rice University, Department of Bioengineering, Houston, TX, USA.

The dynamical properties of distal and proximal gene regulatory elements are
crucial to their functionality in gene regulatory networks. However, the
multiplicity of regulatory interactions at control elements makes their
theoretical and experimental characterisation difficult. Here a thermodynamic
framework to describe gene regulation by distant enhancers via a chromatin
mechanism is developed. In this mechanism transcription factors (TFs) modulate
gene expression via shifts in the equilibrium between chromatin states. The
designs of AND, OR, XOR and NAND two-input transcriptional gates for the
chromatin mechanism are proposed and compared to similar gates based on the
direct physical interactions of TFs with the transcriptional machinery. An
algorithm is developed to estimate the thermodynamic parameters of chromatin
mechanism gates from gene expression reporter data and applied to characterise
the response function for the Gata2-3 enhancer in hematopoietic stem cells. In
addition waiting-time distributions for transcriptionally active states were
analysed to expose the biophysical differences between the contact and chromatin 
mechanisms. These differences can be experimentally observed in single-cell
experiments and therefore can serve as a signature of the gene regulation
mechanism. Taken together these results indicate the diverse functionality and
unique features of the chromatin mechanism of combinatorial gene regulation.

PMID: 21073238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):534-44. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.09.013. Epub 2010
Oct 29.

CDDO-Im is a stimulator of megakaryocytic differentiation.

Petronelli A(1), Pelosi E, Santoro S, Saulle E, Cerio AM, Mariani G, Labbaye C,
Testa U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Suepriore 
di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):427-8.

Although the triterpene CDDO and its potent derivatives, CDDO-Im and CDDO-Me, are
now in phase I/II studies in the treatment of some pathological conditions, their
effects on normal hematopoiesis are not known. In the present study we provide
evidence that CDDO-Im exerts in vitro a potent inhibitory effect on erythroid
cell proliferation and survival and a stimulatory action on megakaryocytic
differentiation. The effect of CDDO-Im on erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation was evaluated both on normal hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) 
induced to selective erythroid (E) or megakaryocytic (Mk) differentiation and on 
erythroleukemic cell lines HEL and TF1. The inhibitory effect of CDDO-Im on
erythroid cell survival and proliferation is mainly related to a reduced GATA-1
expression. This conclusion is supported by the observation that GATA-1
overexpressing TF1 cells are partially protected from the inhibitory effect of
CDDO-Im on cell proliferation and survival. The stimulatory effect of CDDO-Im on 
normal megakaryopoiesis is seemingly related to upmodulation of GATA2 expression 
and induction of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3941-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.051359. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Regulation of hematopoietic cell clusters in the placental niche through SCF/Kit 
signaling in embryonic mouse.

Sasaki T(1), Mizuochi C, Horio Y, Nakao K, Akashi K, Sugiyama D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, SSP Stem Cell Unit, Kyushu University 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan. [corrected]

Erratum in
    Development. 2011 May;138(9):1875.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) emerge from and expand in the mouse placenta at
mid-gestation. To determine their compartment of origin and define extrinsic
signals governing their commitment to this lineage, we identified hematopoietic
cell (HC) clusters in mouse placenta, defined as cells expressing the embryonic
HSC markers CD31, CD34 and Kit, by immunohistochemistry. HC clusters were first
observed in the placenta at 9.5 days post coitum (dpc). To determine their
origin, we tagged the allantoic region with CM-DiI at 8.25 dpc, prior to placenta
formation, and cultured embryos in a whole embryo culture (WEC) system.
CM-DiI-positive HC clusters were observed 42 hours later. To determine how
clusters are extrinsically regulated, we isolated niche cells using laser capture
micro-dissection and assayed them for expression of genes encoding hematopoietic 
cytokines. Among a panel of candidates assayed, only stem cell factor (SCF) was
expressed in niche cells. To define niche cells, endothelial and mesenchymal
cells were sorted by flow cytometry from dissociated placenta and hematopoietic
cytokine gene expression was investigated. The endothelial cell compartment
predominantly expressed SCF mRNA and protein. To determine whether SCF/Kit
signaling regulates placental HC cluster proliferation, we injected anti-Kit
neutralizing antibody into 10.25 dpc embryos and assayed cultured embryos for
expression of hematopoietic transcription factors. Runx1, Myb and Gata2 were
downregulated in the placental HC cluster fraction relative to controls. These
observations demonstrate that placental HC clusters originate from the allantois 
and are regulated by endothelial niche cells through SCF/Kit signaling.

PMID: 20980401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Blood. 2011 Jan 6;117(1):e1-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-295113. Epub 2010 Oct 
19.

Dynamic combinatorial interactions of RUNX1 and cooperating partners regulates
megakaryocytic differentiation in cell line models.

Pencovich N(1), Jaschek R, Tanay A, Groner Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Specific interactions of transcription factors (TFs) with their targets are
crucial for specifying gene expression programs during cell differentiation. How 
specificity is maintained despite limited selectivity of individual TF-DNA
interactions is not fully understood. RUNX1 TF is among the most frequently
mutated genes in human leukemia and an important regulator of megakaryopoiesis.
We used megakaryocytic cell lines to characterize the network of RUNX1 targets
and cooperating TFs in differentiating megakaryocytes and demonstrated how
dynamic partnerships between RUNX1 and cooperating TFs facilitated regulatory
plasticity and specificity during this process. After differentiation onset,
RUNX1 directly activated a large number of genes through interaction with
preexisting and de novo binding sites. Recruitment of RUNX1 to de novo occupied
sites occurred at H3K4me1-marked preprogrammed enhancers. A significant number of
these de novo bound sites lacked RUNX motif but were occupied by AP-1 TFs.
Reciprocally, AP-1 TFs were up-regulated by RUNX1 after
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate induction and recruited to RUNX1-occupied
sites lacking AP-1 motifs. At other differentiation stages, additional
combinatorial interactions occurred between RUNX1 and its coregulators, GATA1 and
ETS. The findings suggest that in differentiating megakaryocytic cell lines,
RUNX1 cooperates with GATA1, AP-1, and ETS to orchestrate cell-specific
transcription programs through dynamic TF partnerships.

PMID: 20959602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Oct 8;7(4):532-44. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.07.016.

Combinatorial transcriptional control in blood stem/progenitor cells: genome-wide
analysis of ten major transcriptional regulators.

Wilson NK(1), Foster SD, Wang X, Knezevic K, Schütte J, Kaimakis P, Chilarska PM,
Kinston S, Ouwehand WH, Dzierzak E, Pimanda JE, de Bruijn MF, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK.

Combinatorial transcription factor (TF) interactions control cellular phenotypes 
and, therefore, underpin stem cell formation, maintenance, and differentiation.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding patterns and combinatorial interactions
for ten key regulators of blood stem/progenitor cells (SCL/TAL1, LYL1, LMO2,
GATA2, RUNX1, MEIS1, PU.1, ERG, FLI-1, and GFI1B), thus providing the most
comprehensive TF data set for any adult stem/progenitor cell type to date.
Genome-wide computational analysis of complex binding patterns, followed by
functional validation, revealed the following: first, a previously unrecognized
combinatorial interaction between a heptad of TFs (SCL, LYL1, LMO2, GATA2, RUNX1,
ERG, and FLI-1). Second, we implicate direct protein-protein interactions between
four key regulators (RUNX1, GATA2, SCL, and ERG) in stabilizing complex binding
to DNA. Third, Runx1(+/-)::Gata2(+/-) compound heterozygous mice are not viable
with severe hematopoietic defects at midgestation. Taken together, this study
demonstrates the power of genome-wide analysis in generating novel functional
insights into the transcriptional control of stem and progenitor cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20887958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 7;5(9):e12628. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012628.

Dissecting the Relation between a nuclear receptor and GATA: binding affinity
studies of thyroid hormone receptor and GATA2 on TSHß promoter.

Figueira AC(1), Polikarpov I, Veprintsev D, Santos GM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Física de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, São Carlos, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Much is known about how genes regulated by nuclear receptors (NRs)
are switched on in the presence of a ligand. However, the molecular mechanism for
gene down-regulation by liganded NRs remains a conundrum. The interaction between
two zinc-finger transcription factors, Nuclear Receptor and GATA, was described
almost a decade ago as a strategy adopted by the cell to up- or down-regulate
gene expression. More recently, cell-based assays have shown that the Zn-finger
region of GATA2 (GATA2-Zf) has an important role in down-regulation of the
thyrotropin gene (TSHß) by liganded thyroid hormone receptor (TR).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In an effort to better understand the mechanism
that drives TSHß down-regulation by a liganded TR and GATA2, we have carried out 
equilibrium binding assays using fluorescence anisotropy to study the interaction
of recombinant TR and GATA2-Zf with regulatory elements present in the TSHß
promoter. Surprisingly, we observed that ligand (T3) weakens TR binding to a
negative regulatory element (NRE) present in the TSHß promoter. We also show that
TR may interact with GATA2-Zf in the absence of ligand, but T3 is crucial for
increasing the affinity of this complex for different GATA response elements
(GATA-REs). Importantly, these results indicate that TR complex formation
enhances DNA binding of the TR-GATA2 in a ligand-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings extend previous results obtained in vivo, further
improving our understanding of how liganded nuclear receptors down-regulate gene 
transcription, with the cooperative binding of transcription factors to DNA
forming the core of this process.

PMCID: PMC2935386
PMID: 20838640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 9;6(9):e1001103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001103.

A single cis element maintains repression of the key developmental regulator
Gata2.

Snow JW(1), Trowbridge JJ, Fujiwara T, Emambokus NE, Grass JA, Orkin SH, Bresnick
EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

In development, lineage-restricted transcription factors simultaneously promote
differentiation while repressing alternative fates. Molecular dissection of this 
process has been challenging as transcription factor loci are regulated by many
trans-acting factors functioning through dispersed cis elements. It is not
understood whether these elements function collectively to confer transcriptional
regulation, or individually to control specific aspects of activation or
repression, such as initiation versus maintenance. Here, we have analyzed cis
element regulation of the critical hematopoietic factor Gata2, which is expressed
in early precursors and repressed as GATA-1 levels rise during terminal
differentiation. We engineered mice lacking a single cis element -1.8 kb upstream
of the Gata2 transcriptional start site. Although Gata2 is normally repressed in 
late-stage erythroblasts, the -1.8 kb mutation unexpectedly resulted in
reactivated Gata2 transcription, blocked differentiation, and an aberrant
lineage-specific gene expression pattern. Our findings demonstrate that the -1.8 
kb site selectively maintains repression, confers a specific histone modification
pattern and expels RNA Polymerase II from the locus. These studies reveal how an 
individual cis element establishes a normal developmental program via regulating 
specific steps in the mechanism by which a critical transcription factor is
repressed.

PMCID: PMC2936534
PMID: 20838598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):4252-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001228. Epub 2010
Sep 10.

GATA2 and Sp1 positively regulate the c-kit promoter in mast cells.

Maeda K(1), Nishiyama C, Ogawa H, Okumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

The c-kit gene is expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and lineage progenitor
cells but is downregulated during cell development in most lineages, except for
mast cells. In mast cells, high expression of c-kit is maintained during
development, and c-Kit signaling is essential for mast cell development. To
analyze the mechanisms by which c-kit gene expression are regulated in mast
cells, we examined mast cell type-specific regulation of the c-kit promoter
region. We observed that a GC-box in the c-kit promoter was critical for
transcriptional activity and was bound to the transcription factor Sp1 as
assessed using reporter assay and electrophoretic mobility assay. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay and coexpression analyses showed that the transcription
factor GATA2, which was recruited to the c-kit promoter in a mast cell-specific
manner, in addition to Sp1, transactivated the c-kit promoter via the GC-box.
Electrophoretic mobility assay and rechromatin immunoprecipitation assay
indicated that GATA2 binds to the GC-box by forming a complex with Sp1.
Introduction of Sp1 small interfering RNA significantly reduced the amount not
only of Sp1 but also of GATA2 binding to the c-kit promoter in mast cells,
resulting in suppression of c-kit transcription. Knockdown of GATA2 suppressed
the recruitment of GATA2 toward the c-kit promoter, subsequently suppressing cell
surface expression of c-Kit. These findings indicate that GATA2 and Sp1 play
crucial roles in expression of the c-kit gene in mast cells.

PMID: 20833840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Feb;18(2):371-80. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.110. Epub 2010
Sep 10.

The Notch2-Jagged1 interaction mediates stem cell factor signaling in
erythropoiesis.

Zeuner A(1), Francescangeli F, Signore M, Venneri MA, Pedini F, Felli N, Pagliuca
A, Conticello C, De Maria R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, Rome, Italy. a.zeuner@iss.it

Stem cell factor (SCF), the ligand for the c-kit receptor, is essential for the
production of red blood cells during development and stress erythropoiesis. SCF
promotes erythroblast proliferation and survival, while delaying erythroid
differentiation through mechanisms that are largely unknown. In cultures of
primary human differentiating erythroblasts, we found that SCF induces an
increase in the expression of Notch2, a member of the Notch family implicated in 
the control of cell growth and differentiation. Functional inhibition of either
Notch or its ligand Jagged1 inhibited the effects of SCF on erythroid cell
expansion. SCF also induced the expression of Hes-1 and GATA-2, which may
contribute to transduce Notch2 signals in response to SCF. Transduction of
primary erythroid precursors with a dominant-negative Notch2 mutant inhibited
both basal and SCF-mediated erythroblast expansion, and counteracted the effects 
of SCF on erythroblast differentiation. These findings provide a clue to
understand the effects of increased proliferation and delayed differentiation
elicited by SCF on the erythroid compartment and indicate Notch2 as a new player 
in the regulation of red cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3131890
PMID: 20829885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 16;5(8):e12156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012156.

VE-statin/egfl7 expression in endothelial cells is regulated by a distal enhancer
and a proximal promoter under the direct control of Erg and GATA-2.

Le Bras A(1), Samson C, Trentini M, Caetano B, Lelievre E, Mattot V, Beermann F, 
Soncin F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Institut de Biologie de Lille, UMR 8161, Equipe labellisée La Ligue,
Lille, France.

Angiogenesis is the process by which new blood vessels arise from existing ones
by the budding out of endothelial cell capillaries from the luminal side of blood
vessels. Blood vessel formation is essential for organ development during
embryogenesis and is associated with several physiological and pathological
processes, such as wound healing and tumor development. The VE-statin/egfl7 gene 
is specifically expressed in endothelial cells during embryonic development and
in the adult. We studied here the regulatory mechanisms that control this
tissue-specific expression. RT-qPCR analyses showed that the specificity of
expression of VE-statin/egfl7 in endothelial cells is not shared with its closest
neighbor genes notch1 and agpat2 on the mouse chromosome 2.
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis of histone modifications at the
VE-statin/egfl7 locus showed that the chromatin is specifically opened in
endothelial cells, but not in fibroblasts at the transcription start sites. A 13 
kb genomic fragment of promoter was cloned and analyzed by gene reporter assays
which showed that two conserved regions are important for the specific expression
of VE-statin/egfl7 in endothelial cells; a -8409/-7563 enhancer and the -252/+38 
region encompassing the exon-1b transcription start site. The latter contains
essential GATA and ETS-binding sites, as assessed by linker-scanning analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis. An analysis of expression of the ETS and GATA
transcription factors showed that Erg, Fli-1 and GATA-2 are the most highly
expressed factors in endothelial cells. Erg and GATA-2 directly control the
expression of the endogenous VE-statin/egfl7 while Fli-1 probably exerts an
indirect control, as assessed by RNA interference and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. This first detailed analysis of the mechanisms that govern
the expression of the VE-statin/egfl7 gene in endothelial cells pinpoints the
specific importance of ETS and GATA factors in the specific regulation of genes
in this cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC2922337
PMID: 20808444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Blood. 2010 Nov 25;116(22):4483-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-276501. Epub 2010 
Aug 26.

Early mammalian erythropoiesis requires the Dot1L methyltransferase.

Feng Y(1), Yang Y, Ortega MM, Copeland JN, Zhang M, Jacob JB, Fields TA, Vivian
JL, Fields PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Cancer and
Developmental Biology, Institute for Reproductive Health and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Nov 25;116(22):4385-6.

Histone methylation is an important regulator of gene expression; its coordinated
activity is critical in complex developmental processes such as hematopoiesis.
Disruptor of telomere silencing 1-like (DOT1L) is a unique histone
methyltransferase that specifically methylates histone H3 at lysine 79. We
analyzed Dot1L-mutant mice to determine influence of this enzyme on embryonic
hematopoiesis. Mutant mice developed more slowly than wild-type embryos and died 
between embryonic days 10.5 and 13.5, displaying a striking anemia, especially
apparent in small vessels of the yolk sac. Further, a severe, selective defect in
erythroid, but not myeloid, differentiation was observed. Erythroid progenitors
failed to develop normally, showing retarded progression through the cell cycle, 
accumulation during G0/G1 stage, and marked increase in apoptosis in response to 
erythroid growth factors. GATA2, a factor essential for early erythropoiesis, was
significantly reduced in Dot1L-deficient cells, whereas expression of PU.1, a
transcription factor that inhibits erythropoiesis and promotes myelopoiesis, was 
increased. These data suggest a model whereby DOT1L-dependent lysine 79 of
histone H3 methylation serves as a critical regulator of a differentiation switch
during early hematopoiesis, regulating steady-state levels of GATA2 and PU.1
transcription, thus controlling numbers of circulating erythroid and myeloid
cells.

PMCID: PMC3321834
PMID: 20798234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Blood. 2010 Nov 11;116(19):3944-54. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-267419. Epub 2010 
Aug 16.

Eosinophils in the zebrafish: prospective isolation, characterization, and
eosinophilia induction by helminth determinants.

Balla KM(1), Lugo-Villarino G, Spitsbergen JM, Stachura DL, Hu Y, Bañuelos K,
Romo-Fewell O, Aroian RV, Traver D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0380, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Nov 11;116(19):3692-3.

Eosinophils are granulocytic leukocytes implicated in numerous aspects of
immunity and disease. The precise functions of eosinophils, however, remain
enigmatic. Alternative models to study eosinophil biology may thus yield novel
insights into their function. Eosinophilic cells have been observed in zebrafish 
but have not been thoroughly characterized. We used a gata2:eGFP transgenic
animal to enable prospective isolation and characterization of zebrafish
eosinophils, and demonstrate that all gata2(hi) cells in adult hematopoietic
tissues are eosinophils. Although eosinophils are rare in most organs, they are
readily isolated from whole kidney marrow and abundant within the peritoneal
cavity. Molecular analyses demonstrate that zebrafish eosinophils express genes
important for the activities of mammalian eosinophils. In addition, gata2(hi)
cells degranulate in response to helminth extract. Chronic exposure to helminth- 
related allergens resulted in profound eosinophilia, demonstrating that
eosinophil responses to allergens have been conserved over evolution.
Importantly, infection of adult zebrafish with Pseudocapillaria tomentosa, a
natural nematode pathogen of teleosts, caused marked increases in eosinophil
number within the intestine. Together, these observations support a conserved
role for eosinophils in the response to helminth antigens or infection and
provide a new model to better understand how parasitic worms activate, co-opt, or
evade the vertebrate immune response.

PMCID: PMC2981543
PMID: 20713961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010 Aug 16;23(8):1405-16. doi: 10.1021/tx100205a.

Teratogenic effects of blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides) in Japanese
medaka (Oryzias latipes) are probably mediated through GATA2/EDN1 signaling
pathway.

Wu M(1), Hu Y, Ali Z, Khan IA, Verlangeiri AJ, Dasmahapatra AK.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Product Research, School of Pharmacy, University
of Mississippi, University, MS, USA.

Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides) (BC) has been used widely to induce
labor and to treat other uterine conditions. However, the safety and
effectiveness of this herbal product has not yet been evaluated by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). Several conflicting reports indicated that the
root extract of BC is a teratogen and, by some unknown mechanisms, is able to
induce cardiovascular malfunctions in new-born babies. To understand the
mechanism, we have used Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) embryo-larval
development as the experimental model and the methanolic extract of BC root as
the teratogen. The embryo mortality, hatching efficiency, and morphological
abnormalities in craniofacial and cardiovascular systems are considered for the
evaluation of BC toxicity. Our results indicate that BC is able to disrupt
cardiovascular and craniofacial cartilage development in medaka embryo in a dose 
and developmental stage-specific manner. Moreover, embryos in precirculation are 
to some extent more resistant to BC than ones with circulation. By using
subtractive hybridization, we have observed that gata2 mRNA was differentially
expressed in the circulating embryos after BC treatment. As GATA-binding
sequences are required for the expression of the endothelin1 (edn1) gene and edn1
expressed in blood vessels and craniofacial cartilages, we have extended our
investigations to edn1 gene expression regulation by BC. We found that edn1,
furin1, and endothelin receptor A (ednrA) genes are developmentally regulated;
endothelin converting enzyme mRNA (ece1) maintained a steady-state level
throughout development. Circulating medaka embryos (3 days post fertilization,
dpf) exposed to BC (10 microg/mL) for 48 h have increased levels of gata2, ece1, 
and preproenodthelin (preproedn1) mRNA contents; however, other mRNAs (furin and 
ednrA) remained unaltered. Therefore, the enhanced expression of gata2 mRNA
followed by ece1 and preproedn1 mRNA by BC might be able to induce
vasoconstriction and cardiovascular defects and disrupt craniofacial cartilages
in medaka embryos. We conclude that cardiovascular and craniofacial defects in
medaka embryogenesis by BC are probably mediated through a GATA2-EDN1 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 20707411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 15;285(42):32405-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141317. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

GATA proteins work together with friend of GATA (FOG) and C-terminal binding
protein (CTBP) co-regulators to control adipogenesis.

Jack BH(1), Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 
2006, Australia.

GATA transcription factors have been implicated in controlling adipogenesis in
Drosophila and in mammals. In mammals, both GATA2 and GATA3 have been shown to be
present in preadipocytes, and their silencing allows the onset of adipogenesis.
Overexpression of GATA proteins blocks adipogenesis in cellular assays. GATA
factors have been found to operate through recruiting cofactors of the Friend of 
GATA (FOG) family. FOG proteins, in turn, recruit co-regulators, including
C-terminal binding proteins (CTBPs). We have investigated whether FOGs and CTBPs 
influence adipogenesis. We found that both FOG1 and FOG2 are expressed in cells
prior to adipogenesis but are down-regulated as adipogenesis proceeds.
Overexpression of FOG1 or FOG2 interferes with adipogenesis. Mutant versions of
FOG2 unable to bind CTBP or GATA proteins are impaired in their inability to
inhibit adipogenesis. Finally, a mutant version of GATA2, unable to associate
with FOGs, also displays abnormal activity and causes enhanced cell
proliferation. These results implicate FOGs and CTBPs as partners of GATA
proteins in the control of adipocyte proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2952242
PMID: 20705609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 18;29(46):6102-14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.351. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

Trisomic dose of several chromosome 21 genes perturbs haematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell differentiation in Down's syndrome.

De Vita S(1), Canzonetta C, Mulligan C, Delom F, Groet J, Baldo C, Vanes L,
Dagna-Bricarelli F, Hoischen A, Veltman J, Fisher EM, Tybulewicz VL, Nizetic D.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular
Science, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Centre for
Paediatrics, London, UK.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2010 Nov 18;29(46):6099-101.

Children with Down's syndrome (DS) have 20-50-fold higher incidence of all
leukaemias (lymphoid and myeloid), for reasons not understood. As incidence of
many solid tumours is much lower in DS, we speculated that disturbed early
haematopoietic differentiation could be the cause of increased leukaemia risk. If
a common mechanism is behind the risk of both major leukaemia types, it would
have to arise before the bifurcation to myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Using the 
transchromosomic system (mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs)) bearing an extra
human chromosome 21 (HSA21)) we analyzed the early stages of haematopoietic
commitment (mesodermal colony formation) in vitro. We observed that trisomy 21
(T21) causes increased production of haemogenic endothelial cells, haematopoietic
stem cell precursors and increased colony forming potential, with significantly
increased immature progenitors. Transchromosomic colonies showed increased
expression of Gata-2, c-Kit and Tie-2. A panel of partial T21 ESCs allowed us to 
assign these effects to HSA21 sub-regions, mapped by 3.5<U+2009>kbp-resolution tiling
arrays. The Gata-2 increase on one side, and c-Kit and Tie-2 increases on the
other, could be attributed to two different, non-overlapping HSA21 regions. Using
human-specific small interfering RNA silencing, we could demonstrate that an
extra copy of RUNX1, but not ETS-2 or ERG, causes an increase in Tie-2/c-Kit
levels. Finally, we detected significantly increased levels of RUNX1, C-KIT and
PU.1 in human foetal livers with T21. We conclude that overdose of more than one 
HSA21 gene contributes to the disturbance of early haematopoiesis in DS, and that
one of the contributors is RUNX1. As the observed T21-driven hyperproduction of
multipotential immature precursors precedes the bifurcation to lymphoid and
myeloid lineages, we speculate that this could create conditions of increased
chance for acquisition of pre-leukaemogenic rearrangements/mutations in both
lymphoid and myeloid lineages during foetal haematopoiesis, contributing to the
increased risk of both leukaemia types in DS.

PMCID: PMC3007620
PMID: 20697343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31087-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R110.159079. Epub 2010
Jul 29.

GATA switches as developmental drivers.

Bresnick EH(1), Lee HY, Fujiwara T, Johnson KD, Keles S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pharmacology, Paul Carbone
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA. ehbresni@wisc.edu

Transcriptional networks orchestrate complex developmental processes. Such
networks are commonly instigated by master regulators of development.
Considerable progress has been made in elucidating GATA factor-dependent genetic 
networks that control blood cell development. GATA-2 is required for the genesis 
and/or function of hematopoietic stem cells, whereas GATA-1 drives the
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into a subset of the blood cell
lineages. GATA-1 directly represses Gata2 transcription, and this involves
GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 from chromatin, a process termed a GATA
switch. GATA switches occur at numerous loci with critical functions, indicating 
that they are widely utilized developmental control tools.

PMCID: PMC2951181
PMID: 20670937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Dev Dyn. 2010 Sep;239(9):2452-69. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22373.

Gata2 is required for the development of inner ear semicircular ducts and the
surrounding perilymphatic space.

Haugas M(1), Lilleväli K, Hakanen J, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Gata2 has essential roles in the development of many organs. During mouse inner
ear morphogenesis, it is expressed in otic vesicle and the surrounding periotic
mesenchyme from early on, but no defects in the ear development of Gata2 null
mice have been observed before lethality at embryonic day (E) 10.5. Here, we used
conditional gene targeting to reveal the role of Gata2 at later stages of inner
ear development. We show that Gata2 is critically required from E14.5-E15.5
onward for vestibular morphogenesis. Without Gata2 the semicircular ducts fail to
grow to their normal size and the surrounding mesenchymal cells are not removed
properly to generate the perilymphatic space. Gata2 is the first factor known to 
control the clearing of the vestibular perilymphatic mesenchyme, but
interestingly, it is not required for the formation of the cochlear perilymphatic
areas, suggesting distinct molecular control for these processes.

Developmental Dynamics 239:2452-2469, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20652952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):742-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085456. Epub 2010 
Jul 21.

BMP4-induced differentiation of a rat spermatogonial stem cell line causes
changes in its cell adhesion properties.

Carlomagno G(1), van Bragt MP, Korver CM, Repping S, de Rooij DG, van Pelt AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are at the basis of the spermatogenic process
and are essential for the continuous lifelong production of spermatozoa. Although
several factors that govern SSC self-renewal and differentiation have been
investigated, the direct effect of such factors on SSCs has not yet been studied,
mainly because of the absence of markers to identify SSCs and the lack of
effective methods to obtain and culture a pure population of SSCs. We now have
used a previously established rat SSC cell line (GC-6spg) to elucidate the role
of BMP4 in SSC differentiation. We found that GC-6spg cells cultured in the
presence of BMP4 upregulate KIT expression, which is an early marker for
differentiating spermatogonia. GC-6spg cells were found to express three BMP4
receptors and the downstream SMAD1/5/8 proteins were phosphorylated during
BMP4-induced differentiation. A time-course DNA micro-array analysis revealed a
total of 529 differentially regulated transcripts (=2-fold), including several
known downstream targets of BMP4 such as Id2 and Gata2. Pathway analysis revealed
that the most affected pathways were those involved in adherens junctions, focal 
junctions, gap junctions, cell adhesion molecules, and regulation of actin
cytoskeleton. Interestingly, among the genes belonging to the most strongly
affected adhesion pathways was Cdh1 (known as E-cadherin), an adhesion molecule
known to be expressed by a subpopulation of spermatogonia including SSCs.
Overall, our results suggest that BMP4 induces early differentiation of SSCs in a
direct manner by affecting cell adhesion pathways.

PMID: 20650884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 15;345(2):180-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.007. Epub 2010 
Jul 17.

Pax2 coordinates epithelial morphogenesis and cell fate in the inner ear.

Christophorou NA(1), Mende M, Lleras-Forero L, Grocott T, Streit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Campus,
London SE1 9RT, UK.

Crucial components of the vertebrate eye, ear and nose develop from discrete
patches of surface epithelium, called placodes, which fold into spheroids and
undergo complex morphogenesis. Little is known about how the changes in cell and 
tissue shapes are coordinated with the acquisition of cell fates. Here we explore
whether these processes are regulated by common transcriptional mechanisms in the
developing ear. After specification, inner ear precursors elongate to form the
placode, which invaginates and is transformed into the complex structure of the
adult ear. We show that the transcription factor Pax2 plays a key role in
coordinating otic fate and placode morphogenesis, but appears to regulate each
process independently. In the absence of Pax2, otic progenitors not only lose
otic marker expression, but also fail to elongate due to the loss of apically
localised N-cadherin and N-CAM. In the absence of either N-cadherin or N-CAM otic
cells lose apical cell-cell contact and their epithelial shape. While
misexpression of Pax2 leads to ectopic activation of both adhesion molecules, it 
is not sufficient to confer otic identity. These observations suggest that Pax2
controls cell shape independently from cell identity and thus acts as coordinator
for these processes.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2946559
PMID: 20643116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 9;5(7):e11483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011483.

Polycomb target genes are silenced in multiple myeloma.

Kalushkova A(1), Fryknäs M, Lemaire M, Fristedt C, Agarwal P, Eriksson M, Deleu
S, Atadja P, Osterborg A, Nilsson K, Vanderkerken K, Oberg F, Jernberg-Wiklund H.

Author information: 
(1)Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala Sweden.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a genetically heterogeneous disease, which to date
remains fatal. Finding a common mechanism for initiation and progression of MM
continues to be challenging. By means of integrative genomics, we identified an
underexpressed gene signature in MM patient cells compared to normal counterpart 
plasma cells. This profile was enriched for previously defined
H3K27-tri-methylated genes, targets of the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins in human
embryonic fibroblasts. Additionally, the silenced gene signature was more
pronounced in ISS stage III MM compared to stage I and II. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay on purified CD138+ cells from four MM patients
and on two MM cell lines, we found enrichment of H3K27me3 at genes selected from 
the profile. As the data implied that the Polycomb-targeted gene profile would be
highly relevant for pharmacological treatment of MM, we used two compounds to
chemically revert the H3K27-tri-methylation mediated gene silencing. The
S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor 3-Deazaneplanocin (DZNep) and the
histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 (Panobinostat), reactivated the expression
of genes repressed by H3K27me3, depleted cells from the PRC2 component EZH2 and
induced apoptosis in human MM cell lines. In the immunocompetent 5T33MM in vivo
model for MM, treatment with LBH589 resulted in gene upregulation, reduced tumor 
load and increased overall survival. Taken together, our results reveal a common 
gene signature in MM, mediated by gene silencing via the Polycomb repressor
complex. The importance of the underexpressed gene profile in MM tumor initiation
and progression should be subjected to further studies.

PMCID: PMC2901331
PMID: 20634887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):12992-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004139107. Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Long-range function of an intergenic retrotransposon.

Pi W(1), Zhu X, Wu M, Wang Y, Fulzele S, Eroglu A, Ling J, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Medical 
College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Retrotransposons including endogenous retroviruses and their solitary long
terminal repeats (LTRs) compose >40% of the human genome. Many of them are
located in intergenic regions far from genes. Whether these intergenic
retrotransposons serve beneficial host functions is not known. Here we show that 
an LTR retrotransposon of ERV-9 human endogenous retrovirus located 40-70 kb
upstream of the human fetal gamma- and adult beta-globin genes serves a
long-range, host function. The ERV-9 LTR contains multiple CCAAT and GATA motifs 
and competitively recruits a high concentration of NF-Y and GATA-2 present in low
abundance in adult erythroid cells to assemble an LTR/RNA polymerase II complex. 
The LTR complex transcribes intergenic RNAs unidirectionally through the
intervening DNA to loop with and modulate transcription factor occupancies at the
far downstream globin promoters, thereby modulating globin gene switching by a
competitive mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2919959
PMID: 20615953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Development. 2010 Aug;137(16):2713-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.048470. Epub 2010 Jul 7.

Regulatory interactions specifying Kolmer-Agduhr interneurons.

Yang L(1), Rastegar S, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Karlsruhe, Germany.

In the zebrafish spinal cord, two classes of neurons develop from the lateral
floor plate: Kolmer-Agduhr' (KA') and V3 interneurons. We show here that the
differentiation of the correct number of KA' cells depends on the activity of the
homeobox transcription factor Nkx2.9. This factor acts in concert with Nkx2.2a
and Nkx2.2b. These factors are also required for the expression of the
zinc-finger transcription factor Gata2 in the lateral floor plate. In turn, Gata2
is necessary for expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Tal2 that acts upstream of the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamic acid
decarboxylase 67 gene (gad67) in KA' cells. Expression of the transcription
factor Sim1, which marks the V3 interneurons in the lateral floor plate, depends 
also on the three Nkx2 factors. sim1 expression does not require, however, gata2 
and tal2. KA' cells of the lateral floor plate and the KA' cells located more
dorsally in the spinal cord share expression of transcription factors. The
functional connections between the different regulatory genes, however, differ in
the two GABAergic cell types: although gata2 and tal2 are expressed in KA' cells,
they are dispensable for gad67 expression in these cells. Instead, olig2 and
gata3 are required for the differentiation of gad67-expressing KA' cells. This
suggests that the layout of regulatory networks is crucially dependent on the
lineage that differs between KA' and KA' cells.

PMID: 20610488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Blood. 2010 Sep 23;116(12):2141-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-264143. Epub 2010 
Jun 16.

Vegf regulates embryonic erythroid development through Gata1 modulation.

Drogat B(1), Kalucka J, Gutiérrez L, Hammad H, Goossens S, Farhang Ghahremani M, 
Bartunkova S, Haigh K, Deswarte K, Nyabi O, Naessens M, Ferrara N, Klingmüller U,
Lambrecht BN, Nagy A, Philipsen S, Haigh JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Cell Biology Unit, Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB,
Ghent, Belgium.

To determine the role of vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf) in embryonic
erythroid development we have deleted or overexpressed Vegf specifically in the
erythroid lineage using the EpoR-iCre transgenic line in combination with
Cre/loxP conditional gain and loss of function Vegf alleles. ROSA26
promoter-based expression of the Vegf(164) isoform in the early erythroid lineage
resulted in a differentiation block of primitive erythroid progenitor (EryP)
development and a partial block in definitive erythropoiesis between the
erythroid burst-forming unit and erythroid colony-forming unit stages. Decreased 
mRNA expression levels of the key erythroid transcription factor Gata1 were
causally linked to this phenotype. Conditional deletion of Vegf within the
erythroid lineage was associated with increased Gata1 levels and increased
erythroid differentiation. Expression of a ROSA26-based GATA2 transgene rescued
Gata1 mRNA levels and target genes and restored erythroid differentiation in our 
Vegf gain of function model. These results demonstrate that Vegf modulates Gata1 
expression levels in vivo and provides new molecular insight into Vegf's ability 
to modulate erythropoiesis.

PMID: 20554972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;30(15):3853-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00032-10. Epub 2010 Jun 
1.

Gfi1 expression is controlled by five distinct regulatory regions spread over 100
kilobases, with Scl/Tal1, Gata2, PU.1, Erg, Meis1, and Runx1 acting as upstream
regulators in early hematopoietic cells.

Wilson NK(1), Timms RT, Kinston SJ, Cheng YH, Oram SH, Landry JR, Mullender J,
Ottersbach K, Gottgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) gene was originally discovered in the
hematopoietic system, where it functions as a key regulator of stem cell
homeostasis, as well as neutrophil and T-cell development. Outside the blood
system, Gfi1 is essential for inner-ear hair and intestinal secretory cell
differentiation. To understand the regulatory hierarchies within which Gfi1
operates to control these diverse biological functions, we used a combination of 
comparative genomics, locus-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, functional
validation in cell lines, and extensive transgenic mouse assays to identify and
characterize the complete ensemble of Gfi1 regulatory elements. This concerted
effort identified five distinct regulatory elements spread over 100kb each
driving expression in transgenic mice to a subdomain of endogenous Gfi1. Detailed
characterization of an enhancer 35 kb upstream of Gfi1 demonstrated activity in
the dorsal aorta region and fetal liver in transgenic mice, which was bound by
key stem cell transcription factors Scl/Tal1, PU.1/Sfpi1, Runx1, Erg, Meis1, and 
Gata2. Taken together, our results reveal the regulatory regions responsible for 
Gfi1 expression and importantly establish that Gfi1 expression at the sites of
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) emergence is controlled by key HSC regulators, thus
integrating Gfi1 into the wider HSC regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC2916401
PMID: 20516218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 1;111(2):310-21. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22695.

Gab1 mediates hepatocyte growth factor-stimulated mitogenicity and morphogenesis 
in multipotent myeloid cells.

Felici A(1), Giubellino A, Bottaro DP.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National, Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1501, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-stimulated mitogenesis, motogenesis and
morphogenesis in various cell types begins with activation of the Met receptor
tyrosine kinase and the recruitment of intracellular adaptors and kinase
substrates. The adapter protein Gab1 is a critical effector and substrate of
activated Met, mediating morphogenesis, among other activities, in epithelial
cells. To define its role downstream of Met in hematopoietic cells, Gab1 was
expressed in the HGF-responsive, Gab1-negative murine myeloid cell line 32D.
Interestingly, the adhesion and motility of Gab1-expressing cells were
significantly greater than parental cells, independent of growth factor
treatment. Downstream of activated Met, Gab1 expression was specifically
associated with rapid Shp-2 recruitment and activation, increased mitogenic
potency, suppression of GATA-1 expression and concomitant upregulation of GATA-2 
transcription. In addition to enhanced proliferation, continuous culture of
Gab1-expressing 32D cells in HGF resulted in cell attachment, filopodia extension
and phenotypic changes suggestive of monocytic differentiation. Our results
suggest that in myeloid cells, Gab1 is likely to enhance HGF mitogenicity by
coupling Met to Shp-2 and GATA-2 expression, thereby potentially contributing to 
normal myeloid differentiation as well as oncogenic transformation.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3393599
PMID: 20506405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 May 6;6(5):e1000771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000771.

Modeling reveals bistability and low-pass filtering in the network module
determining blood stem cell fate.

Narula J(1), Smith AM, Gottgens B, Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.

Combinatorial regulation of gene expression is ubiquitous in eukaryotes with
multiple inputs converging on regulatory control elements. The dynamic properties
of these elements determine the functionality of genetic networks regulating
differentiation and development. Here we propose a method to quantitatively
characterize the regulatory output of distant enhancers with a biophysical
approach that recursively determines free energies of protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions from experimental analysis of transcriptional reporter
libraries. We apply this method to model the Scl-Gata2-Fli1 triad-a network
module important for cell fate specification of hematopoietic stem cells. We show
that this triad module is inherently bistable with irreversible transitions in
response to physiologically relevant signals such as Notch, Bmp4 and Gata1 and we
use the model to predict the sensitivity of the network to mutations. We also
show that the triad acts as a low-pass filter by switching between steady states 
only in response to signals that persist for longer than a minimum duration
threshold. We have found that the auto-regulation loops connecting the
slow-degrading Scl to Gata2 and Fli1 are crucial for this low-pass filtering
property. Taken together our analysis not only reveals new insights into
hematopoietic stem cell regulatory network functionality but also provides a
novel and widely applicable strategy to incorporate experimental measurements
into dynamical network models.

PMCID: PMC2865510
PMID: 20463872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. BMC Cancer. 2010 Apr 28;10:165. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-165.

Analysis of gene expression in prostate cancer epithelial and interstitial
stromal cells using laser capture microdissection.

Gregg JL(1), Brown KE, Mintz EM, Piontkivska H, Fraizer GC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND: The prostate gland represents a multifaceted system in which prostate
epithelia and stroma have distinct physiological roles. To understand the
interaction between stroma and glandular epithelia, it is essential to delineate 
the gene expression profiles of these two tissue types in prostate cancer. Most
studies have compared tumor and normal samples by performing global expression
analysis using a mixture of cell populations. This report presents the first
study of prostate tumor tissue that examines patterns of differential expression 
between specific cell types using laser capture microdissection (LCM).
METHODS: LCM was used to isolate distinct cell-type populations and identify
their gene expression differences using oligonucleotide microarrays. Ten
differentially expressed genes were then analyzed in paired tumor and
non-neoplastic prostate tissues by quantitative real-time PCR. Expression
patterns of the transcription factors, WT1 and EGR1, were further compared in
established prostate cell lines. WT1 protein expression was also examined in
prostate tissue microarrays using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The two-step method of laser capture and microarray analysis identified 
nearly 500 genes whose expression levels were significantly different in prostate
epithelial versus stromal tissues. Several genes expressed in epithelial cells
(WT1, GATA2, and FGFR-3) were more highly expressed in neoplastic than in
non-neoplastic tissues; conversely several genes expressed in stromal cells
(CCL5, CXCL13, IGF-1, FGF-2, and IGFBP3) were more highly expressed in
non-neoplastic than in neoplastic tissues. Notably, EGR1 was also differentially 
expressed between epithelial and stromal tissues. Expression of WT1 and EGR1 in
cell lines was consistent with these patterns of differential expression.
Importantly, WT1 protein expression was demonstrated in tumor tissues and was
absent in normal and benign tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The prostate represents a complex mix of cell types and there is a
need to analyze distinct cell populations to better understand their potential
interactions. In the present study, LCM and microarray analysis were used to
identify novel gene expression patterns in prostate cell populations, including
identification of WT1 expression in epithelial cells. The relevance of WT1
expression in prostate cancer was confirmed by analysis of tumor tissue and cell 
lines, suggesting a potential role for WT1 in prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2876079
PMID: 20426842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Fertil Steril. 2010 May 15;93(8):2465-85. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.03.034. 
Epub 2010 Apr 18.

Mechanisms of FSH synthesis: what we know, what we don't, and why you should
care.

Bernard DJ(1), Fortin J, Wang Y, Lamba P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Quebec, Canada. daniel.bernard@mcgill.ca

The pituitary gonadotropin hormones, FSH and LH, are key regulators of
reproductive physiology. Though the two hormones are produced by the same cell
type, often in response to the same endocrine and paracrine regulators, they
sub-serve different biological functions and their synthesis and secretion are
differentially regulated. This stems largely from differences in transcriptional,
post-transcriptional, and post-translational regulation of their unique beta
subunits. That is, both hormones are dimeric glycoproteins and share a common
alpha subunit. Their unique beta subunits, however, derive from different genes
encoding distinct proteins. Past and recent research indicates synthesis and
release of the two hormones are subject to extensive and independent regulation. 
LH appears to be secreted predominantly via the regulated secretory pathway,
whereas FSH release is largely constitutive. As such, investigations of FSH-beta 
subunit synthesis may lend direct insight into mechanisms underlying patterns of 
secreted FSH, more so than investigations of the LHbeta subunit. Here, we review 
recent investigations of transcriptional regulation of the FSH-beta subunit gene 
from different mammalian species, including humans. The results reveal both
conserved and species-specific regulatory mechanisms that might contribute to
inter-species variation in FSH release.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20403589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Exp Hematol. 2010 Aug;38(8):685-95. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.03.019. Epub 2010 
Apr 8.

A potential activity of valproic acid in the stimulation of
interleukin-3-mediated megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis.

Liu B(1), Ohishi K, Yamamura K, Suzuki K, Monma F, Ino K, Nishii K, Masuya M,
Sekine T, Heike Y, Takaue Y, Katayama N.

Author information: 
(1)Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

Erratum in
    Exp Hematol. 2010 Sep;38(9):845. Nishii, Kazuhiro [added].

OBJECTIVE: Although the anticancer activities of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors have been studied, a role for HDAC in normal hematopoiesis has not
been clearly defined. Previous studies have shown that the potent HDAC inhibitor 
FK228 stimulates interleukin (IL)-3-mediated erythropoiesis. Here, we examined
whether the widely used valproic acid (VPA) affects megakaryopoiesis as well as
erythropoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD34(+) cells were incubated in serum-free or
serum-containing cultures with cytokines, with or without VPA.
RESULTS: In the serum-free cultures containing IL-3+stem cell factor (SCF), VPA
significantly increased generation of CD61(+)GPA(-) megakaryocytic and a
CD61(+)GPA(+) mixture of megakaryocytic and erythroid precursors from CD34(+)
hematopoietic precursors at a pharmacological concentration (100 microg/mL). The 
increase in generation of megakaryocytic and erythroid precursors by VPA was
confirmed by replating cultured cells with thrombopoietin+SCF and
erythropoietin+SCF, respectively. VPA was as potent as FK228. In cultures with
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor+SCF, where CD61(-)GPA(+)
erythroid precursors were mostly developed, VPA mainly enhanced the generation of
CD61(-)GPA(+) erythroid precursors. In serum-containing cultures, only low
numbers of CD61(+) or GPA(+) cells were developed with IL-3+SCF. Nevertheless, a 
substantial number of these cells were generated with VPA. Furthermore, these
stimulating effects of VPA were observed by incubating CD34(+) cells from
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction showed that VPA enhanced GATA-2, but not GATA-1,
messenger RNA expression with IL-3+SCF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a novel role for VPA in enhancing the
potential of IL-3 to stimulate megakaryopoiesis as well as erythropoiesis and
suggest a new therapeutic approach of epigenetic therapy for hematological
disease.

2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20381581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Neurochem. 2010 Jun;113(6):1659-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06725.x. Epub
2010 Mar 31.

The exceptional properties of 9-methyl-beta-carboline: stimulation, protection
and regeneration of dopaminergic neurons coupled with anti-inflammatory effects.

Polanski W(1), Enzensperger C, Reichmann H, Gille G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Beta-carbolines (BCs) are potential endogenous and exogenous neurotoxins that may
contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. However, we recently
demonstrated protective and stimulatory effects of 9-methyl-BC (9-me-BC) in
primary dopaminergic culture. In the present study, treatment with 9-me-BC
unmasked a unique tetrad of effects. First, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression 
was stimulated in pre-existing dopa decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons and
several TH-relevant transcription factors (Gata2, Gata3, Creb1, Crebbp) were
up-regulated. Neurite outgrowth of TH immunoreactive (THir) neurons was likewise 
stimulated. The interaction with tyrosine kinases (protein kinase A and C,
epidermal growth factor-receptor, fibroblast growth factor-receptor and neural
cell adhesion molecule) turned out to be decisive for these observed effects.
Second, 9-me-BC protected in acute toxicity models THir neurons against
lipopolysaccharide and 2,9-dime-BC(+) toxicity. Third, in a chronic toxicity
model when cells were treated with 9-me-BC after chronic rotenone administration,
a pronounced regeneration of THir neurons was observed. Fourth, 9-me-BC inhibited
the proliferation of microglia induced by toxin treatment and installed an
anti-inflammatory environment by decreasing the expression of inflammatory
cytokines and receptors. Finally, 9-me-BC lowered the content of alpha-synuclein 
protein in the cultures. The presented results warrant the exploration of 9-me-BC
as a novel potential anti-parkinsonian medication, as 9-me-BC interferes with
several known pathogenic factors in Parkinson's disease as outlined above.
Further investigations are currently under way.

PMID: 20374418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Immunol. 2010 May 1;184(9):4907-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902184. Epub 2010
Apr 5.

Gene coexpression analysis in single cells indicates lymphomyeloid copriming in
short-term hematopoietic stem cells and multipotent progenitors.

Gautreau L(1), Boudil A, Pasqualetto V, Skhiri L, Grandin L, Monteiro M, Jais JP,
Ezine S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 591, 156 rue 
de Vaugirard, F-75730 Paris 15, France.

Progressive restriction to a differentiation pathway results from both activation
and silencing of particular gene expression programs. To identify the
coexpression and the expression levels of regulatory genes during hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) differentiation toward the T cell branch, we applied a new
single-cell RT-PCR technique to analyze the simultaneous expression of 13 genes
in 9 functionally purified populations from the bone marrow and the thymus. We
report in this paper that Lin(-)Sca1(+)ckit(+) HSCs display, at the single-cell
level, a homogeneous and high transcriptional activity as do early thymic
progenitors. Moreover, the coexpression of lymphoid and myeloid genes is an early
event detected in approximately 30% of short-term HSC and most multipotent
progenitors, suggesting novel sources for the generation of early thymic
progenitors, common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), and common myeloid progenitors. 
Loss of multipotency in Lin(-)Sca1(+)ckit(+) cells directed to the lymphoid
branch is characterized by Lmo2 and Gata2 gene expression downregulation. Indeed,
highest levels of Gata2 expression are detected only in long-term and short-term 
HSC populations. Complete shutdown of Pu1 gene expression in all triple-negative 
(TN)3 stage thymic pre-T cells is indicative of total T cell commitment.
Interestingly, this is also observed in 30% of TN2 cells and 25% of CLP in the
bone marrow, suggesting a possible initiation of T cell engagement in TN2 and
CLP. Also, our strategy highlights similar gene patterns among HSCs and
intrathymic progenitors, proposing, therefore, that identical activation signals 
are maintained until further maturation and generation of CD4 and CD8 coreceptors
bearing thymocytes.

PMID: 20368277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):16967-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102046. Epub
2010 Apr 2.

Acetylation of lysine 564 adjacent to the C-terminal binding protein-binding
motif in EVI1 is crucial for transcriptional activation of GATA2.

Shimahara A(1), Yamakawa N, Nishikata I, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is an important transcription factor
for leukemogenesis. EVI1 is a member of a group of transcription factors with
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)-binding motifs that act as transcriptional
co-repressors; however, we recently found that EVI1 directly activates GATA2
transcription, which is an important gene for the maintenance of hematopoietic
stem cells. We show here that EVI1-activated GATA2 transcripts derive from exon
1S of GATA2, which is specifically activated in neural and hematopoietic cells.
EVI1 was acetylated by the histone acetyltransferase p300/CBP association factor 
(P/CAF) in myeloid leukemia cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells. Acetylation
at Lys(564), which is adjacent to the CtBP-binding consensus sequence of EVI1,
was found to be important for transcriptional activation of GATA2. Mutation of
Lys(564) to alanine (K564A) markedly reduced the ability of EVI1 to bind DNA and 
activate transcription of GATA2. Furthermore, we confirmed that Lys(564) in EVI1 
was specifically acetylated in leukemia and primary hematopoietic cells by using 
an antibody directed against an acetylated Lys(564) EVI1 peptide. Moreover,
co-transfection of P/CAF with EVI1 overcame the suppressive effect of the CtBP
co-repressor and resulted in GATA2 transcriptional activation; nonetheless, CtBP2
was still included in the protein complex with EVI1 and P/CAF on the EVI1-binding
site in the GATA2 promoter region. Thus, acetylation of EVI1 at Lys(564) by P/CAF
enhances the DNA binding capacity of EVI1 and thereby contributes to the
activation of GATA2.

PMCID: PMC2878005
PMID: 20363750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 May;17(3):163-8. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32833800b8.

GATA factor switching during erythroid differentiation.

Kaneko H(1), Shimizu R, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Efforts have been made to understand how erythroid
differentiation is regulated, and recent discoveries have clarified that
lineage-specific transcription factor networks are essential for proper
differentiation of erythroid cells. The transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 are
involved in such networks that regulate erythroid gene expression. Importantly,
expression of Gata1 and Gata2 genes is also under the control of such regulatory 
networks. The present review is focused on the mechanism of Gata1 and Gata2 gene 
regulation during erythropoiesis and the physiological significance of their
dynamic regulation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Gata1 and Gata2 genes are regulated by multiple transcription
factors, including their own products GATA1 and GATA2. GATA1 and GATA2 recognize 
specific regulatory GATA motifs, and their expression levels change dynamically
during erythroid differentiation, leading to diversified gene expression during
erythropoiesis.
SUMMARY: Strict regulations of the Gata1 and Gata2 genes are critical for proper 
lineage commitment and development of erythroid cells. It has been shown in
transgenic mouse analyses that cis-acting GATA binding motifs are critical for
the expression of Gata1 and Gata2 genes. Furthermore, expression of Gata1 and
Gata2 genes along with a set of erythroid genes appeared to be regulated by GATA 
factor switching.

PMID: 20216212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Life Sci. 2010 May 8;86(19-20):699-706. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.02.021. Epub 2010
Mar 4.

The transcription factor GATA-4 regulates cytochrome P4502C19 gene expression.

Mwinyi J(1), Hofmann Y, Pedersen RS, Nekvindová J, Cavaco I, Mkrtchian S,
Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Jessica.Mwinyi@ki.se

AIMS: Cytochrome P4502C19 (CYP2C19) is an important enzyme involved in the
metabolism of antiulcer drugs and antidepressants. However, despite the well
documented drug-dependent variability of CYP2C19 expression, the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of the enzyme remain unknown. In this study we
investigated whether the transcription factor family GATA is involved in the
regulation of CYP2C19 gene expression.
MAIN METHODS: We identified a novel putative GATA binding site at position
-165/-156 within the CYP2C19 gene promoter. 5'-Deletion fragments of the CYP2C19 
promoter containing wild type or mutant variants of this GATA binding site were
co-transfected with expression vectors encoding the transcription factors GATA-4 
or GATA-2 and analyzed using dual luciferase gene reporter assays in HepG2 and
Huh-7 hepatoma cells. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) and Chromatin
Immunoprecipitations (ChIP) were performed to proof a sequence-specific
interaction of GATA proteins with the putative GATA binding site.
KEY FINDINGS: The wild type fragments of CYP2C19 promoter were highly upregulated
by GATA-4 and GATA-2 in luciferase gene reporter assay, whereas mutations
introduced into the GATA binding sites caused a significant activity loss.
Similar attenuation was observed upon co-transfection of GATA-4 with a known
co-regulator of GATA activity, FOG-2. EMSA analysis revealed a sequence-specific 
binding of GATA-4 and GATA-6 to the wild type GATA binding site. In addition, the
association of GATA-4 with the CYP2C19 promoter was confirmed by ChIP analysis.
SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that GATA-4 plays an important role in the
transcriptional regulation of CYP2C19 expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(9):2181-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01441-09. Epub 2010 Mar
1.

The TAL1/SCL transcription factor regulates cell cycle progression and
proliferation in differentiating murine bone marrow monocyte precursors.

Dey S(1), Curtis DJ, Jane SM, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Room 777, Preston Research Building,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Monocytopoiesis involves the stepwise differentiation in the bone marrow (BM) of 
common myeloid precursors (CMPs) to monocytes. The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor TAL1/SCL plays a critical role in other hematopoietic
lineages, and while it had been reported to be expressed by BM-derived
macrophages, its role in monocytopoiesis had not been elucidated. Using cell
explant models of monocyte/macrophage (MM) differentiation, one originating with 
CMPs and the other from more committed precursors, we characterized the
phenotypic and molecular consequences of inactivation of Tal1 expression ex vivo.
While Tal1 knockout had minimal effects on cell survival and slightly accelerated
terminal differentiation, it profoundly inhibited cell proliferation and
decreased entry into and traversal of the G(1) and S phases. In conjunction,
steady-state levels of p16(Ink4a) mRNA were increased and those of Gata2 mRNA
decreased. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated the association of
Tal1 and E47, one of its E protein DNA-binding partners, with an E box-GATA
sequence element in intron 4 of the Gata2 gene and with three E boxes upstream of
p16(Ink4a). Finally, wild-type Tal1, but not a DNA binding-defective mutant,
rescued the proliferative defect in Tal1-null MM precursors. These results
document the importance of this transcription factor in cell cycle progression
and proliferation during monocytopoiesis and the requirement for direct DNA
binding in these processes.

PMCID: PMC2863590
PMID: 20194619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):14031-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102855. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Activation of canonical wingless-type MMTV integration site family (Wnt)
signaling in mature adipocytes increases beta-catenin levels and leads to cell
dedifferentiation and insulin resistance.

Gustafson B(1), Smith U.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Center of Excellence for Metabolic 
and Cardiovascular Research, Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, the
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 413 45, Sweden.

Canonical Wnt ligands are secreted by several cell types in the adipose tissue.
We examined if mature adipocytes can also be target cells and found that
canonical Wnt activation by Wnt3a induced a marked dedifferentiation of both
3T3-L1 and human adipocytes. Typical adipogenic markers were reduced while
undifferentiated cell markers like Pref-1/Dlk1, Wnt10b, and Gata2 were increased.
The cells also became insulin-resistant with impaired upstream insulin signaling 
and reduced glucose uptake. Wnt3a stabilized beta-catenin in the absence of the
LRP6 receptor and with maintained axin and Dickkopf-1 protein expression.
PPARgamma was repressed and PPARgamma ligands could not restore the adipogenic
markers or reduce the beta-catenin levels. The dedifferentiated adipocytes
expressed the myofibroblast marker alpha-smooth muscle actin and were also
susceptible to osteogenic transdifferentiation. These results identify a novel
pathway in mature adipose cells that is critical for maintaining the normal
adipocyte phenotype and insulin sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2859564
PMID: 20179324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Cell Sci. 2010 Mar 15;123(Pt 6):871-80. doi: 10.1242/jcs.057968. Epub 2010 Feb 
16.

Opposing effects of retinoic acid and FGF9 on Nanos2 expression and meiotic entry
of mouse germ cells.

Barrios F(1), Filipponi D, Pellegrini M, Paronetto MP, Di Siena S, Geremia R,
Rossi P, De Felici M, Jannini EA, Dolci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Cellular Biology, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, 00133 Rome, Italy.

In the mouse, three genes that are homologous to the Drosophila Nanos (Nos) gene 
have been identified. Deletion of one of these genes, Nanos2, results in male
sterility, owing to loss of germ cells during fetal life. Before apoptosis,
Nanos2-null gonocytes enter meiosis, suggesting that Nanos2 functions as a
meiotic repressor. Here, we show that Nanos2 is continuously expressed in male
germ cells from fetal gonocytes to postnatal spermatogonial stem cells. We
observed that the promeiotic factor AtRA, an analog of retinoic acid (RA),
downregulates NANOS2 levels, in both fetal and postnatal gonocytes, while
promoting meiosis. Interestingly, FGF9, a growth factor crucial for sex
differentiation and survival of fetal gonocytes, upregulates levels of NANOS2 in 
both male and female primordial germ cells (PGCs) and in premeiotic
spermatogonia. This effect was paralleled by an impairment of meiotic entry,
suggesting that FGF9 acts as an inhibitor of meiosis through the upregulation of 
Nanos2. We found that NANOS2 interacts with PUM2, and that these two proteins
colocalize in the ribonucleoparticle and polysomal fractions on sucrose
gradients, supporting the notion that they bind RNA. Finally, we found that
recombinant NANOS2 binds to two spermatogonial mRNAs, Gata2 and Taf7l, which are 
involved in germ-cell differentiation.

PMID: 20159962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):377-90. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091755.

Genomic organization and regulation of the human orexin (hypocretin) receptor 2
gene: identification of alternative promoters.

Chen J(1), Randeva HS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Sciences Research Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

Orexins (hypocretins), acting via their receptors, are involved in the control of
feeding behaviour, sleep, arousal and energy homoeostasis. However, regulation of
the human orexin receptor 2 (hOX2R) gene remains unknown. We have identified four
transcripts arising from alternative splicing from three exons. These exon 1
variants were designated exons 1A, 1B and 1C on the basis of their 5'-3' order.
RT (reverse transcription)-PCR demonstrates the differential expression in
various human tissues. The alternative 5'-UTRs (untranslated regions) possessed
by these isoforms have different translational efficiencies, which regulate the
level of protein expression. In the present study, we have demonstrated that the 
hOX2R gene is regulated by two promoters and the novel transcripts are regulated 
by the distal promoter located upstream of exon 1A. We have demonstrated that the
AP-1 (activator protein 1) motif is critical for sustaining the basal activity of
distal promoter. Analysis of the proximal promoter revealed the region regulating
promoter activity contained putative binding elements including those for CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein), GATA-2 and Oct-1. Using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that CREB, GATA-2 and Oct-1
transcription factors bind to these critical regulatory promoter elements.
Mutational studies suggested that these motifs functioned independently, but have
a compound effect regulating hOX2R gene transcription. Furthermore, proximal
promoter activity is enhanced by both PKA (protein kinase A) and PKC (protein
kinase C) pathway activation, via binding of CREB and GATA-2 transcription
factors. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that expression of hOX2R is
regulated by a complex involving a proximal PKA/PKC-regulated promoter and a
distal promoter regulating tissue-specific expression of alternative transcripts 
which in turn post-transcriptionally regulate receptor levels.

PMID: 20156195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Blood. 2010 Apr 29;115(17):3463-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-232876. Epub 2010 
Feb 12.

Lineage-specific combinatorial action of enhancers regulates mouse erythroid
Gata1 expression.

Drissen R(1), Guyot B, Zhang L, Atzberger A, Sloane-Stanley J, Wood B, Porcher C,
Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK.

Precise spatiotemporal control of Gata1 expression is required in both early
hematopoietic progenitors to determine erythroid/megakaryocyte versus
granulocyte/monocyte lineage output and in the subsequent differentiation of
erythroid cells and megakaryocytes. An enhancer element upstream of the mouse
Gata1 IE (1st exon erythroid) promoter, mHS-3.5, can direct both erythroid and
megakaryocytic expression. However, loss of this element ablates only
megakaryocytes, implying that an additional element has erythroid specificity.
Here, we identify a double DNaseI hypersensitive site, mHS-25/6, as having
erythroid but not megakaryocytic activity in primary cells. It binds an
activating transcription factor complex in erythroid cells where it also makes
physical contact with the Gata1 promoter. Deletion of mHS-25/6 or mHS-3.5 in
embryonic stem cells has only a modest effect on in vitro erythroid
differentiation, whereas loss of both elements ablates both primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis with an almost complete loss of Gata1 expression.
Surprisingly, Gata2 expression was also concomitantly low, suggesting a more
complex interaction between these 2 factors than currently envisaged. Thus,
whereas mHS-3.5 alone is sufficient for megakaryocytic development, mHS-3.5 and
mHS-25/6 collectively regulate erythroid Gata1 expression, demonstrating
lineage-specific differences in Gata1 cis-element use important for development
of these 2 cell types.

PMCID: PMC2918365
PMID: 20154211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Feb;220(2):127-38.

Fractionation of mature eosinophils in GATA-reporter transgenic mice.

Kim K(1), Suzuki N, Ohneda K, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Eosinophils contribute to the pathophysiology of allergic and infectious
diseases, albeit their molecular functions remain unknown. Mature eosinophils are
identified by their unique morphology and staining characteristics. However, it
is difficult to fractionate living eosinophils by flow cytometry because these
granulocytes express multiple cell surface markers that are shared by other cells
of hematopoietic or non-hematopoietic origin. In this study, we describe a flow
cytometry-based method to enumerate and fractionate eosinophils by developmental 
stages. To fractionate these cell types, we used transgenic mouse lines that
express fluorescent proteins under control of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic
regulatory region (Gata1-HRD), which is exclusively active in Gata1-expressing
hematopoietic cells, including eosinophils. As expected, mature eosinophils were 
highly enriched in the fluorescent reporter-expressing subfraction of bone marrow
myeloid cells that were negatively selected by using multiple antibodies against 
B220, CD4, CD8, Ter119, c-Kit and CD71. Cytochemical analyses of flow-sorted
cells identified the cells in this fraction as eosinophils harboring eosinophilic
granules. Additionally, expression of eosinophil-specific genes, for instance
eosinophil enzymes and the IL-5 receptor alpha gene, were specifically detected
in this fraction. The expression of these eosinophil-specific genes increased as 
the cells differentiated. This method for enrichment of bone marrow eosinophils
is applicable to fractionation of eosinophils and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
from transgenic mice with atopic asthma. Thus, both pathological and
developmental stages of eosinophils are efficiently fractionated by this flow
cytometry-based method using Gata1-HRD transgenic reporter mice. This study,
therefore, proposes a useful means to study the experimental allergic and
inflammatory systems.

PMID: 20139664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Blood. 2010 Mar 18;115(11):2156-66. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-251280. Epub 2010 
Jan 11.

FOG1 requires NuRD to promote hematopoiesis and maintain lineage fidelity within 
the megakaryocytic-erythroid compartment.

Gregory GD(1), Miccio A, Bersenev A, Wang Y, Hong W, Zhang Z, Poncz M, Tong W,
Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Nuclear factors regulate the development of complex tissues by promoting the
formation of one cell lineage over another. The cofactor FOG1 interacts with
transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 to control erythroid and megakaryocyte (MK)
differentiation. In contrast, FOG1 antagonizes the ability of GATA factors to
promote mast cell (MC) development. Normal FOG1 function in late-stage erythroid 
cells and MK requires interaction with the chromatin remodeling complex NuRD.
Here, we report that mice in which the FOG1/NuRD interaction is disrupted
(Fog(ki/ki)) produce MK-erythroid progenitors that give rise to significantly
fewer and less mature MK and erythroid colonies in vitro while retaining
multilineage capacity, capable of generating MCs and other myeloid lineage cells.
Gene expression profiling of Fog(ki/ki) MK-erythroid progenitors revealed
inappropriate expression of several MC-specific genes. Strikingly, aberrant MC
gene expression persisted in mature Fog(ki/ki) MK and erythroid progeny. Using a 
GATA1-dependent committed erythroid cell line, select MC genes were found to be
occupied by NuRD, suggesting a direct mechanism of repression. Together, these
observations suggest that a simple heritable silencing mechanism is insufficient 
to permanently repress MC genes. Instead, the continuous presence of GATA1, FOG1,
and NuRD is required to maintain lineage fidelity throughout MK-erythroid
ontogeny.

PMCID: PMC2844012
PMID: 20065294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 20;29(2):457-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.368. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

FOG-1-mediated recruitment of NuRD is required for cell lineage re-enforcement
during haematopoiesis.

Gao Z(1), Huang Z, Olivey HE, Gurbuxani S, Crispino JD, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The transcriptional co-factor Friend of GATA1 (FOG-1) has been shown to interact 
with subunits of the nucleosome remodelling and histone deacetylase (NuRD)
complex through a specific motif located at its N-terminus. To test the
importance of FOG-1/NuRD interaction for haematopoiesis in vivo, we generated
mice with a mutation that specifically disrupts FOG-1/NuRD interaction
(FOG-1(R3K5A)). Homozygous FOG-1(R3K5A) mice were found to have splenomegaly,
extramedullary erythropoiesis, granulocytosis and thrombocytopaenia secondary to 
a block in megakaryocyte maturation. FOG-1(R3K5A/R3K5A) megakaryocytes and
erythroid progenitors expressed increased levels of GATA2, showing that
FOG-1/NuRD interaction is required for the earlier described 'GATA Switch'. In
addition, ablation of FOG-1/NuRD interaction led to inappropriate expression of
mast cell and eosinophil-specific genes in the megakaryocyte and erythroid
lineages. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the NuRD
complex was not properly recruited to a mast cell gene promoter in
FOG-1(R3K5A/R3K5A) megakaryocytes, suggesting that FOG-1/NuRD interaction is
required for the direct suppression of mast cell gene expression. Taken together,
these results underscore the importance of the FOG-1/NuRD interaction for the
re-enforcement of lineage commitment during erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2824465
PMID: 20010697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Blood. 2010 Feb 18;115(7):1433-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227413. Epub 2009
Dec 9.

Cbfb/Runx1 repression-independent blockage of differentiation and accumulation of
Csf2rb-expressing cells by Cbfb-MYH11.

Hyde RK(1), Kamikubo Y, Anderson S, Kirby M, Alemu L, Zhao L, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

It is known that CBFB-MYH11, the fusion gene generated by inversion of chromosome
16 in human acute myeloid leukemia, is causative for oncogenic transformation.
However, the mechanism by which CBFB-MYH11 initiates leukemogenesis is not clear.
Previously published reports showed that CBFB-MYH11 dominantly inhibits RUNX1 and
CBFB, and such inhibition has been suggested as the mechanism for leukemogenesis.
Here we show that Cbfb-MYH11 caused Cbfb/Runx1 repression-independent defects in 
both primitive and definitive hematopoiesis. During primitive hematopoiesis,
Cbfb-MYH11 delayed differentiation characterized by sustained expression of
Gata2, Il1rl1, and Csf2rb, a phenotype not found in Cbfb and Runx1 knockout mice.
Expression of Cbfb-MYH11 in the bone marrow induced the accumulation of abnormal 
progenitor-like cells expressing Csf2rb in preleukemic mice. The expression of
all 3 genes was detected in most human and murine CBFB-MYH11(+) leukemia samples.
Interestingly, Cbfb-MYH11(+) preleukemic progenitors and leukemia-initiating
cells did not express Csf2rb, although the majority of leukemia cells in our
Cbfb-MYH11 knockin mice were Csf2rb(+). Therefore Csf2rb can be used as a
negative selection marker to enrich preleukemic progenitor cells and
leukemia-initiating cells from Cbfb-MYH11 mice. These results suggest that
Cbfb/Runx1 repression-independent activities contribute to leukemogenesis by
Cbfb-MYH11.

PMCID: PMC2826765
PMID: 20007544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Hear Res. 2010 Mar;261(1-2):9-21. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2009.12.017. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Expression of prestin and Gata-3,-2,-1 mRNA in the rat organ of Corti during the 
postnatal period and in culture.

Gross J(1), Stute K, Moller R, Fuchs J, Amarjargal N, Pohl EE, Angerstein M,
Smorodchenko A, Mazurek B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Institute of Cell- and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Germany. johann.gross@charite.de

Based on observations that mutations of GATA-3 are responsible for the
HDR-syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, renal defects) and that
GATA-transcription factors have an important role to play in inner ear
development, we hypothesized that these transcription factors may be involved in 
regulatory changes of prestin transcription. To prove this, we examined in
parallel the expression of mRNA of prestin and Gata-3,-2 and Gata-1 in the organ 
of Corti during early postnatal development of rats and in organotypic cultures. 
Remarkable relations are observed between prestin and Gata-3,-2 expression in
organ of Corti preparations in vivo and in vitro: (i) Gata-3,-2 expression
display similar apical-basal gradients as prestin mRNA levels. (ii) The prestin
expression increases between postnatal day two and postnatal day eight by a
factor of about four in the apical and middle segments and by a factor of two in 
the basal part. Highly significant Pearson correlation coefficients were observed
between Gata-3,-2 mRNA and prestin levels when the data were evaluated by
regression analyses. (iii) Parallel changes of prestin mRNA and Gata-3,-2 mRNA
levels were observed in response to thyroid hormone and to gemfibrozil
application. These observations suggest a regulatory role played by the Gata-3,-2
transcription factors in prestin expression.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Mar;38(3):415-21. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.029405. Epub 2009 
Dec 7.

New insights into the regulation of CYP2C9 gene expression: the role of the
transcription factor GATA-4.

Mwinyi J(1), Nekvindová J, Cavaco I, Hofmann Y, Pedersen RS, Landman E, Mkrtchian
S, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden. Jessica.Mwinyi@ki.se

CYP2C9 is an important drug-metabolizing enzyme that metabolizes, e.g., warfarin,
antidiabetics, and antiphlogistics. However, the endogenous regulation of this
enzyme is largely unknown. In this study, we examined the role of GATA
transcription factors in the gene expression of CYP2C9. We investigated four
putative GATA binding sites within the first 200 base pairs of CYP2C9 promoter at
the positions I: -173/-170, II: -167/-164, III: -118/-115, and IV: -106/-103.
Luciferase activity driven by a wild-type CYP2C9 promoter construct was strongly 
up-regulated in Huh-7 cells upon cotransfection with expression plasmids for
GATA-2 and GATA-4, whereas mutations introduced into GATA binding site III or I
and II reduced this induction to a significant extent. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays revealed specific binding of GATA-4 and GATA-6 to the
oligonucleotides containing GATA binding sites I and II. Furthermore, the
association of GATA-4 with CYP2C9 promoter was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in HepG2 cells. Taken together, these data strongly
suggest an involvement of liver-specific transcription factor GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of CYP2C9.

PMID: 19995889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Oct;37(7):3369-76. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9924-5. Epub 2009
Dec 2.

Identification of the promoter region of the P2RX4 gene.

Gu BJ(1), Sun C, Valova VA, Skarratt KK, Wiley JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nepean Clinical School, Nepean Hospital, Level 5,
South Block, Penrith, NSW, 2750, Australia.

The human P2X(4) purinergic receptor is an ATP gated cation-selective channel,
which can be upregulated following nerve injury or stimulation by various
cytokines. However, the transcriptional control of this regulation is unknown. In
this study, the transcription initiation site was estimated to be 72 bp upstream 
of ATG start codon by using a novel sequencing based primer extension method with
5'-FAM tagged primers. To delineate the promoter region of the P2RX4 gene which
encodes the P2X(4) receptor, we constructed 8 fragments (size range 100-4500 bp) 
covering the 4.5 Kb upstream region of the P2RX4 gene. A dual-colour luciferase
reporter vector system was used to measure the promoter activities in both
transfected HEK-293 cells and COS-7 cells for each fragment extracted from 5 to 7
randomly picked colonies. The 62 bp sequence upstream of the initiation site
showed promoter activity. A putative GATA-2 binding site (-29 to -20) within this
region was required for high promoter activity and GATA-2 was found to be one of 
the transcriptional factors binding to P2RX4 promoter by both fluorescent super
electrophoresis mobility shift assay and immunoprecipitation using streptavidin
coated Dynabeads and biotin-labeled double-strand DNA probes. A single nucleotide
polymorphism with minor allele frequency of 0.23 was found within the GATA-2
binding site of P2RX4 promoter region which significantly reduced gene
transcription. In conclusion, our data has identified the first transcription
factor involved in P2X receptor expression.

PMID: 19953327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 25;36(4):667-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.001.

Discovering hematopoietic mechanisms through genome-wide analysis of GATA factor 
chromatin occupancy.

Fujiwara T(1), O'Geen H, Keles S, Blahnik K, Linnemann AK, Kang YA, Choi K,
Farnham PJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin
Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, 53705, USA.

GATA factors interact with simple DNA motifs (WGATAR) to regulate critical
processes, including hematopoiesis, but very few WGATAR motifs are occupied in
genomes. Given the rudimentary knowledge of mechanisms underlying this
restriction and how GATA factors establish genetic networks, we used ChIP-seq to 
define GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupancy genome-wide in erythroid cells. Coupled with
genetic complementation analysis and transcriptional profiling, these studies
revealed a rich collection of targets containing a characteristic binding motif
of greater complexity than WGATAR. GATA factors occupied loci encoding multiple
components of the Scl/TAL1 complex, a master regulator of hematopoiesis and
leukemogenic target. Mechanistic analyses provided evidence for crossregulatory
and autoregulatory interactions among components of this complex, including
GATA-2 induction of the hematopoietic corepressor ETO-2 and an ETO-2-negative
autoregulatory loop. These results establish fundamental principles underlying
GATA factor mechanisms in chromatin and illustrate a complex network of
considerable importance for the control of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2784893
PMID: 19941826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Pediatr Res. 2010 Mar;67(3):314-9. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181caafd2.

Severe gastrointestinal bleeding and thrombocytopenia in a child with an
anti-GATA1 autoantibody.

de Waele L(1), Freson K, Louwette S, Thys C, Wittevrongel C, de Vos R, Debeer A, 
van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

We describe a patient, who developed during the first week of life petechiae and 
hematomas caused by severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding due to 
multiple small gastric hemangiomata. Bone marrow examination showed
hypermegakaryocytosis and dysmegakaryopoiesis. Alloimmune thrombocytopenia was
excluded. Only 3 y later, platelet counts normalized and bleedings disappeared
but small skin hemangiomata remained. Electron microscopy showed enlarged round
platelets with a paucity of alpha granules similar as in GATA1-deficient patients
but no GATA1 mutation was found. Immunoblot analysis showed a strong interaction 
between patient Igs and recombinant GATA1, GATA2, and the N finger (Nf) of GATA1.
The lymphocyte transformation test with recombinant GATA1Nf was positive. In
vitro culturing of normal CD34 cells with purified patient Igs showed a decreased
number of megakaryocyte colonies but an increased overall size of the colonies
compared with control Igs. Mice injected with patient Igs showed a reduced
platelet count compared with mice injected with control Igs. Thrombopoiesis was
also reduced after injection of patient Igs in transgenic zebrafish compared with
control Igs. In conclusion, this study is the first report of an anti-GATA1
autoantibody leading to severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding
from multiple pinpoint hemangiomata.

PMID: 19924028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Blood. 2010 Jan 14;115(2):e1-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-232322. Epub 2009 Nov 
4.

Comparative gene expression analysis of zebrafish and mammals identifies common
regulators in hematopoietic stem cells.

Kobayashi I(1), Ono H, Moritomo T, Kano K, Nakanishi T, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, Sakaguchi Laboratory, School of Medicine, 
Keio University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. kobaisao@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Hematopoiesis in teleost fish is maintained in the kidney. We previously reported
that Hoechst dye efflux activity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is highly
conserved in vertebrates, and that Hoechst can be used to purify HSCs from
teleost kidneys. Regulatory molecules that are strongly associated with HSC
activity may also be conserved in vertebrates. In this study, we identified
evolutionarily conserved molecular components in HSCs by comparing the gene
expression profiles of zebrafish, murine, and human HSCs. Microarray data of
zebrafish kidney side population cells (zSPs) showed that genes involved in cell 
junction and signal transduction tended to be up-regulated in zSPs, whereas genes
involved in DNA replication tended to be down-regulated. These properties of zSPs
were similar to those of mammalian HSCs. Overlapping gene expression analysis
showed that 40 genes were commonly up-regulated in these 3 HSCs. Some of these
genes, such as egr1, gata2, and id1, have been previously implicated in the
regulation of HSCs. In situ hybridization in zebrafish kidney revealed that
expression domains of egr1, gata2, and id1 overlapped with that of abcg2a, a
marker for zSPs. These results suggest that the overlapping genes identified in
this study are regulated in HSCs and play important roles in their functions.

PMID: 19890097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;127(1):101-5. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0761-3. Epub 2009 Nov
3.

The transcription factor GATA-2 does not associate with angiographic coronary
artery disease in the Ottawa Heart Genomics and Cleveland Clinic GeneBank
Studies.

Dandona S(1), Chen L, Fan M, Alam MA, Assogba O, Belanger M, Williams K, Wells
GA, Tang WH, Ellis SG, Hazen SL, McPherson R, Roberts R, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)The John & Jennifer Ruddy Canadian Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University 
of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada.

The transcription factor GATA2 was reported to associate with coronary artery
disease (CAD) in the family-based Genecard sample (Connelly et al. in PLoS Genet 
2:e139, 2006). We asked whether GATA2 associates with sporadic cases of CAD in
the Ottawa Heart Genomics Study (OHGS) and Cleveland Clinic (CC) populations. We 
genotyped the lead single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) from Genecard, rs2713604 
which is located in intron 5-6 of GATA2 in 600 CAD cases and 625 controls, as
well as a tag SNP rs1573949 (r (2) = 0.87 in Caucasians of European ancestry in
Utah from HapMap) in 1,136 cases and 1,162 controls in the OHGS1 population. A
further 1,838 CAD cases and 913 controls derived from an independent sample
combining genotypes from CC and OHGS2 populations were genotyped for rs1573949.
Neither of the genotyped SNPs associates with CAD in the OHGS1 or CC/OHGS2
populations. Our data suggest that GATA2 does not contribute to the development
of angiographic CAD among sporadic cases.

PMCID: PMC2836531
PMID: 19885677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 May;16(4):284-7. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.10.006. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Association study of GATA-2 transcription factor gene (GATA2) polymorphism and
Parkinson's disease.

Kurzawski M(1), Bialecka M, Slawek J, Klodowska-Duda G, Drozdzik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Powstancow Wlkp. 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.

It was shown that high levels of alpha-synuclein in substantia nigra are
essential in pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD), and SNCA expression in
neurons is controlled by GATA-2 transcription factor, which plays also crucial
role in central nervous system development, and erythroid cells differentiation. 
Recently, significant association of two GATA2 SNPs with early-onset coronary
artery disease has been presented. In this case-control study we tested a
hypothesis that polymorphism of GATA2 gene may be associated with sporadic PD.
Five tag SNPs within GATA2 gene (rs2860228:G > A, rs2335052:G > A, rs11717152:A >
C, rs2713604:G > A, and rs3803:C > T) were investigated in 368 PD patients and
349 controls of Caucasian origin from Poland. We did not find any significant
differences in the GATA2 allele and genotype frequencies between PD cases and
controls, for individual SNPs, neither in haplotype analysis. Elevated frequency 
of rs3803T allele was observed in early-onset PD patients (vs. controls and vs.
late-onset PD), but this difference was not significant (0.05 < p < 0.1). We
conclude that GATA2 polymorphism is not an important risk factor for sporadic PD 
in Caucasians.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19864173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Allergy. 2010 May;65(5):616-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02227.x. Epub 2009 
Oct 26.

Genetic evidence for a role of IL33 in nasal polyposis.

Buysschaert ID(1), Grulois V, Eloy P, Jorissen M, Rombaux P, Bertrand B, Collet
S, Bobic S, Vlaminck S, Hellings PW, Lambrechts D.

Author information: 
(1)Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the genetic factors that contribute to nasal
polyposis (NP). A genome-wide association study identified 10 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with eosinophilia. As eosinophils play a key role
in the pathogenesis of NP, we assessed if any of these SNPs contribute to genetic
susceptibility of NP.
METHODS: We recruited 284 patients with NP in four participating hospitals in
Belgium and 427 healthy controls, and genotyped 10 SNPs affecting eosinophilia
(rs1420101 in IL1RL1, rs12619285 in IKZF2, rs4431128 in GATA2, rs4143832 in IL5, 
rs3184504 in SH2B3, rs2416257 in WDR36, rs2269426 in MHC, rs9494145 in MYB,
rs748065 in GFRA2, and rs3939286 in IL33) using MALDI-TOF. A two-stage design was
used while correcting for multiple testing.
RESULTS: First stage analysis, involving 150 NP patients and 250 controls,
identified rs3939286 nearby IL33 as a susceptibility factor for NP. Per at-risk
A-allele, rs3939286 increased the risk for NP with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.60
(95% CI = 1.16-2.22; P = 0.0041). Second stage replication analysis in another
123 NP patients and 165 controls confirmed this association (OR = 1.43; CI =
1.00-2.06; P = 0.046). The combined analysis of both stages revealed an OR of
1.53 (CI = 1.21-1.96; P = 0.00041). Given the association of IL33 with NP, we
also investigated rs1420101 in IL1RL1, which is the receptor for IL33. Although
rs1420101 itself failed to associate with NP, a combined risk assessment of
rs3939286 and rs1420101 further increased the risk for NP.
CONCLUSION: We provide unprecedented genetic evidence suggesting a role for the
IL33 pathway in the pathogenesis of NP.

PMID: 19860791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Fitoterapia. 2010 Jun;81(4):259-68. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2009.09.012. Epub 2009 
Sep 30.

Inhibitory effect and transcriptional impact of berberine and evodiamine on human
white preadipocyte differentiation.

Hu Y(1), Fahmy H, Zjawiony JK, Davies GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.

It has been reported that the botanical alkaloids, berberine and evodiamine
inhibit mouse preadipocyte 3T3-L1 differentiation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect and transcriptional impact of berberine and evodiamine
individually and in combination on human white preadipocyte (HWP)
differentiation. We have shown that treatment with 8 microM berberine or 4 microM
evodiamine resulted in a major inhibition of HWP differentiation accompanied by
up-regulation of both GATA binding protein 2 and 3 (GATA-2 and GATA-3) mRNA and
protein expression, suggesting that both compounds may have excellent potential
as agents to prevent obesity.

(c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19799972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Endocr Pathol. 2009 Winter;20(4):209-20. doi: 10.1007/s12022-009-9094-y.

Clinicopathological characterization of TSH-producing adenomas: special reference
to TSH-immunoreactive but clinically non-functioning adenomas.

Wang EL(1), Qian ZR, Yamada S, Rahman MM, Inosita N, Kageji T, Endo H, Kudo E,
Sano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University
of Tokushima Graduate School, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH))-producing pituitary adenomas have
been known to be quite variable in clinical features covering from typical
functioning TSH-producing adenomas (FTSHomas) associated with hyperthyroidism to 
clinically silent TSH cell adenomas (STAs) that are apparently unassociated with 
hyperthyroidism. It is important to distinguish STAs from other types of
clinically non-functioning adenomas for adequate postoperative managements.
However, because of rareness of TSH-producing adenomas, their histopathological
features linking to the clinical manifestations have not been well characterized.
Herein, we investigated clinical and histopathological findings to characterize
29 TSH-producing adenomas including 20 FTSHomas and nine STAs. Clinical symptoms 
of the patients with STAs included headache, visual defect, vertigo, and nausea. 
All STAs and 19 FTSHomas were macroadenoma. The average tumor size of STAs was
significantly larger than that of FTSHomas (P < 0.05). The invasiveness was
detected in 33% STAs and in 20% FTSHomas. Both STAs and FTSHomas showed a variety
of morphological features and immunohistochemical profiles. Chromophobic
polygonal or short-spindled tumor cells usually proliferated in a diffuse
pattern, while they exhibited globoid or whorl-like appearance with intertwined
cytoplasmic processes in both subgroups. Stromal fibrosis and calcification were 
often noted. Their nuclei were somehow pleomorphic. Ultrastructural features of
all four STAs examined were similar to those of normal thyrotrophs. Thus, STAs
and FTSHomas were indistinguishable by histology alone. Immunohistochemically,
the number of TSH-positive cells in individual FTSHomas was highly various. Six
tumors showed only a few TSH-positive cells (1-5%), and three were negative for
TSH by conventional method without antigen retrieval. After proteinase K
treatment, these tumors turned out TSH positive. As defined, STAs were TSH
positive in more than 20% of tumor cells and three of them in more than 50%.
Growth hormone- and/or prolactin-positive cells were detected in 55% STAs and 63%
FTSHomas. Both pituitary-specific transcription factor 1 and GATA-binding protein
2 were expressed in all STAs and 20 FTSHomas. Membranous somatostatin receptor
(SSTR)-2A immunoreactivity was found in 89% STAs and 94% FTSHomas, whereas SSTR5 
was positive in 78% of both STAs and FTSHomas. MIB-1 labeling index was related
to tumor invasiveness and tumor size (P < 0.05, P = 0.09, respectively). Thus,
although both STAs and FTSHomas showed unique histopathological features distinct
from other type adenomas, these two subgroups were indistinguishable by
histopathology. Immunohistochemistry for TSH by use of antigen retrieval,
transcription factors, and SSTRs may be useful to confirm STAs and to determine
the postoperative therapy among various kinds of clinically non-functioning
adenomas.

PMID: 19774499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Exp Hematol. 2009 Dec;37(12):1393-9. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.09.005. Epub 2009
Sep 20.

Downregulation of GATA-2 and overexpression of adipogenic gene-PPARgamma in
mesenchymal stem cells from patients with aplastic anemia.

Xu Y(1), Takahashi Y, Wang Y, Hama A, Nishio N, Muramatsu H, Tanaka M, Yoshida N,
Villalobos IB, Yagasaki H, Kojima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Aplastic anemia (AA) is characterized by a reduced number of hematopoietic stem
cells and fatty replacement in the bone marrow. Transcriptional factor GATA-2
plays several important roles in both hematopoiesis and adipogenesis. Decreased
levels of GATA-2 compromise the proliferation and survival of hematopoietic stem 
cells. GATA-2 suppresses adipocyte differentiation through direct inhibition of
adipogenic factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
(PPARgamma). Previous studies have shown that expression of GATA-2 is decreased
in marrow CD34-positive cells in AA. To elucidate the mechanisms of fatty marrow 
replacement, we evaluated the mRNA expression for GATA-2 and PPARgamma in
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from patients with AA by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. GATA-2 expression by MSCs from AA patients was
significantly lower than in normal subjects. Conversely, expression of PPARgamma 
was significantly higher in AA patients. Western blot analysis demonstrated that 
protein levels of GATA-2 were lower in AA patients than those in normal subjects.
Moreover, incubation with interferon-gamma induced downregulation of GATA-2
levels in MSCs from normal subjects. These findings indicate that fatty marrow
replacement in AA patients can be explained by downregulation of GATA-2 and
overexpression of PPARgamma in MSCs. Decreased expression of GATA-2 might be
responsible for the pathogenesis and development of the clinical features of the 
disease.

PMID: 19772889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Pathol. 2009 Dec;219(4):463-72. doi: 10.1002/path.2614.

Cholinergic switch associated with morphological differentiation in
neuroblastoma.

Bourdeaut F(1), Janoueix-Lerosey I, Lucchesi C, Paris R, Ribeiro A, de Pontual L,
Amiel J, Lyonnet S, Pierron G, Michon J, Peuchmaur M, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U830, Institut Curie, Génétique et biologie des Cancers, Paris, France.

The morphology of malignant cells distinguishes between undifferentiated, poorly 
differentiated and differentiating neuroblastomas and constitutes a strong
prognostic factor. Spontaneous or treatment-induced maturation characterizes a
subset of neuroblastomas. It constitutes the basis of retinoic acid treatment to 
improve survival in aggressive neuroblastomas. However, the molecular events that
drive differentiation are poorly understood. In the present study we have
investigated the relationships between gene expression profiles and
differentiation criteria in stroma-poor neuroblastomas. This study included three
undifferentiated (UN), 20 poorly differentiated (PDN) and 11 differentiating (DN)
neuroblastomas. These groups could be clearly separated using unsupervised
clustering methods, which further enabled a major classification impact of genes 
involved in neural development, differentiation and function to be identified.
UNs are characterized by high ASCL1, high PHOX2B, low GATA2, low TH and low DBH
expressions. Most PDNs harbour a clear adrenergic phenotype, even in the presence
of missense PHOX2B mutations. Finally, all DN tumours demonstrate cholinergic
features. Depending upon their association with adrenergic characteristics, this 
enables dual 'cholinergic/adrenergic' and 'fully cholinergic' neuroblastomas to
be defined. This suggests that the cholinergic switch, a final specification
process that occurs physiologically in a minority of sympathetic neurons, is a
critical step of differentiation in some neuroblastic tumours. This switch is
associated with a down regulation of DBH that is apparently not strictly
dependent upon PHOX2B. Conversely, GATA2 and TFAP2B may play critical roles in
maintaining adrenergic features in poorly differentiated tumours.

PMID: 19768740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Cells. 2009 Aug 31;28(2):87-92. doi: 10.1007/s10059-009-0110-3. Epub 2009 Aug
20.

Identification of GATA2 and AP-1 Activator elements within the enhancer VNTR
occurring in intron 5 of the human SIRT3 gene.

Bellizzi D(1), Covello G, Di Cianni F, Tong Q, De Benedictis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, 87036, Rende, Italy.
dina.bellizzi@unical.it

Human SIRT3 gene contains an intronic VNTR enhancer. A T > C transition occurring
in the second repeat of each VNTR allele implies the presence/absence of a
putative GATA binding motif. A partially overlapping AP-1 site, not affected by
the transition, was also identified. Aims of the present study were: 1) to verify
if GATA and AP-1 sites could bind GATA2 and c-Jun/c-Fos factors, respectively; 2)
to investigate whether such sites modulate the enhancer activity of the
SIRT3-VNTR alleles. DAPA assay proved that GATA2 and c-Jun/c-Fos factors are able
to bind the corresponding sites. Moreover, co-transfection experiments showed
that the over-expression of GATA2 and c-Jun/c-Fos factors boosts the VNTR
enhancer activity in an allelic-specific way. Furthermore, we established that
GATA2 and c-Jun/c-Fos act additively in modulating the SIRT3-VNTR enhancer
function. Therefore, GATA2 and AP-1 are functional sites and the T S> C
transition of the second VNTR repeat affects their activity.

PMID: 19714312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1481-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605276. Epub 2009
Aug 25.

GATA factors in human neuroblastoma: distinctive expression patterns in clinical 
subtypes.

Hoene V(1), Fischer M, Ivanova A, Wallach T, Berthold F, Dame C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to elucidate the expression patterns of GATA
transcription factors in neuroblastoma and the developing sympathetic nervous
system (SNS).
METHODS: GATA-2, -3 and -4 and their cofactor friend-of-GATA (FOG)-2 were
investigated in primary neuroblastoma by immunohistochemistry, real-time RT-PCR
(n=73) and microarray analysis (n=251). In addition, GATA-2, -3 and FOG-2
expression was determined by northern-blot hybridisation. In the developing
murine SNS, Gata-4 and Fog-2 were examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Although Gata-2, -3 and Fog-2 are expressed in the developing nervous
system, Gata-4 was not detected. In contrast, protein expression of all factors
was observed in human neuroblastoma. Northern-blot hybridisation and real-time
RT-PCR suggested specific expression patterns of the four genes in primary
neuroblastoma, but did not show unequivocal results. In the large cohort examined
by microarrays, a significant association of GATA-2, -3 and FOG-2 expression with
low-risk features was observed, whereas GATA-4 mRNA levels correlated with
MYCN-amplification.
CONCLUSION: The transcription factors GATA-2 and -3, which are essential for
normal SNS development, and their cofactor FOG-2 are downregulated in aggressive 
but not in favourable neuroblastoma. In contrast, upregulation of GATA-4 appears 
to be a common feature of this malignancy and might contribute to neuroblastoma
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2768442
PMID: 19707195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Ann Hum Genet. 2009 Nov;73(Pt 6):551-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2009.00540.x.
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

Validation study of genetic associations with coronary artery disease on
chromosome 3q13-21 and potential effect modification by smoking.

Horne BD(1), Hauser ER, Wang L, Muhlestein JB, Anderson JL, Carlquist JF, Shah
SH, Kraus WE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, Intermountain Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA.

The CATHGEN study reported associations of chromosome 3q13-21 genes (KALRN, MYLK,
CDGAP, and GATA2) with early-onset coronary artery disease (CAD). This study
attempted to independently validate those associations. Eleven single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) were examined (rs10934490, rs16834817, rs6810298, rs9289231,
rs12637456, rs1444768, rs1444754, rs4234218, rs2335052, rs3803, rs2713604) in
patients (N = 1618) from the Intermountain Heart Collaborative Study (IHCS).
Given the higher smoking prevalence in CATHGEN than IHCS (41% vs. 11% in
controls, 74% vs. 29% in cases), smoking stratification and genotype-smoking
interactions were evaluated. Suggestive association was found for GATA2
(rs2713604, p = 0.057, OR = 1.2). Among smokers, associations were found in CDGAP
(rs10934490, p = 0.019, OR = 1.6) and KALRN (rs12637456, p = 0.011, OR = 2.0) and
suggestive association was found in MYLK (rs16834871, p = 0.051, OR = 1.8,
adjusting for gender). No SNP association was found among non-smokers, but
smoking/SNP interactions were detected for CDGAP (rs10934491, p = 0.017) and
KALRN (rs12637456, p = 0.010). Similar differences in SNP effects by smoking
status were observed on re-analysis of CATHGEN. CAD associations were suggestive 
for GATA2 and among smokers significant post hoc associations were found in
KALRN, MYLK, and CDGAP. Genetic risk conferred by some of these genes may be
modified by smoking. Future CAD association studies of these and other genes
should evaluate effect modification by smoking.

PMCID: PMC2764812
PMID: 19706030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 29;28(43):3847-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.243. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

A role for GATA-2 in transition to an aggressive phenotype in prostate cancer
through modulation of key androgen-regulated genes.

Böhm M(1), Locke WJ, Sutherland RL, Kench JG, Henshall SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales 2010, Australia.

GATA-2, a member of the GATA family of transcription factors, is involved in
androgen receptor (AR) signaling, however, little is known regarding its role in 
prostate cancer. Here, we report that GATA-2 is expressed in a substantial
proportion of prostate cancers and that high expression of GATA-2 is associated
with biochemical recurrence and distant metastatic progression in a validation
set of 203 cancers. In vitro data show that GATA-2 is directly recruited to the
promoter region of the AR upon androgen stimulation of LNCaP prostate cancer
cells with 5alpha-dihydroxytestosterone (DHT) for 24 h. Ectopic GATA-2 expression
causes the induction of AR transcript levels under androgen-depleted conditions
(P<0.05). The expression of the AR target gene, AZGP1, is induced upon androgen
stimulation and this effect is repressed by GATA-2. In contrast, GATA-2
significantly increases transcript levels of KLK2, which increases further in a
time-dependent manner on DHT treatment and in the presence of GATA-2. These
results indicate that upregulation of GATA-2 may contribute to the progression to
aggressive prostate cancer through modulation of expression of AR and key
androgen-regulated genes, one of which, AZGP1, is associated with the progression
to metastatic disease.

PMID: 19684615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):29109-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041145. Epub
2009 Aug 12.

Critical role for GATA3 in mediating Tie2 expression and function in large vessel
endothelial cells.

Song H(1), Suehiro J, Kanki Y, Kawai Y, Inoue K, Daida H, Yano K, Ohhashi T,
Oettgen P, Aird WC, Kodama T, Minami T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Endothelial phenotypes are highly regulated in space and time by both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. There is increasing evidence
that the GATA family of transcription factors function as signal transducers,
coupling changes in the extracellular environment to changes in downstream target
gene expression. Here we show that human primary endothelial cells derived from
large blood vessels express GATA2, -3, and -6. Of these factors, GATA3 was
expressed at the highest levels. In DNA microarrays of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC), small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of GATA3
resulted in reduced expression of genes associated with angiogenesis, including
Tie2. At a functional level, GATA3 knockdown inhibited angiopoietin
(Ang)-1-mediated but not vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF)-mediated 
AKT signaling, cell migration, survival, and tube formation. In electrophoretic
gel mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation, GATA3 was shown to
bind to regulatory regions within the 5'-untranslated region of the Tie2 gene. In
co-immunoprecipitation and co-transfection assays, GATA3 and the Ets
transcription factor, ELF1, physically interacted and synergized to transactivate
the Tie2 promoter. GATA3 knockdown blocked the ability of Ang-1 to attenuate
vascular endothelial cell growth factor stimulation of vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 expression and monocytic cell adhesion. Moreover, exposure of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells to tumor necrosis factor-alpha resulted in
marked down-regulation of GATA3 expression and reduction in Tie2 expression.
Together, these findings suggest that GATA3 is indispensable for
Ang-1-Tie2-mediated signaling in large vessel endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2781456
PMID: 19674970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov-Dec;1789(11-12):675-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.07.007. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

A-form DNA structure is a determinant of transcript levels from the Xenopus gata2
promoter in embryos.

Llewellyn KJ(1), Cary PD, McClellan JA, Guille MJ, Scarlett GP.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, IBBS, University of
Portsmouth, Portsmouth, PO1 2DT, UK.

We have previously shown that a critical region of the gata2 promoter contains an
inverted CCAAT box and adopts a partial A-form DNA structure in vitro. At
gastrula stages of development transcription requires binding of CBTF (CCAAT box 
transcription factor), a multi-subunit transcription factor, to this region.
Xilf3 is one component of CBTF and the double stranded RNA binding domains
(dsRBDs) of Xilf3 must be active for both binding to, and transcription from,
this promoter. Here we determine the contribution of DNA sequence and structure
at the gata2 promoter to transcriptional activity. In all the constructs we
tested a CCAAT box was a requirement for full activity. However, base
substitutions that increase B-form structure propensity in the sequences flanking
the CCAAT box are equally able to decrease activity even if a CCAAT box is
present. In contrast, mutations that maintain A-form propensity in these regions 
also maintain, or increase, transcription factor binding and transcriptional
activity. We propose a two-component model for the interaction of CBTF with the
gata2 promoter, requiring both a CCAAT sequence and flanking A-form DNA
structures. These results support a novel role for dsRBDs in transcriptional
regulation and suggest a function for A-form DNA in vivo.

PMID: 19665599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Clin Invest. 2009 Aug;119(8):2257-70. doi: 10.1172/JCI35738. Epub 2009 Jul 13.

The Down syndrome critical region gene 1 short variant promoters direct vascular 
bed-specific gene expression during inflammation in mice.

Minami T(1), Yano K, Miura M, Kobayashi M, Suehiro J, Reid PC, Hamakubo T, Ryeom 
S, Aird WC, Kodama T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. minami@med.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Down syndrome critical region gene 1 (DSCR-1) short variant (DSCR-1s) is an
inhibitor of calcineurin/NFAT signaling encoded by exons 4-7 of DSCR1. We
previously reported that VEGF induces DSCR-1s expression in endothelial cells,
which in turn negatively feeds back to attenuate endothelial cell activation.
Here, in order to characterize the role of the promoter that drives DSCR-1s
expression in mediating inducible expression in vivo and to determine the
functional relevance of DSCR-1s in inflammation, we targeted a DNA construct
containing 1.7 kb of the human DSCR1s promoter coupled to the lacZ reporter to
the hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (Hprt) locus of mice. We
determined that lacZ was uniformly expressed in the endothelium of transgenic
embryos but was markedly downregulated postnatally. Systemic administration of
VEGF or LPS in adult mice resulted in cyclosporine A-sensitive reactivation of
the DSCR1s promoter and endogenous gene expression in a subset of organs,
including the heart and brain. The DSCR1s promoter was similarly induced in the
endothelium of tumor xenografts. In a mouse model of endotoxemia,
DSCR-1s-deficient mice demonstrated increased sepsis mortality, whereas
adenovirus-mediated DSCR-1s overexpression protected against LPS-induced
lethality. Collectively, these data suggest that the DSCR1s promoter directs
vascular bed-specific expression in activated endothelium and that DSCR-1s serves
to dampen the host response to infection.

PMCID: PMC2719921
PMID: 19620774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5168-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00482-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
20.

GATA-2 reinforces megakaryocyte development in the absence of GATA-1.

Huang Z(1), Dore LC, Li Z, Orkin SH, Feng G, Lin S, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Northwestern University, Lurie Research
Building 5-113, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

GATA-2 is an essential transcription factor that regulates multiple aspects of
hematopoiesis. Dysregulation of GATA-2 is a hallmark of acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia in children with Down syndrome, a malignancy that is defined by the
combination of trisomy 21 and a GATA1 mutation. Here, we show that GATA-2 is
required for normal megakaryocyte development as well as aberrant
megakaryopoiesis in Gata1 mutant cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that GATA-2
indirectly controls cell cycle progression in GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes.
Genome-wide microarray analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that GATA-2 regulates a wide set of genes, including cell cycle
regulators and megakaryocyte-specific genes. Surprisingly, GATA-2 also negatively
regulates the expression of crucial myeloid transcription factors, such as Sfpi1 
and Cebpa. In the absence of GATA-1, GATA-2 prevents induction of a latent
myeloid gene expression program. Thus, GATA-2 contributes to cell cycle
progression and the maintenance of megakaryocyte identity of GATA-1-deficient
cells, including GATA-1s-expressing fetal megakaryocyte progenitors. Moreover,
our data reveal that overexpression of GATA-2 facilitates aberrant
megakaryopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2738300
PMID: 19620289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Dec;76(12):1143-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21082.

Involvement of GATA transcription factors in the regulation of endogenous bovine 
interferon-tau gene transcription.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Kim MS, Muroi Y, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Nakajima H, Takahashi M,
Nagaoka K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Expression of interferon-tau (IFNT), necessary for pregnancy establishment in
ruminant ungulates, is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner. However,
molecular mechanisms by which IFNT gene transcription is regulated in this manner
have not been firmly established. In this study, DNA microarray/RT-PCR analysis
between bovine trophoblast CT-1 and Mardin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells was
initially performed, finding that transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, and GATA6
mRNAs were specific to CT-1 cells. These mRNAs were also found in Days 17, 20,
and 22 (Day 0 = day of estrus) bovine conceptuses. In examining other bovine cell
lines, ovary cumulus granulosa (oCG) and ear fibroblast (EF) cells, GATA2 and
GATA3, but not GATA6, were found specific to the bovine trophoblast cells. In
transient transfection analyses using the upstream region (-631 to +59 bp) of
bovine IFNT gene (bIFNT, IFN-tau-c1), over-expression of GATA2/GATA3 did not
affect the transcription of bIFNT-reporter construct in human choriocarcinoma
JEG3 cells. Transfection of GATA2, GATA3, ETS2, and/or CDX2, however, was
effective in the up-regulation of the bIFNT construct transfected into bovine oCG
and EF cells. One Point mutation studies revealed that among six potential GATA
binding sites located on the upstream region of the bIFNT gene, the one next to
ETS2 site exhibited reduced luciferase activity. In CT-1 cells, endogenous bIFNT 
gene transcription was up-regulated by over-expression of GATA2 or GATA3, but
down-regulated by siRNA specific to GATA2 mRNA. These data suggest that GATA2/3
is involved in trophoblast-specific regulation of bIFNT gene transcription.

PMID: 19598245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Mar;20(3):661-71. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp134. Epub 2009 Jul 8.

Transforming growth factor beta promotes neuronal cell fate of mouse cortical and
hippocampal progenitors in vitro and in vivo: identification of Nedd9 as an
essential signaling component.

Vogel T(1), Ahrens S, Büttner N, Krieglstein K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Centre of Anatomy, Georg-August-University, 37075 
Goettingen, Germany.

Transforming Growth Factor beta (Tgfbeta) and associated signaling effectors are 
expressed in the forebrain, but little is known about the role of this
multifunctional cytokine during forebrain development. Using hippocampal and
cortical primary cell cultures of developing mouse brains, this study identified 
Tgfbeta-regulated genes not only associated with cell cycle exit of progenitors
but also with adoption of neuronal cell fate. Accordingly, we observed not only
an antimitotic effect of Tgfbeta on progenitors but also an increased expression 
of neuronal markers in Tgfbeta treated cultures. This effect was dependent upon
Smad4. Furthermore, in vivo loss-of-function analyses using
Tgfbeta2(-/-)/Tgfbeta3(-/-) double mutant mice showed the opposite effect of
increased cell proliferation and fewer neurons in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus. Gata2, Runx1, and Nedd9 were candidate genes regulated by Tgfbeta
and known to be involved in developmental processes of neuronal progenitors.
Using siRNA-mediated knockdown, we identified Nedd9 as an essential signaling
component for the Tgfbeta-dependent increase in neuronal cell fate. Expression of
this scaffolding protein, which is mainly described as a signaling molecule of
the beta1-integrin pathway, was not only induced after Tgfbeta treatment but was 
also associated with morphological changes of the Nestin-positive progenitor pool
observed upon exposure to Tgfbeta.

PMCID: PMC2820705
PMID: 19587023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Chromosoma. 2009 Oct;118(5):647-63. doi: 10.1007/s00412-009-0225-5. Epub 2009 Jul
8.

The spatial repositioning of adipogenesis genes is correlated with their
expression status in a porcine mesenchymal stem cell adipogenesis model system.

Szczerbal I(1), Foster HA, Bridger JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life
Sciences, 60-637 Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Alterations in the nuclear positioning of chromosomes and specific genes during
differentiation and development have suggested strongly the existence of a
relationship between non-random organization of the genome and its function. In
this study, we have examined the genome organization in interphase nuclei during 
adipogenesis, using the pig as a model organism. We hypothesized that changes in 
the gene expression profile and chromatin remodeling which occur during cellular 
differentiation would elicit repositioning of whole chromosomes, moving specific 
genes on them to different regions of the nucleus. We established an in vitro
adipogenesis differentiation system using mesenchymal stem cells, derived from
porcine bone marrow. The nuclear position of seven adipogenesis genes (PPARG,
SREBF1, FABP4, CEBPA, CEBPB, CREB, and GATA2), two control genes (SOX9 and MYL1),
and six chromosomes carrying these gene loci (SSC4, SSC6, SSC12, SSC13, SSC15,
and SSC17) was determined. We found that during adipogenesis, using the in vitro 
stem cell model system, in contrast to our original hypothesis, the nuclear
position of genes involved in adipogenesis was altered radically with the
up-regulation of gene expression correlating with these genes becoming more
internally located within nuclei. Chromosome territories, containing these genes,
were also found to alter their nuclear position during the in vitro adipogenesis 
model, with the most dramatic repositioning being SSC4 that moved from the
nuclear periphery towards the nuclear interior. We found that during in vitro
adipogenesis chromosome territories decondensed and the genes were found on loops
and projections of chromatin, away from the main body of the chromosomes. From
our data, it appears that the temporal repositioning of genes, emanating away
from chromosomes, during adipogenesis is correlated with gene activity,
supporting models of the involvement of spatial genome repositioning in
regulating gene expression and the nuclear interior being an important region of 
the nucleus for transcription.

PMID: 19585140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Stem Cells. 2009 Aug;27(8):1750-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.100.

A boost of BMP4 accelerates the commitment of human embryonic stem cells to the
endothelial lineage.

Goldman O(1), Feraud O, Boyer-Di Ponio J, Driancourt C, Clay D, Le
Bousse-Kerdiles MC, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Uzan G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U972, Villejuif, France.

Embryoid bodies (EBs) generated during differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) contain vascular-like structures, suggesting that commitment of
mesoderm progenitors into endothelial cells occurs spontaneously. We showed that 
bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), an inducer of mesoderm, accelerates the peak
expression of CD133/kinase insert domain-containing receptor (KDR) and CD144/KDR.
Because the CD133(+)KDR(+) population could represent endothelial progenitors, we
sorted them at day 7 and cultured them in endothelial medium. These cells were,
however, unable to differentiate into endothelial cells. Under standard
conditions, the CD144(+)KDR(+) population represents up to 10% of the total cells
at day 12. In culture, these cells, if sorted, give rise to a homogeneous
population with a morphology typical of endothelial cells and express endothelial
markers. These endothelial cells derived from the day 12 sorted population were
functional, as assessed by different in vitro assays. When EBs were stimulated by
BMP4, the CD144(+)KDR(+) peak was shifted to day 7. Most of these cells, however,
were CD31(-), becoming CD31(+) in culture. They then expressed von Willebrand
factor and were functional. This suggests that, initially, the BMP4-boosted day
7, CD144(+)KDR(+)CD31(-) population represents immature endothelial cells that
differentiate into mature endothelial cells in culture. The expression of OCT3/4,
a marker of immaturity for hESCs decreases during EB differentiation, decreasing 
faster following BMP4 induction. We also show that BMP4 inhibits the global
expression of GATA2 and RUNX1, two transcription factors involved in
hemangioblast formation, at day 7 and day 12.

PMID: 19544443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2477-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.034546.

Insm1 (IA-1) is an essential component of the regulatory network that specifies
monoaminergic neuronal phenotypes in the vertebrate hindbrain.

Jacob J(1), Storm R, Castro DS, Milton C, Pla P, Guillemot F, Birchmeier C,
Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London
NW7 1AA, UK. jjacob@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Monoaminergic neurons include the physiologically important central serotonergic 
and noradrenergic subtypes. Here, we identify the zinc-finger transcription
factor, Insm1, as a crucial mediator of the differentiation of both subtypes, and
in particular the acquisition of their neurotransmitter phenotype. Insm1 is
expressed in hindbrain progenitors of monoaminergic neurons as they exit the cell
cycle, in a pattern that partially overlaps with the expression of the proneural 
factor Ascl1. Consistent with this, a conserved cis-regulatory sequence
associated with Insm1 is bound by Ascl1 in the hindbrain, and Ascl1 is essential 
for the expression of Insm1 in the ventral hindbrain. In Insm1-null mutant mice, 
the expression of the serotonergic fate determinants Pet1, Lmx1b and Gata2 is
markedly downregulated. Nevertheless, serotonergic precursors begin to
differentiate in Insm1 mutants, but fail to produce serotonin because of a
failure to activate expression of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (Tph2), the key enzyme
of serotonin biosynthesis. We find that both Insm1 and Ascl1 coordinately specify
Tph2 expression. In brainstem noradrenergic centres of Insm1 mutants, expression 
of tyrosine hydroxylase is delayed in the locus coeruleus and is markedly
deficient in the medullary noradrenergic nuclei. However, Insm1 is dispensable
for the expression of a second key noradrenergic biosynthetic enzyme, dopamine
beta-hydroxylase, which is instead regulated by Ascl1. Thus, Insm1 regulates the 
synthesis of distinct monoaminergic neurotransmitters by acting combinatorially
with, or independently of, Ascl1 in specific monoaminergic populations.

PMCID: PMC2729354
PMID: 19542360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(16):4376-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01330-08. Epub 2009 Jun 
15.

Increased c-Jun expression and reduced GATA2 expression promote aberrant
monocytic differentiation induced by activating PTPN11 mutants.

Yang Z(1), Kondo T, Voorhorst CS, Nabinger SC, Ndong L, Yin F, Chan EM, Yu M,
Würstlin O, Kratz CP, Niemeyer CM, Flotho C, Hashino E, Chan RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is characterized by myelomonocytic cell
overproduction and commonly bears activating mutations in PTPN11. Murine
hematopoietic progenitors expressing activating Shp2 undergo myelomonocytic
differentiation, despite being subjected to conditions that normally support only
mast cells. Evaluation of hematopoietic-specific transcription factor expression 
indicates reduced GATA2 and elevated c-Jun in mutant Shp2-expressing progenitors.
We hypothesized that mutant Shp2-induced Ras hyperactivation promotes c-Jun
phosphorylation and constitutive c-Jun expression, permitting, as a coactivator
of PU.1, excessive monocytic differentiation and reduced GATA2. Hematopoietic
progenitors expressing activating Shp2 demonstrate enhanced macrophage CFU
(CFU-M) compared to that of wild-type Shp2-expressing cells. Treatment with the
JNK inhibitor SP600125 or cotransduction with GATA2 normalizes activating
Shp2-generated CFU-M. However, cotransduction of DeltaGATA2 (lacking the
C-terminal zinc finger, needed to bind PU.1) fails to normalize CFU-M. NIH 3T3
cells expressing Shp2E76K produce higher levels of luciferase expression directed
by the macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (MCSFR) promoter, which
utilizes c-Jun as a coactivator of PU.1. Coimmunoprecipitation demonstrates
increased c-Jun-PU.1 complexes in mutant Shp2-expressing hematopoietic
progenitors, while chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates increased c-Jun
binding to the c-Jun promoter and an increased c-Jun-PU.1 complex at the Mcsfr
promoter. Furthermore, JMML progenitors express higher levels of c-JUN than
healthy controls, substantiating the disease relevance of these mechanistic
findings.

PMCID: PMC2725726
PMID: 19528235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;27(9):2153-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.151.

Gfi-1B promoter remains associated with active chromatin marks throughout
erythroid differentiation of human primary progenitor cells.

Laurent B(1), Randrianarison-Huetz V, Kadri Z, Roméo PH, Porteu F, Duménil D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Growth Factor Independent-1B (Gfi-1B) is a transcriptional repressor that plays
critical roles in the control of erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis. Gfi-1B
expression was described to be repressed by an autoregulatory feedback control
loop. Here, we show that Gfi-1 transcription is positively regulated early after 
induction of erythroid differentiation and remains highly active to late
erythroblasts. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in CD34+ cells from
human cord blood, we found that Gfi-1 and GATA-2 in immature progenitors and then
Gfi-1B and GATA-1 in erythroblasts are bound to the Gfi-1B promoter as well as to
the promoter of c-myc, a known Gfi-1B target gene. Surprisingly, this
Gfi-1/GATA-2-Gfi-1B/GATA-1 switch observed at erythroblast stages is associated
to an increase in the Gfi-1B transcription whereas it triggers repression of
c-myc transcription. Accordingly, analysis of chromatin modification patterns
shows that HDAC, CoREST, and LSD1 are recruited to the c-myc promoter leading to 
appearance of repressive chromatin marks. In contrast, the Gfi-1B promoter
remains associated with a transcriptionally active chromatin configuration as
highlighted by an increase in histone H3 acetylation and concomitant release of
the LSD1 and CoREST corepressors. The repressive function of Gfi-1B therefore
depends on the nature of the proteins recruited to the target gene promoters and 
on chromatin modifications. We conclude that Gfi-1B behaves as a
lineage-affiliated gene with an open chromatin configuration in multipotent
progenitors and sustained activation as cells progress throughout erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2962905
PMID: 19522008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):983-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-207944. Epub 2009
Jun 2.

Graded repression of PU.1/Sfpi1 gene transcription by GATA factors regulates
hematopoietic cell fate.

Chou ST(1), Khandros E, Bailey LC, Nichols KE, Vakoc CR, Yao Y, Huang Z, Crispino
JD, Hardison RC, Blobel GA, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA.

GATA-1 and PU.1 are essential hematopoietic transcription factors that control
erythromegakaryocytic and myelolymphoid differentiation, respectively. These
proteins antagonize each other through direct physical interaction to repress
alternate lineage programs. We used immortalized Gata1(-) erythromegakaryocytic
progenitor cells to study how PU.1/Sfpi1 expression is regulated by GATA-1 and
GATA-2, a related factor that is normally expressed at earlier stages of
hematopoiesis. Both GATA factors bind the PU.1/Sfpi1 gene at 2 highly conserved
regions. In the absence of GATA-1, GATA-2 binding is associated with an
undifferentiated state, intermediate level PU.1/Sfpi1 expression, and low-level
expression of its downstream myeloid target genes. Restoration of GATA-1 function
induces erythromegakaryocytic differentiation. Concomitantly, GATA-1 replaces
GATA-2 at the PU.1/Sfpi1 locus and PU.1/Sfpi1 expression is extinguished. In
contrast, when GATA-1 is not present, shRNA knockdown of GATA-2 increases
PU.1/Sfpi1 expression by 3-fold and reprograms the cells to become macrophages.
Our findings indicate that GATA factors act sequentially to regulate lineage
determination during hematopoiesis, in part by exerting variable repressive
effects at the PU.1/Sfpi1 locus.

PMCID: PMC2721792
PMID: 19491391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Cancer. 2009 Aug 1;125(3):612-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24392.

Gene expression profiling of alpha-radiation-induced rat osteosarcomas:
identification of dysregulated genes involved in radiation-induced tumorigenesis 
of bone.

Daino K(1), Ugolin N, Altmeyer-Morel S, Guilly MN, Chevillard S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Cancérologie Expérimentale, iRCM, DSV, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France.

To better understand the molecular basis of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (OS), 
we performed global gene expression profiling of rat OS tumors induced by the
bone-seeking alpha emitter (238)Pu, and the expression profiles were compared
with those of normal osteoblasts (OB). The expressions of 72 genes were
significantly differentially expressed in the tumors related to OB. These
included genes involved in the cell adhesion (e.g., Podxl, Col18a1, Cd93, Emcn
and Vcl), differentiation, developmental processes (e.g., Hhex, Gata2, P2ry6,
P2rx5, Cited2, Osmr and Igsf10), tumor-suppressor function (e.g., Nme3, Blcap and
Rrm1), Src tyrosine kinase signaling (e.g., Hck, Shf, Arhgap29, Cttn and Akap12),
and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling (e.g., Fzd6, Lzic, Dkk3 and Ctnna1) pathways.
Expression changes of several genes were validated by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR analysis. Notably, all of the identified genes involved in the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway were known or proposed to be negative
regulators of this pathway and were downregulated in the tumors, suggesting the
activation of beta-catenin in radiation-induced OS. By using immunohistochemical 
and immunoblot analyses, constitutive activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway in the tumors was confirmed by observing nuclear and/or
cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin and a decrease in its inactive
(phosphorylated) form. Furthermore, we found a significant reduction in the
levels of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) protein in the tumors
relative to OB. Taken together, these findings provide new insights into the
molecular basis of radiation-induced OS.

PMID: 19444910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Apr;29(4):602-5.

[Spontaneous differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into hematopoietic
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Lin G, Zhao HP, Lu GX.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering of Central South
University, Human Stem Cell Engineering Research Center of China, Changsha
410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the time course of spontaneous differentiation of in
vitro cultured human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into hematopoietic cells to
provide experimental evidence for induction of hematopoietic commitment of hESCs.
METHODS: In human embryoid bodies (hEBs) derived from spontaneous differentiation
of chESC3, a hESC cell line we established previously, the expressions of such
genes as KDR, Bmi1, Scl and gata2 were detected by RT-PCR every other day during 
the 12-day differentiation to monitor the process of the hematopoiesis. The
hematopoietic stem cell marker CD34 was examined using flow cytometry to evaluate
the efficiency of hematopoietic differentiation of the cells on days 6, 8, 10 and
12. The spontaneously differentiated hESCs were seeded in the hematopoietic
colony culture system to study the hematopoietic colony forming ability.
Immunocytochemical staining for CD45 was performed on the hEBs to examine the
emergence of mature hematopoietic cells.
RESULTS: The expressions of the hematopoietic stem cell-related genes KDR and
Bmi-1 were detected in the hESCs, and on days 4 to 6, the two genes were
upregulated with prolonged cuture of the hEBs. Scl and gata2 gene expressions
were detected since 6-8 days of culture and maintained high expressions till day 
12. Flow cytometry revealed a gradual increase in CD34-positive cells in the
culture, with positivity rates on days 6, 8, 10, and 12 of (1.4-/+0.4)%,
(3.4-/+1.3)%, (5.5-/+2.2)%, and (5.1-/+1.7)%, respectively. The numbers of
CD43-positive cell colonies on days 6, 8, 10, and 12 were 0, 7-/+2, 37-/+11, and 
89-/+29 in each 10(5) cells, respectively. Immunocytochemical staining identified
CD45-positive cells on days 10, 12, 15, and 18 in the cell colonies, with the
positive cell numbers of 0, 40.5-/+15.09, 178.6-/+55.89, and 253.0-/+52.04,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The hESCs undergo spontaneous hematopoietic differentiation in 3
stages, including the differentiation into germ layer-specific cells (days 6-8), 
expansion period of the hematopoitic progenitors (days 8-12), and maturation of
the hematopoietic cells (after day 15).

PMID: 19403374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Phytomedicine. 2009 Sep;16(9):864-73. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2009.03.002. Epub
2009 Apr 28.

Berberine increases expression of GATA-2 and GATA-3 during inhibition of
adipocyte differentiation.

Hu Y(1), Davies GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.

It is known that a number of transcription factors are key regulators in the
complex process of adipocyte differentiation including peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and the CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha). Studies have demonstrated that in pre-adipocyte 3T3-L1 cells
constitutive expression of the DNA binding proteins GATA-2 and GATA-3 results in 
protein/protein interactions with C/EBPalpha resulting in down regulation of
PPARgamma and subsequent suppressed adipocyte differentiation with cells trapped 
at the pre-adipocyte stage. Thus it appears that GATA-2 and GATA-3 are of
critical importance in regulating adipocyte differentiation through molecular
interactions with PPARgamma and C/EBPalpha. Recent reports suggest that
berberine, an isoquinoline derivative alkaloid isolated from many medicinal herbs
prevents differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells via a down regulation of PPARgamma and
C/EBPalpha expression. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
berberine on GATA-2 and 3 gene and protein expression levels during
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells. MTT (Methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium
bromide) was used to detect the cytotoxic effects of berberine on the viability
of 3T3-L1 cells during proliferation and differentiation. Differentiation of
3T3-L1 cells was monitored by Oil Red O staining and RT-PCR of PPARgamma and
C/EBPalpha and the expression of GATA-2 and 3 was determined by RT-PCR and
Western Blot. Results show that following treatment with 8microM berberine the
mRNA and protein expression levels of GATA-2 and 3 were elevated and accompanied 
by inhibited adipocyte differentiation. These results may lead to the use of
berberine to target the induction of specific genes such as GATA-2 and GATA-3
which affect adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 19403287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Life Sci. 2009 Jul 3;85(1-2):39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2009.04.008. Epub 2009 May
3.

In vitro development of a hemangioblast from a human embryonic stem cell,
SNUhES#3.

Choi JH(1), Ryu YS, Kim KH, Lee YR, Cha KW, Han IS, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)IRC, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Republic
of Korea.

AIMS: Recent reports demonstrated that a hemangioblast population emerged during 
hematopoietic development in both mouse and human embryonic stem cell (hESC)
differentiation cultures.
MAIN METHODS: In this study, a new uncharacterized hESC line, SNUhES#3, was
studied for its capacity to proliferate with STO cells and differentiate into
hemangioblasts in co-culture with OP9 cells.
KEY FINDINGS: We were able to obtain CD34(+)CD45(-) cells from SNUhES#3 cells
after 12 days of in vitro culture, and this cell population could be maximized to
12.6% of the total. These cells, derived from SNUhES#3, showed the morphology of 
hematopoietic precursor cells and endothelial lineage cells with high efficiency.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed that the
hematopoietic markers CD34, GATA2, and LMO2 were co-expressed with the
endothelial marker CD31 from day 8, whereas ES cell marker OCT4 no longer existed
at an early stage. Moreover, we found that the efficacy of colony forming by
SNUhES#3 cells is better than that of H9 cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings provide evidence that SNUhES#3 cells can be used as 
an established human ESC line, and co-culture with OP9 can induce SNUhES#3 cells 
to differentiate into hemangioblasts, the common precursors of the hematopoietic 
and endothelial lineages.

PMID: 19401206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jun;100(6):990-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01152.x. Epub
2009 Mar 9.

Pathogenetic significance of ecotropic viral integration site-1 in hematological 
malignancies.

Goyama S(1), Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi-1) gene was first identified as a
common locus of retroviral integration in murine leukemia models. In humans,
EVI-1 is located on chromosome 3q26, and rearrangements on chromosome 3q26 often 
activate EVI-1 expression in hematological malignancies. Overexpression of EVI-1 
also occurs with high frequency in leukemia patients without 3q26 abnormalities, 
and importantly, high EVI-1 expression is an independent negative prognostic
indicator irrespective of the presence of 3q26 rearrangements. Recent gene
targeting studies in mice revealed that Evi-1 is preferentially expressed in
hematopoietic stem cells and plays an essential role in proliferation and
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells. In addition, intense attention has been 
focused on the EVI-1 gene complex as retrovirus integration sites because
transcription-activating integrations into the EVI-1 locus confer survival and
self-renewing ability to hematopoietic cells. The experimental results using
animal models suggest that activation of Evi-1 in hematopoietic cells leads to
clonal expansion or dysplastic hematopoiesis, whereas onset of full-blown
leukemia requires cooperative genetic events. EVI-1 possesses diverse functions
as an oncoprotein, including suppression of transforming growth
factor-beta-mediated growth inhibition, upregulation of GATA2, inhibition of the 
Jun kinase pathway, and stimulation of cell growth via activator protein-1. In
this article, we summarize current knowledge regarding the biochemical properties
and biological functions of EVI-1 in normal and malignant hematopoiesis, with
specific focus on its pathogenetic significance in hematological malignancies.

PMID: 19385966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Sep 15;131(1-2):127-36. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.03.007. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Co-culture of carp (Cyprinus carpio) kidney haematopoietic cells with feeder
cells resulting in long-term proliferation of T-cell lineages.

Katakura F(1), Takizawa F, Yoshida M, Yamaguchi T, Araki K, Tomana M, Nakao M,
Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

To characterise fish haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, it is necessary to
develop a culture system that supports proliferation and differentiation of these
cells. In the present study, we established cell lines from various tissues of
carp (Cyprinus carpio) and ginbuna (Carassius auratus langsdorfii). By using
these cell lines, we developed a culture system in which carp haematopoietic
cells proliferated and were successively passaged. Cell lines from carp thymus
(KoT), carp fin (KoF1) and ginbuna thymus (GTS6 and GTS9) were newly established.
In addition to these cell lines, ginbuna fin (CFS) cell lines were also used as
feeder layers. Kidney haematopoietic cells co-cultured with these feeder layers
proliferated rapidly and were passaged over 20 times for more than 60 days. To
characterise the proliferating cells, expression of marker genes for blood cell
development were analysed. In the primary culture, marker genes for
myeloid/erythroid progenitors (gata1), haematopoietic stem cells (gata2),
neutrophils (mpx/mpo), B-cells (IgH) and T-cells (lck, TCRbeta and gata3) were
detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Expression 
of most of the genes disappeared after the third passage, only T-cell marker
genes were highly expressed after passages. These results indicate that multiple 
blood cells developed in the primary culture and then T-cell lineages dominantly 
proliferated after several passages.

PMID: 19375173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genes Cells. 2009 May;14(5):569-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01289.x. Epub
2009 Apr 13.

GATA2-dependent and region-specific regulation of Gata2 transcription in the
mouse midbrain.

Nozawa D(1), Suzuki N, Kobayashi-Osaki M, Pan X, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA2 is expressed in numerous mammalian tissues, including 
neural, hematopoietic, cardiovascular and urogenital systems, and yet it plays
important roles in the regulation of tissue-restricted gene expression. The Gata2
gene itself is also under stringent tissue-specific control and multiple
cis-regulatory domains have been identified in the Gata2 locus. In this study we 
sought out and then examined in detail the domains that regulate Gata2 in the
midbrain. We identified two discrete domains in the Gata2 promoter that direct
midbrain expression; these distal 5H and proximal 2H regulatory domains are
located 3.0 and 1.9 kbp, respectively, upstream of the transcriptional initiation
site. Importantly, both domains contain GATA factor binding sites. Our analyses
further revealed that GATA2 is essential for Gata2 gene expression in the
midbrain, whereas GATA3 is not. Both the 2H and 5H domains have the independent
ability to activate Gata2 gene expression in the midbrain superior colliculus,
whereas the distal-5H domain is additionally capable of activating Gata2
transcription in the inferior colliculus. These results demonstrate that two
distinct regulatory domains contribute to the Gata2 gene expression in the mouse 
midbrain and that Gata2 midbrain transcription is under positive autoregulation.

PMID: 19371385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biotechnol Lett. 2009 Aug;31(8):1173-81. doi: 10.1007/s10529-009-9994-4. Epub
2009 Apr 9.

Identification of trophoblast-specific binding sites for GATA-2 that are
essential for rat placental lactogen-I gene expression.

Kim GS(1), Ko YG, Park OS, Park HJ, Koh PO, Cho KW, Min KS, Seong HH, Won CK, Cho
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Life Science, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyongsang National University, Jinju, Korea.

We identified a 3.4-kb 5'-flanking region of the rPL-I gene and examined its
promoter activity using rat trophoblast Rcho-1 cells. A regulatory element
between base pairs (bp) -2,487 and -2,310 in the 5'-flanking region was essential
for maximum promoter activity of the rPL-I gene. This regulatory element was
further characterized between bp -2,443 to -2,415 and -2,374 to -2,345.
Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis showed that the interaction of nuclear
extract proteins from differentiated Rcho-1 cells was inhibited by competition
with a GATA-like sequence in the promoter, but not by a mutated GATA sequence.
Moreover, the promoter activity of 2487 eLuc containing two novel GATA sites was 
significantly elevated by co-transfection of a GATA-2 expression vector in
proliferating Rcho-1 cells. Our results demonstrate that GATA-2 is involved in
multiple promoter regions to activate the specific expression of the rPL-I gene
in placental tissue.

PMID: 19357811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuron. 2009 Mar 26;61(6):839-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.011.

LMO4 controls the balance between excitatory and inhibitory spinal V2
interneurons.

Joshi K(1), Lee S, Lee B, Lee JW, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Multiple excitatory and inhibitory interneurons form the motor circuit with motor
neurons in the ventral spinal cord. Notch signaling initiates the diversification
of immature V2-interneurons into excitatory V2a-interneurons and inhibitory
V2b-interneurons. Here, we provide a transcriptional regulatory mechanism
underlying their balanced production. LIM-only protein LMO4 controls this binary 
cell fate choice by regulating the activity of V2a- and V2b-specific LIM
complexes inversely. In the spinal cord, LMO4 induces GABAergic V2b-interneurons 
in collaboration with SCL and inhibits Lhx3 from generating glutamatergic
V2a-interneuons. In LMO4;SCL compound mutant embryos, V2a-interneurons increase
markedly at the expense of V2b-interneurons. We further demonstrate that LMO4
nucleates the assembly of a novel LIM-complex containing SCL, Gata2, and NLI.
This complex activates specific enhancers in V2b-genes consisting of binding
sites for SCL and Gata2, thereby promoting V2b-interneuron fate. Thus, LMO4 plays
essential roles in directing a balanced generation of inhibitory and excitatory
neurons in the ventral spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2848494
PMID: 19323994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Leuk Res. 2009 Aug;33(8):1141-3. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.02.025. Epub 2009
Mar 21.

GATA-2 L359 V mutation is exclusively associated with CML progression but not
other hematological malignancies and GATA-2 P250A is a novel single nucleotide
polymorphism.

Zhang SJ(1), Shi JY, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. sujiangzhang@hotmail.com

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) progression is characterized by occurrence of new 
cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities. In the previous study, we have shown the
important role of GATA-2 L359 V mutation in CML progression. To further ascertain
the truth of transcription factor GATA-2 in hematological malignancies, we
expanded our study to GATA-2 full length by directly sequencing and applied
MassARRAY assay into GATA-2 L359 V mutation analysis. Finally, no GATA-2 L359 V
mutation was found in 270 acute myeloid leukemia, 30 myelodysplastic syndrome, 50
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 12 chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 40 CML chronic
phase and 286 BCR/ABL negative myeloproliferative disorders except CML blast
crisis. A new variation of GATA-2 resulted in P250A change was identified, which 
was not found to have statistical difference between patients with hematological 
malignancies and healthy control. Hence, we concluded GATA-2 L359 V is
exclusively associated with CML progression but not other hematological
malignancies and P250A is a new single nucleotide polymorphism.

PMID: 19304323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):13099-109. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807307200. Epub 2009
Mar 10.

GATA transcription factors regulate the expression of the human
eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (RNase 2) gene.

Qiu Z(1), Dyer KD, Xie Z, Rådinger M, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 have been implicated in promoting
differentiation of eosinophilic leukocytes. In this study, we examined the roles 
of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in activating transcription of the secretory ribonuclease,
the eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN/RNase 2). Augmented expression of both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 was detected in eosinophil promyelocyte HL-60 clone 15 cells in
response to biochemical differentiation with butyric acid. Deletion or mutation
of one or both of the two consensus GATA-binding sites in the extended 1000-bp 5'
promoter of the EDN gene resulted in profound reduction in reporter gene
activity. Antibody-augmented electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses indicate that GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins bind to
both functional GATA consensus sequences in the EDN promoter. Interestingly, RNA 
silencing of GATA-1 alone had no impact on EDN expression; silencing of GATA-2
resulted in diminished expression of EDN, and also diminished expression of
GATA-1 in both butyric acid-induced HL-60 clone 15 cells and in differentiating
human eosinophils derived from CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitors. Likewise,
overexpression of GATA-2 in uninduced HL-60 clone 15 cells resulted in augmented 
transcription of both EDN and GATA-1. Taken together, our data suggest that
GATA-2 functions directly via interactions with the EDN promoter and also
indirectly, via its ability to regulate the expression of GATA-1 in
differentiating eosinophils and eosinophil cell lines.

PMCID: PMC2676042
PMID: 19279013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nature. 2009 Feb 26;457(7233):1103-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07765.

A mechanosensitive transcriptional mechanism that controls angiogenesis.

Mammoto A(1), Connor KM, Mammoto T, Yung CW, Huh D, Aderman CM, Mostoslavsky G,
Smith LE, Ingber DE.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Program, Department of Pathology & Surgery, Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Angiogenesis is controlled by physical interactions between cells and
extracellular matrix as well as soluble angiogenic factors, such as VEGF.
However, the mechanism by which mechanical signals integrate with other
microenvironmental cues to regulate neovascularization remains unknown. Here we
show that the Rho inhibitor, p190RhoGAP (also known as GRLF1), controls capillary
network formation in vitro in human microvascular endothelial cells and retinal
angiogenesis in vivo by modulating the balance of activities between two
antagonistic transcription factors, TFII-I (also known as GTF2I) and GATA2, that 
govern gene expression of the VEGF receptor VEGFR2 (also known as KDR). Moreover,
this new angiogenesis signalling pathway is sensitive to extracellular matrix
elasticity as well as soluble VEGF. This is, to our knowledge, the first known
functional cross-antagonism between transcription factors that controls tissue
morphogenesis, and that responds to both mechanical and chemical cues.

PMCID: PMC2708674
PMID: 19242469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):e1-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162958. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

A HaemAtlas: characterizing gene expression in differentiated human blood cells.

Watkins NA(1), Gusnanto A, de Bono B, De S, Miranda-Saavedra D, Hardie DL,
Angenent WG, Attwood AP, Ellis PD, Erber W, Foad NS, Garner SF, Isacke CM, Jolley
J, Koch K, Macaulay IC, Morley SL, Rendon A, Rice KM, Taylor N, Thijssen-Timmer
DC, Tijssen MR, van der Schoot CE, Wernisch L, Winzer T, Dudbridge F, Buckley CD,
Langford CF, Teichmann S, Göttgens B, Ouwehand WH; Bloodomics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, National Health Service
Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, United Kingdom. naw23@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):4479-80.

Hematopoiesis is a carefully controlled process that is regulated by complex
networks of transcription factors that are, in part, controlled by signals
resulting from ligand binding to cell-surface receptors. To further understand
hematopoiesis, we have compared gene expression profiles of human erythroblasts, 
megakaryocytes, B cells, cytotoxic and helper T cells, natural killer cells,
granulocytes, and monocytes using whole genome microarrays. A bioinformatics
analysis of these data was performed focusing on transcription factors,
immunoglobulin superfamily members, and lineage-specific transcripts. We observed
that the numbers of lineage-specific genes varies by 2 orders of magnitude,
ranging from 5 for cytotoxic T cells to 878 for granulocytes. In addition, we
have identified novel coexpression patterns for key transcription factors
involved in hematopoiesis (eg, GATA3-GFI1 and GATA2-KLF1). This study represents 
the most comprehensive analysis of gene expression in hematopoietic cells to date
and has identified genes that play key roles in lineage commitment and cell
function. The data, which are freely accessible, will be invaluable for future
studies on hematopoiesis and the role of specific genes and will also aid the
understanding of the recent genome-wide association studies.

PMCID: PMC2680378
PMID: 19228925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Tissue Res. 2009 Apr;336(1):11-20. doi: 10.1007/s00441-008-0743-0. Epub 2009
Feb 18.

Characterization of primary neurospheres generated from mouse ventral rostral
hindbrain.

Osterberg N(1), Roussa E.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Neuroanatomy, Georg-August-University Goettingen, Kreuzbergring
36, 37075, Goettingen, Germany. nosterb@gwdg.de

Serotonergic (5-HT) neurons of the reticular formation play a key role in the
modulation of behavior, and their dysfunction is associated with severe
neurological and psychiatric disorders, such as depression and schizophrenia.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the differentiation of the
progenitor cells and the specification of the 5-HT phenotype are not fully
understood. A primary neurosphere cell-culture system from mouse ventral rostral 
hindbrain at embryonic day 12 was therefore established. The generated primary
neurospheres comprised progenitor cells and fully differentiated neurons.
Bromodeoxyuridine incorporation experiments in combination with
immunocytochemistry for neural markers revealed the proliferation capacity of the
neural multipotent hindbrain progenitors within neurospheres and their ability to
differentiate toward the neuronal lineage and serotonergic phenotype. Gene
expression analysis by reverse transcription with the polymerase chain reaction
showed that the neurospheres were regionally specified, as reflected by the
expression of the transcription factors Gata2 and Pet1. Treatment of dissociated 
primary neurospheres with exogenous Shh significantly increased the number of
5-HT-immunopositive cells compared with controls, whereas neutralization of
endogenous Shh significantly decreased the number of 5-HT neurons. Thus, the
primary neurosphere culture system presented here allows the expansion of
hindbrain progenitor cells and the experimental control of their differentiation 
toward the serotonergic phenotype. This culture system is therefore a useful
model for in vitro studies dealing with the development of 5-HT neurons.

PMCID: PMC2714903
PMID: 19224248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Oncol. 2009 Mar;34(3):697-705.

The Phox2 pathway is differentially expressed in neuroblastoma tumors, but no
mutations were found in the candidate tumor suppressor gene PHOX2A.

Wilzén A(1), Nilsson S, Sjöberg RM, Kogner P, Martinsson T, Abel F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Gothenburg University, S-416 85 Gothenburg,
Sweden.

Neuroblastoma (NB), a tumor of the sympathetic nervous system, is the most common
solid tumor in childhood. By microarray expression analysis (Affymetrix HU133A)
important players in the noradrenalin biosynthesis pathway (DBH, DDC, GATA2,
GATA3, PHOX2A, PHOX2B, SLC6A2 SLC18A1 and TH) were found to be among the top
ranked genes in showing lower expression in unfavorable NB tumor types as
compared to favorable ones. By quantitative PCR with TaqMan, this result was
significantly verified for all transcripts (p<0.05, one-tailed) in a new set of
11 primary NB tumors (5 favorable vs. 6 unfavorable). PHOX2A, a downstream target
of Phox2b, was found to be the sixth ranked gene from the microarray gene list.
Since the PHOX2A gene is localized in a tumor suppressor candidate region at 11q,
we screened this gene for mutations by DNA sequencing in 47 tumors of different
stages. However, no critical changes were found that could support its role in
tumor development or progression. Overall, the findings in this study either
suggest that expression of this pathway could be a predictive differentiation
marker of NB tumors, or our results could also imply that the noradrenalin
biosynthesis pathway is involved in tumor pathogenesis.

PMID: 19212675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Leukemia. 2009 Jul;23(7):1270-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.13. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 binding to 3' enhancer of WT1 gene is essential for its
transcription in acute leukemia and solid tumor cell lines.

Furuhata A(1), Murakami M, Ito H, Gao S, Yoshida K, Sobue S, Kikuchi R, Iwasaki
T, Takagi A, Kojima T, Suzuki M, Abe A, Naoe T, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Although oncogenic functions and the clinical significance of Wilms tumor 1 (WT1)
have been extensively studied in acute leukemia, the regulatory mechanism of its 
transcription still remains to be determined. We found a significant correlation 
among the amounts of WT1, GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNAs from leukemia and solid tumor
cell lines. Overexpression and small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection
experiments of GATA-1 and GATA-2 showed that these GATA transcription factors
could induce WT1 expression. Promoter analysis showed that the 5' promoter did
not explain the different WT1 mRNA levels between cell lines. The 3' enhancer,
especially the distal sites out of six putative GATA binding sites located within
the region, but not the intron 3 enhancer, were essential for the WT1 mRNA level.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed both GATA-1 and GATA-2 bound
to these GATA sites. Besides acute leukemia cell lines, solid tumor cell lines
including, TYK-nu-cPr also showed a high level of WT1 mRNA. We showed that GATA-2
expression is a determinant of WT1 mRNA expression in both TYK-nu-cPr cells and
HL60 cells without GATA-1 expression. Taken together, these results suggest that 
GATA-1 and/or GATA-2 binding to a GATA site of the 3' enhancer of WT1 played an
important role in WT1 gene expression.

PMID: 19212333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5783-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-187757. Epub 2009
Jan 26.

Expression of the leukemia oncogene Lmo2 is controlled by an array of
tissue-specific elements dispersed over 100 kb and bound by Tal1/Lmo2, Ets, and
Gata factors.

Landry JR(1), Bonadies N, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Wilson NK, Oram SH, Janes M,
Piltz S, Hammett M, Carter J, Hamilton T, Donaldson IJ, Lacaud G, Frampton J,
Follows G, Kouskoff V, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5693.

The Lmo2 gene encodes a transcriptional cofactor critical for the development of 
hematopoietic stem cells. Ectopic LMO2 expression causes leukemia in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients and severe combined immunodeficiency
patients undergoing retroviral gene therapy. Tightly controlled Lmo2 expression
is therefore essential, yet no comprehensive analysis of Lmo2 regulation has been
published so far. By comparative genomics, we identified 17 highly conserved
noncoding elements, 9 of which revealed specific acetylation marks in
chromatin-immunoprecipitation and microarray (ChIP-chip) assays performed across 
250 kb of the Lmo2 locus in 11 cell types covering different stages of
hematopoietic differentiation. All candidate regulatory regions were tested in
transgenic mice. An extended LMO2 proximal promoter fragment displayed strong
endothelial activity, while the distal promoter showed weak forebrain activity.
Eight of the 15 distal candidate elements functioned as enhancers, which together
recapitulated the full expression pattern of Lmo2, directing expression to
endothelium, hematopoietic cells, tail, and forebrain. Interestingly, distinct
combinations of specific distal regulatory elements were required to extend
endothelial activity of the LMO2 promoter to yolk sac or fetal liver
hematopoietic cells. Finally, Sfpi1/Pu.1, Fli1, Gata2, Tal1/Scl, and Lmo2 were
shown to bind to and transactivate Lmo2 hematopoietic enhancers, thus identifying
key upstream regulators and positioning Lmo2 within hematopoietic regulatory
networks.

PMID: 19171877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Blood. 2009 Mar 19;113(12):2661-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-161117. Epub 2009 
Jan 23.

High GATA-2 expression inhibits human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
function by effects on cell cycle.

Tipping AJ(1), Pina C, Castor A, Hong D, Rodrigues NP, Lazzari L, May GE,
Jacobsen SE, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Evidence suggests the transcription factor GATA-2 is a critical regulator of
murine hematopoietic stem cells. Here, we explore the relation between GATA-2 and
cell proliferation and show that inducing GATA-2 increases quiescence (G(0)
residency) of murine and human hematopoietic cells. In human cord blood,
quiescent fractions (CD34(+)CD38(-)Hoechst(lo)Pyronin Y(lo)) express more GATA-2 
than cycling counterparts. Enforcing GATA-2 expression increased quiescence of
cord blood cells, reducing proliferation and performance in long-term
culture-initiating cell and colony-forming cell (CFC) assays. Gene expression
analysis places GATA-2 upstream of the quiescence regulator MEF, but enforcing
MEF expression does not prevent GATA-2-conferred quiescence, suggesting
additional regulators are involved. Although known quiescence regulators
p21(CIP1) and p27(KIP1) do not appear to be responsible, enforcing GATA-2 reduced
expression of regulators of cell cycle such as CCND3, CDK4, and CDK6. Enforcing
GATA-2 inhibited human hematopoiesis in vivo: cells with highest exogenous
expression (GATA-2(hi)) failed to contribute to hematopoiesis in nonobese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficient (NOD-SCID) mice, whereas GATA-2(lo)
cells contributed with delayed kinetics and low efficiency, with reduced
expression of Ki-67. Thus, GATA-2 activity inhibits cell cycle in vitro and in
vivo, highlighting GATA-2 as a molecular entry point into the transcriptional
program regulating quiescence in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 19168794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 15;327(2):478-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.034. Epub 2009 
Jan 3.

Cell communication with the neural plate is required for induction of neural
markers by BMP inhibition: evidence for homeogenetic induction and implications
for Xenopus animal cap and chick explant assays.

Linker C(1), De Almeida I, Papanayotou C, Stower M, Sabado V, Ghorani E, Streit
A, Mayor R, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street (Anatomy Building), London WC1E 6BT, UK. claudia.linker@cancer.org.uk

In Xenopus, the animal cap is very sensitive to BMP antagonists, which result in 
neuralization. In chick, however, only cells at the border of the neural plate
can be neuralized by BMP inhibition. Here we compare the two systems. BMP
antagonists can induce neural plate border markers in both ventral Xenopus
epidermis and non-neural chick epiblast. However, BMP antagonism can only
neuralize ectodermal cells when the BMP-inhibited cells form a continuous trail
connecting them to the neural plate or its border, suggesting that homeogenetic
neuralizing factors can only travel between BMP-inhibited cells. Xenopus animal
cap explants contain cells fated to contribute to the neural plate border and
even to the anterior neural plate, explaining why they are so easily neuralized
by BMP-inhibition. Furthermore, chick explants isolated from embryonic epiblast
behave like Xenopus animal caps and express border markers. We propose that the
animal cap assay in Xenopus and explant assays in the chick are unsuitable for
studying instructive signals in neural induction.

PMCID: PMC2713608
PMID: 19162002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Allergol Int. 2009 Mar;58(1):21-8. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.08-RAI-0067. Epub
2009 Jan 25.

Origin of basophils and mast cells.

Arinobu Y(1), Iwasaki H, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital,
Fukuoka, Japan. yarinobu@cancer.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Basophils and mast cells are major players in the progression of allergic
disorders. Although both cell types originate from hematopoietic stem cells,
their lineage commitment pathways and mechanisms have been unsolved issues in
hematology. Recent advances in the multicolor FACS system enable the prospective 
isolation of progenitor populations whose readouts are restricted to basophil
and/or mast cell lineages. These newly-isolated progenitor subsets are helpful to
understand the developmental machinery of basophil and mast cell lineages,
leading to the possible exploitation of a novel therapeutic strategy for allergic
and autoimmune disorders. In this review, we summarize the recent progress in our
understanding of the basophil/mast cell ontogeny on a cellular basis.

PMID: 19153533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Steroids. 2009 Apr-May;74(4-5):441-8. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2008.12.011. Epub
2008 Dec 30.

Estradiol promotes pituitary cell proliferation and gonadotroph differentiation
at different doses and with different mechanisms in chick embryo.

Wu YJ(1), Chen da W, Liu JL, Zhang JH, Luo HS, Cui S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.

Estrogens are known to play a role in the feedback regulation of pituitary
gonadotropin secretion in adults. However, it is still unknown whether estrogens 
are involved in promoting pituitary development. In this study, we selected chick
embryo as the animal model and microinjected different doses of estradiol (E2) at
stage E27-28, which was when endogenous E2 was not detected. First, the results
demonstrated that E2 at different doses promoted pituitary cell proliferation and
gonadotroph differentiation. Lower doses of E2 had a more significant effect on
cell proliferation, while higher doses of E2 were required for luteinizing
hormone (LH) secreting cell differentiation. Furthermore, the levels of early
growth response protein 1 (Egr-1) and GATA2 mRNAs were also elevated with E2
treatment at a higher dose than that required to increase the level of
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in vitro. To investigate whether
estrogen receptors (ERs) mediate these effects of estradiol, the ER antagonist
ICI 182,780 was added, and the results showed that ICI 182,780 did not modify the
enhancing effects of E2 on cell proliferation; however, it inhibited the
stimulatory effect of E2 on LH secreting cell differentiation. These results
suggest that E2 at different doses promotes pituitary cell proliferation and
gonadotroph differentiation with different mechanisms. Our results are important 
to further understanding of the physiological and pharmacological functions and
related mechanisms of estrogens and their receptors, although the related
mechanism need to be elucidated in future studies.

PMID: 19150621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7719-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807489200. Epub 2009 
Jan 14.

FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha imposes eosinophil lineage commitment on hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells.

Fukushima K(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Tokunaga M, Yasumi M, Satoh Y, Shibayama H, 
Tanaka H, Iwama A, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Although leukemogenic tyrosine kinases (LTKs) activate a common set of downstream
molecules, the phenotypes of leukemia caused by LTKs are rather distinct. Here we
report the molecular mechanism underlying the development of hypereosinophilic
syndrome/chronic eosinophilic leukemia by FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha. When introduced into
c-Kit(high)Sca-1(+)Lineage(-) cells, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha conferred
cytokine-independent growth on these cells and enhanced their self-renewal,
whereas it did not immortalize common myeloid progenitors in in vitro replating
assays and transplantation assays. Importantly, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha but not
TEL-PDGFRbeta enhanced the development of Gr-1(+)IL-5Ralpha(+) eosinophil
progenitors from c-Kit(high)Sca-1(+)Lineage(-) cells. FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha also
promoted eosinophil development from common myeloid progenitors. Furthermore,
when expressed in megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors and common lymphoid
progenitors, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha not only inhibited differentiation toward
erythroid cells, megakaryocytes, and B-lymphocytes but aberrantly developed
eosinophil progenitors from megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors and common
lymphoid progenitors. As for the mechanism of FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-induced
eosinophil development, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha was found to more intensely activate
MEK1/2 and p38(MAPK) than TEL-PDGFRbeta. In addition, a MEK1/2 inhibitor and a
p38(MAPK) inhibitor suppressed FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-promoted eosinophil development.
Also, reverse transcription-PCR analysis revealed that FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha
augmented the expression of C/EBPalpha, GATA-1, and GATA-2, whereas it hardly
affected PU.1 expression. In addition, short hairpin RNAs against C/EBPalpha and 
GATA-2 and GATA-3KRR, which can act as a dominant-negative form over all GATA
members, inhibited FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-induced eosinophil development. Furthermore,
FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha and its downstream Ras inhibited PU.1 activity in luciferase
assays. Together, these results indicate that FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha enhances
eosinophil development by modifying the expression and activity of
lineage-specific transcription factors through Ras/MEK and p38(MAPK) cascades.

PMCID: PMC2658066
PMID: 19147501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9458-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809498200. Epub 2009
Jan 9.

Re-expression of GATA2 cooperates with peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma depletion to revert the adipocyte phenotype.

Schupp M(1), Cristancho AG, Lefterova MI, Hanniman EA, Briggs ER, Steger DJ,
Qatanani M, Curtin JC, Schug J, Ochsner SA, McKenna NJ, Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Univ. of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 700 CRB, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia,
PA 19104-6149, USA.

Nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) is required 
for adipocyte differentiation, but its role in mature adipocytes is less clear.
Here, we report that knockdown of PPARgamma expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes
returned the expression of most adipocyte genes to preadipocyte levels.
Consistently, down-regulated but not up-regulated genes showed strong enrichment 
of PPARgamma binding. Surprisingly, not all adipocyte genes were reversed, and
the adipocyte morphology was maintained for an extended period after PPARgamma
depletion. To explain this, we focused on transcriptional regulators whose
adipogenic regulation was not reversed upon PPARgamma depletion. We identified
GATA2, a transcription factor whose down-regulation early in adipogenesis is
required for preadipocyte differentiation and whose levels remain low after
PPARgamma knockdown. Forced expression of GATA2 in mature adipocytes complemented
PPARgamma depletion and impaired adipocyte functionality with a more
preadipocyte-like gene expression profile. Ectopic expression of GATA2 in adipose
tissue in vivo had a similar effect on adipogenic gene expression. These results 
suggest that PPARgamma-independent down-regulation of GATA2 prevents reversion of
mature adipocytes after PPARgamma depletion.

PMCID: PMC2666598
PMID: 19136559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Toxicol Pathol. 2008 Dec;36(7):958-71. doi: 10.1177/0192623308327121.

Effects of p38 MAP kinase inhibitors on the differentiation and maturation of
erythroid progenitors.

Dalmas DA(1), Tierney LA, Zhang C, Narayanan PK, Boyce RW, Schwartz LW, Frazier
KS, Scicchitano MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Assessment, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia,
Pennsylvania 19406, USA. deidre.a.dalmas@gsk.com

In rodents, p38 MAP kinase inhibitors (p38is) induce bone marrow hypocellularity 
and reduce reticulocyte and erythrocyte counts. To identify target cell
populations affected, a differentiating primary liquid erythroid culture system
using sca-1(+)cells from mouse bone marrow was developed and challenged with
p38is SB-203580, SB-226882, and SB-267030. Drug-related alterations in genes
involved at different stages of erythropoiesis, cell-surface antigen expression
(CSAE), burst-forming unit erythroid (BFU-E) colony formation, and cellular
morphology (CM), growth (CG), and viability were evaluated. CSAE, CM, and
decreases in BFU-E formation indicated delayed maturation, while CG and viability
were unaffected. Terminal differentiation was delayed until day 14 versus day 7
in controls. CSAE demonstrated higher percentages of sca-1(+)cells after day 2
and reduced percentages of ter119(+) cells after day 7 in all treated cultures.
Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction revealed a transient
delay in expression of genes involved at early, intermediate, and late stages of 
erythropoiesis, followed by rebound expression at later time points. Results
demonstrate p38is do not irreversibly inhibit erythrogenesis but induce a
potency-dependent, transient delay in erythropoietic activity. The delay in
activity is suggestive of effects on sca-1(+)bone marrow cells caused by
alterations in expression of genes related to erythroid commitment and
differentiation resulting in delayed maturation.

PMID: 19126791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Dec;47(4):422-30. doi:
10.1016/S1028-4559(09)60010-3.

Genetic network analysis of human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/precursor cells.

Chang SJ(1), Huang TS, Wang KL, Wang TY, Yang YC, Chang MD, Wu YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, and
National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Somatic CD34+ hematopoietic stem/precursor cells (HSPCs) give rise to 
hematopoietic cells and endothelial cells and have been used in clinical
applications. Understanding the genes responsible for stemness and how they
interact with each other will help us to manipulate these cells more efficiently 
in the future.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed microarray analysis on human CD34+ HSPCs and 
on two different progeny cell types, i.e. microvascular endothelial cells and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Systems biology and advanced bioinformatics
tools were used to help clarify the genetic networks associated with these stem
cell genes.
RESULTS: We identified CD34+ HSPC genes and found that they were involved in
critical biologic processes such as cell cycle regulation, chromosome
organization, and DNA repair. We also identified a novel precursor gene cluster
on chromosome 19p13.3. Analysis of HSPC-enriched genes using systems biology
tools revealed a complex genetic network functioning in CD34+ cells, in which
several genes acted as hubs to maintain the stability (such as GATA1) or
connectivity (such as hepatic growth factor) of the whole network.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the foundation for a more detailed understanding 
of CD34+ HSPCs.

PMID: 19126509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Dec;1150:59-60. doi: 10.1196/annals.1447.008.

Lowered expressions of the NF-kappaB family members in dendritic cells from NOD
mice are associated with a reduced expression of GATA-2.

Takahashi K(1), Satoh J, Oka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Iwate Medical University, Morioka,
Japan. kazumat@iwate-med.ac.jp

In type 1 diabetes, dendritic cells (DCs) display defective phenotype and
function and possibly play crucial roles in the pathogenesis of this disease. In 
the present study, we compared transcription profiles of CD11c(+) bone marrow
(BM)-derived DCs from NOD mice with those from NON mice, focusing on the
NF-kappaB/Rel family members and associated molecules. The BMDCs from NOD mice
displayed reduced mRNA expressions of NF-kappaB components, p65, p50, p52, and
RelB, compared to NON mice: the proportions of each molecule relative to those of
NON DCs were 53.9, 54.1, 54.0, and 37.0%, respectively, which were accompanied
with lowered expressions of downstream immunomodulatory molecules, including
IL-6, CD80, CD86, 4-1BB, and CD40. The reduction of NF-kappaB components possibly
underlies the defective phenotype and function of DCs from NOD mice, and could
predispose to autoimmunity.

PMID: 19120268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 20;284(8):4978-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807329200. Epub 2008
Dec 23.

Context-dependent function of regulatory elements and a switch in chromatin
occupancy between GATA3 and GATA2 regulate Gata2 transcription during trophoblast
differentiation.

Ray S(1), Dutta D, Rumi MA, Kent LN, Soares MJ, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology and the Division of Cancer & Developmental
Biology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

GATA transcription factors are important regulators of tissue-specific gene
expression during development. GATA2 and GATA3 have been implicated in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific genes. However, the regulatory mechanisms of
GATA2 expression in trophoblast cells are poorly understood. In this study, we
demonstrate that Gata2 is transcriptionally induced during trophoblast giant
cell-specific differentiation. Transcriptional induction is associated with
displacement of GATA3-dependent nucleoprotein complexes by GATA2-dependent
nucleoprotein complexes at two regulatory regions, the -3.9- and +9.5-kb regions,
of the mouse Gata2 locus. Analyses with reporter genes showed that, in
trophoblast cells, -3.9- and +9.5-kb regions function as transcriptional
enhancers in GATA motif independent and dependent fashions, respectively. We also
found that knockdown of GATA3 by RNA interference induces GATA2 in
undifferentiated trophoblast cells. Interestingly, three other known GATA
motif-dependent Gata2 regulatory elements, the -1.8-, -2.8-, and -77-kb regions, 
which are important to regulate Gata2 in hematopoietic cells are not occupied by 
GATA factors in trophoblast cells. These elements do not show any enhancer
activity and also possess inaccessible chromatin structure in trophoblast cells
indicating a context-dependent function. Our results indicate that GATA3 directly
represses Gata2 in undifferentiated trophoblast cells, and a switch in chromatin 
occupancy between GATA3 and GATA2 (GATA3/GATA2 switch) induces transcription
during trophoblast differentiation. We predict that this GATA3/GATA2 switch is an
important mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of other
trophoblast-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2643515
PMID: 19106099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Mar;42(3):225-37. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0099. Epub 2008 Dec 
22.

Functions of PIT1 in GATA2-dependent transactivation of the thyrotropin beta
promoter.

Kashiwabara Y(1), Sasaki S, Matsushita A, Nagayama K, Ohba K, Iwaki H, Matsunaga 
H, Suzuki S, Misawa H, Ishizuka K, Oki Y, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, Hamamatsu,
Shizuoka, Japan.

Thyrotropin (TSH) is a heterodimer consisting of alpha and beta chains, and the
beta chain (TSHbeta) is specific to TSH. The coexistence of two transcription
factors, PIT1 and GATA2, is known to be essential for TSHbeta expression. Using
kidney-derived CV1 cells, we investigated the role of PIT1 in the expression of
Tshb gene. GATA2 Zn finger domain, which is known to recognize GATA-responsive
elements (GATA-REs), is essential for cooperation by PIT1. Transactivation of
TSHbeta promoter requires PIT1-binding site upstream to GATA-REs (PIT1-US), and
the spacing between PIT1-US and GATA-REs strictly determines the cooperation
between PIT1 and GATA2. Moreover, truncation of the sequence downstream to
GATA-REs enabled GATA2 to transactivate the TSHbeta promoter without PIT1. The
deleted region (nt -82/-52) designated as a suppressor region (SR) was considered
to inhibit transactivation by GATA2. The cooperation of PIT1 with GATA2 was not
conventional synergism but rather counteracted SR-induced suppression
(derepression). The minimal sequence for SR was mapped to the 9 bp sequence
downstream to GATA-REs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay suggested that some 
nuclear factor exists in CV1 cells, which binds with SR and this interaction was 
blocked by recombinant PIT1. Our study indicates that major activator for the
TSHbeta promoter is GATA2 and that PIT1 protects the function of GATA2 from the
inhibition by SR-binding protein.

PMID: 19103719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Hematol. 2009 Feb;84(2):79-86. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21332.

Clinical significance of Gata-1, Gata-2, EKLF, and c-MPL expression in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Ayala RM(1), Martínez-López J, Albízua E, Diez A, Gilsanz F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematologia, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, España.
rayaladiaz@yahoo.es

The aim of this study was to evaluate the biological correlation and prognostic
impact of Gata-1, Gata-2, EKLF, and c-MPL transcript level in a group of 41 acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Gata-1 overexpression was related to advanced
age and a low percentage of bone marrow blasts and was associated with the
expression of CD34 antigen and lymphoid T markers. The negative impact of Gata-1 
expression on the probability of achieving complete remission has been confirmed.
Gata-2 overexpression was associated with a low percentage of blasts in BM and
males. Expression of c-MPL was associated with CD34+ AML and M2 FAB AML subtype. 
A higher expression of EKLF was found in secondary AML versus primary AML.
Nevertheless, patients expressing EKLF had a longer overall survival and event
free survival than those patients that did not express EKLF. Our study has
identified expression of EKLF as a factor with a favorable impact on prognosis in
AML.

PMID: 19097174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Development. 2009 Jan;136(2):253-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.029900. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Gata2 is a tissue-specific post-mitotic selector gene for midbrain GABAergic
neurons.

Kala K(1), Haugas M, Lilleväli K, Guimera J, Wurst W, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Midbrain GABAergic neurons control several aspects of behavior, but regulation of
their development and diversity is poorly understood. Here, we further refine the
midbrain regions active in GABAergic neurogenesis and show their correlation with
the expression of the transcription factor Gata2. Using tissue-specific
inactivation and ectopic expression, we show that Gata2 regulates GABAergic
neuron development in the mouse midbrain, but not in rhombomere 1, where it is
needed in the serotonergic lineage. Without Gata2, all the precursors in the
embryonic midbrain fail to activate GABAergic neuron-specific gene expression and
instead switch to a glutamatergic phenotype. Surprisingly, this fate switch is
also observed throughout the neonatal midbrain, except for the GABAergic neurons 
located in the ventral dopaminergic nuclei, suggesting a distinct developmental
pathway for these neurons. These studies identify Gata2 as an essential
post-mitotic selector gene of the GABAergic neurotransmitter identity and
demonstrate developmental heterogeneity of GABAergic neurons in the midbrain.

PMID: 19088086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Biol. 2008 Dec 15;183(6):1033-48. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200804077.

Identification of FHL1 as a regulator of skeletal muscle mass: implications for
human myopathy.

Cowling BS(1), McGrath MJ, Nguyen MA, Cottle DL, Kee AJ, Brown S, Schessl J, Zou 
Y, Joya J, Bönnemann CG, Hardeman EC, Mitchell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton
3800, Victoria, Australia.

Regulators of skeletal muscle mass are of interest, given the morbidity and
mortality of muscle atrophy and myopathy. Four-and-a-half LIM protein 1 (FHL1) is
mutated in several human myopathies, including reducing-body myopathy (RBM). The 
normal function of FHL1 in muscle and how it causes myopathy remains unknown. We 
find that FHL1 transgenic expression in mouse skeletal muscle promotes
hypertrophy and an oxidative fiber-type switch, leading to increased whole-body
strength and fatigue resistance. Additionally, FHL1 overexpression enhances
myoblast fusion, resulting in hypertrophic myotubes in C2C12 cells, (a phenotype 
rescued by calcineurin inhibition). In FHL1-RBM C2C12 cells, there are no
hypertrophic myotubes. FHL1 binds with the calcineurin-regulated transcription
factor NFATc1 (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic,
calcineurin-dependent 1), enhancing NFATc1 transcriptional activity. Mutant
RBM-FHL1 forms aggregate bodies in C2C12 cells, sequestering NFATc1 and resulting
in reduced NFAT nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity. NFATc1 also
colocalizes with mutant FHL1 to reducing bodies in RBM-afflicted skeletal muscle.
Therefore, via NFATc1 signaling regulation, FHL1 appears to modulate muscle mass 
and strength enhancement.

PMCID: PMC2600747
PMID: 19075112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 26;28(48):12748-58. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4349-08.2008.

Serotonergic transcription of human FEV reveals direct GATA factor interactions
and fate of Pet-1-deficient serotonin neuron precursors.

Krueger KC(1), Deneris ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Altered expression of the human FEV (fifth Ewing variant) ETS transcription
factor gene impacts the level of CNS serotonin (5-HT) neuron gene expression and 
maternal nurturing. However, the regulatory mechanisms that determine FEV
expression are poorly understood. Here, we investigated the cis-regulatory
control of FEV to begin to identify the upstream transcription factors that
restrict FEV expression to 5-HT neurons. We find that sequences extending only
275 bp upstream of the FEV 5' untranslated region are sufficient to direct FEV
transgene expression to embryonic 5-HT neurons, although sequences farther
upstream are required for maintenance in adult 5-HT neurons. Two highly conserved
consensus GATA factor binding sites within the 275 bp region interact with GATA
factors in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitations with embryonic hindbrain
demonstrated Gata-2 interactions with the orthologous mouse Pet-1 ETS
cis-regulatory region. Mutagenesis of GATA sites revealed that one or the other
site is required for serotonergic FEV transgene expression. Unexpectedly,
FEV-LacZ transgenes enabled determination of 5-HT neuron precursor fate in the
adult Pet-1(-/-) dorsal and median raphe nuclei and thus provided additional
insight into FEV/Pet-1 function. Comparable numbers of FEV-LacZ-positive cells
were detected in Pet-1(+/-) and Pet-1(-/-) adult dorsal raphe nuclei, indicating 
that the majority of mutant serotonergic precursors are not fated to apoptosis.
However, B7 dorsal raphe cells were aberrantly distributed, suggesting a role for
FEV/Pet-1 in their midline organization. Our findings identify a direct
transcriptional interaction between Gata-2 and FEV and a unique marker for new
insight into FEV/Pet-1 function in 5-HT neuron development.

PMCID: PMC2610260
PMID: 19036967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;23(1):61-73. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0028. Epub 2008 Nov
26.

A composite intronic element directs dynamic binding of the progesterone receptor
and GATA-2.

Magklara A(1), Smith CL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The progesterone receptor (PR) plays a pivotal role in proper development and
function of the mammary gland and has also been implicated in mammary
tumorigenesis. PR is a ligand-activated transcription factor; however,
relatively, little is known about its mechanisms of action at endogenous target
promoters. The aim of our study was to identify a natural PR-responsive gene and 
investigate its transcriptional regulation in the mammary microenvironment. Our
experiments revealed FKBP5 as a direct target of the PR, because it exhibited a
rapid activation by progestin that was cycloheximide independent and correlated
with recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter. Site-directed mutagenesis 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that progestin responsiveness is 
mediated through a composite element in the first intron, to which the PR binds
concomitantly with GATA-2. Mutational analysis of the element revealed that the
GATA-2 site is essential for progestin activation. Direct binding of PR to DNA
contributes to the efficiency of activation but is not sufficient, suggesting
that the receptor makes important protein-protein interactions as part of its
mechanism of action at the FKBP5 promoter. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays we also determined that the intronic region is in communication with the
promoter, probably via DNA looping. Time course analysis revealed a cyclical
pattern of PR recruitment to the FKBP5 gene but a persistent recruitment to the
mouse mammary tumor virus promoter, indicating that receptor cycling is a
gene-specific phenomenon rather than a characteristic of the receptor itself. Our
study offers new insight in the nature of PR-regulated transcription in mammary
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2646598
PMID: 19036901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nephrol Ther. 2008 Oct;4 Spec No 2:17-22. doi: 10.1016/S1769-7255(08)74252-4.

[Erythropoietin: receptor of stimulating agents of erythropoiesis].

[Article in French]

Rieu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de néphrologie et CNRS UMR 6198, Reims, France.

PMID: 19000894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003645. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Genomic androgen receptor-occupied regions with different functions, defined by
histone acetylation, coregulators and transcriptional capacity.

Jia L(1), Berman BP, Jariwala U, Yan X, Cogan JP, Walters A, Chen T, Buchanan G, 
Frenkel B, Coetzee GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The androgen receptor (AR) is a steroid-activated transcription
factor that binds at specific DNA locations and plays a key role in the etiology 
of prostate cancer. While numerous studies have identified a clear connection
between AR binding and expression of target genes for a limited number of loci,
high-throughput elucidation of these sites allows for a deeper understanding of
the complexities of this process.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have mapped 189 AR occupied regions (ARORs)
and 1,388 histone H3 acetylation (AcH3) loci to a 3% continuous stretch of human 
genomic DNA using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) microarray analysis. Of 62
highly reproducible ARORs, 32 (52%) were also marked by AcH3. While the number of
ARORs detected in prostate cancer cells exceeded the number of nearby
DHT-responsive genes, the AcH3 mark defined a subclass of ARORs much more highly 
associated with such genes -- 12% of the genes flanking AcH3+ARORs were
DHT-responsive, compared to only 1% of genes flanking AcH3-ARORs. Most ARORs
contained enhancer activities as detected in luciferase reporter assays. Analysis
of the AROR sequences, followed by site-directed ChIP, identified binding sites
for AR transcriptional coregulators FoxA1, CEBPbeta, NFI and GATA2, which had
diverse effects on endogenous AR target gene expression levels in siRNA knockout 
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that only some ARORs function under the
given physiological conditions, utilizing diverse mechanisms. This diversity
points to differential regulation of gene expression by the same transcription
factor related to the chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC2577007
PMID: 18997859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Dec 8;120(3):437-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.09.024. Epub 
2008 Oct 1.

Molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu Granule in beta-thalassemia
therapy.

Zhang C(1), Wu ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory of Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, China.

OBJECTIVES: To study the molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu
Granule, a complex prescription of the Chinese traditional medicine used to treat
beta-thalassemia.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR method had been applied to analyze the genes 
expression: gamma-globin, Ckit, EpoR, Spi, FKLF, GATA1 and GATA2 in K562 cell
treated and untreated with this complex prescription and its each single herbal
medicine.
RESULTS: The results showed that this complex prescription increased the
gamma-globin, EpoR, Spi and FKLF expression and decreased the Ckit, GATA1 and
GATA2 expression. And all single herbal medicines of this complex prescription
could change some of those gene expressions, but not the same as the complex
prescription. Even that, this study results indicated that the YiSui ShenXu
Granule has its molecular pharmacological basis in treating beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 18951967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):34563-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804271200. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

Significance of NF-kappaB/GATA axis in tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced
expression of 6-sulfated cell recognition glycans in human T-lymphocytes.

Chen GY(1), Sakuma K, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya 464-8681,
Japan.

Sulfated glycans play critical roles in various cell recognition events among
leukocytes. The 6-sulfated lactosamine glycans in particular have been widely
noted for their importance because they are involved in cell recognition events
mediated by cell-adhesion molecules such as selectins and sialic acid-recognizing
molecules such as siglecs and also in the activation of CD44 in binding to
extracellular matrix hyaluronate. A pro-inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, induces expression of 6-sulfated glycans on human leukocytes. Here 
we report that the transcription of the GlcNAc6ST-1 gene, the gene encoding a
sulfotransferase for 6-sulfated glycan synthesis, is induced in human T-lymphoid 
cells through tandem NF-kappaB and GATA motifs in its 5'-regulatory region.
Results of our reporter assays, immunoprecipitation, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses indicated that GATA-3 and/or GATA-2, but not GATA-1,
associates with NF-kappaB in a transcription factor complex on the 5'-regulatory 
region of the gene and acts synergistically with NF-kappaB in triggering
GlcNAc6ST-1 transcription. Recently, a skin-homing subset of helper memory T
cells exhibiting the Th2 marker CCR4 was shown to specifically express 6-sulfated
glycans. The transactivation mechanism described here suggested that GlcNAc6ST-1 
transcription is coordinated with the NF-kappaB/GATA-3 axis, which is known to
figure heavily in Th2 cell differentiation. In line with this, in vitro
differentiation of human T cells to Th2 cells was found to significantly induce
GlcNAc6ST-1 transcription and 6-sulfated glycan expression.

PMCID: PMC3259878
PMID: 18849568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 2009 Feb 19;113(8):1794-804. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-155812. Epub 2008 
Oct 10.

miR-451 regulates zebrafish erythroid maturation in vivo via its target gata2.

Pase L(1), Layton JE, Kloosterman WP, Carradice D, Waterhouse PM, Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia.

We demonstrate that in zebrafish, the microRNA miR-451 plays a crucial role in
promoting erythroid maturation, in part via its target transcript gata2.
Zebrafish miR-144 and miR-451 are processed from a single precursor transcript
selectively expressed in erythrocytes. In contrast to other hematopoietic
mutants, the zebrafish mutant meunier (mnr) showed intact erythroid specification
but diminished miR-144/451 expression. Although erythropoiesis initiated normally
in mnr, erythrocyte maturation was morphologically retarded. Morpholino knockdown
of miR-451 increased erythrocyte immaturity in wild-type embryos, and miR-451 RNA
duplexes partially rescued erythroid maturation in mnr, demonstrating a
requirement and role for miR-451 in erythrocyte maturation. mnr provided a
selectively miR-144/451-deficient background, facilitating studies to discern
miRNA function and validate candidate targets. Among computer-predicted miR-451
targets potentially mediating these biologic effects, the pro-stem cell
transcription factor gata2 was an attractive candidate. In vivo reporter assays
validated the predicted miR-451/gata2-3'UTR interaction, gata2 down-regulation
was delayed in miR-451-knockdown and mnr embryos, and gata2 knockdown partially
restored erythroid maturation in mnr, collectively confirming gata2
down-regulation as pivotal for miR-451-driven erythroid maturation. These studies
define a new genetic pathway promoting erythroid maturation (mnr/miR-451/gata2)
and provide a rare example of partial rescue of a mutant phenotype solely by
miRNA overexpression.

PMCID: PMC2647672
PMID: 18849488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4862-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-136564. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

GATA-2 regulates granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cell function.

Rodrigues NP(1), Boyd AS, Fugazza C, May GE, Guo Y, Tipping AJ, Scadden DT, Vyas 
P, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Hematology Unit, Weatherall Institute for Molecular
Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 has been implicated in the regulation
of hematopoietic stem cells. Herein, we explored the role of GATA-2 as a
candidate regulator of the hematopoietic progenitor cell compartment. We showed
that bone marrow from GATA-2 heterozygote (GATA-2(+/-)) mice displayed attenuated
granulocyte-macrophage progenitor function in colony-forming cell (CFC) and
serial replating CFC assays. This defect was mapped to the
Lin(-)CD117(+)Sca-1(-)CD34(+)CD16/32(high) granulocyte-macrophage progenitor
(GMP) compartment of GATA-2(+/-) marrow, which was reduced in size and
functionally impaired in CFC assays and competitive transplantation. Similar
functional impairments were obtained using a RNA interference approach to stably 
knockdown GATA-2 in wild-type GMP. Although apoptosis and cell-cycle distribution
remained unperturbed in GATA-2(+/-) GMP, quiescent cells from GATA-2(+/-) GMP
exhibited altered functionality. Gene expression analysis showed attenuated
expression of HES-1 mRNA in GATA-2-deficient GMP. Binding of GATA-2 to the HES-1 
locus was detected in the myeloid progenitor cell line 32Dcl3, and enforced
expression of HES-1 expression in GATA-2(+/-) GMP rectified the functional
defect, suggesting that GATA-2 regulates myeloid progenitor function through
HES-1. These data collectively point to GATA-2 as a novel, pivotal determinant of
GMP cell fate.

PMID: 18840712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4512-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157560. Epub 2008
Sep 19.

Endoglin expression in blood and endothelium is differentially regulated by
modular assembly of the Ets/Gata hemangioblast code.

Pimanda JE(1), Chan WY, Wilson NK, Smith AM, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Janes ME,
Landry JR, Kolb-Kokocinski A, Frampton J, Tannahill D, Ottersbach K, Follows GA, 
Lacaud G, Kouskoff V, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. jpimanda@unsw.edu.au

Endoglin is an accessory receptor for TGF-beta signaling and is required for
normal hemangioblast, early hematopoietic, and vascular development. We have
previously shown that an upstream enhancer, Eng -8, together with the promoter
region, mediates robust endothelial expression yet is inactive in blood. To
identify hematopoietic regulatory elements, we used array-based methods to
determine chromatin accessibility across the entire locus. Subsequent transgenic 
analysis of candidate elements showed that an endothelial enhancer at Eng +9 when
combined with an element at Eng +7 functions as a strong hemato-endothelial
enhancer. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip analysis demonstrated
specific binding of Ets factors to the promoter as well as to the -8, +7+9
enhancers in both blood and endothelial cells. By contrast Pu.1, an Ets factor
specific to the blood lineage, and Gata2 binding was only detected in blood.
Gata2 was bound only at +7 and GATA motifs were required for hematopoietic
activity. This modular assembly of regulators gives blood and endothelial cells
the regulatory freedom to independently fine-tune gene expression and emphasizes 
the role of regulatory divergence in driving functional divergence.

PMCID: PMC2682356
PMID: 18805961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Nov 15;76(10):1229-39. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.08.025.
Epub 2008 Sep 2.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibits erythroid differentiation in human
erythropoietin-dependent cells involving p38 MAPK pathway, GATA-1 and FOG-1
downregulation and GATA-2 upregulation.

Buck I(1), Morceau F, Cristofanon S, Heintz C, Chateauvieux S, Reuter S, Dicato
M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9 rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) has been
linked to inflammation- and cancer-related anemia, which reduces both quality of 
life and prognosis of patients. The aim of this study was to reveal molecular
mechanisms linked to the inhibition of erythroid differentiation by TNFalpha. In 
this study, we showed that the inhibition of erythropoietin (Epo)-mediated
differentiation by TNFalpha lead to a downregulation of hemoglobin synthesis and 
was correlated to a modulation of key erythroid transcription factors. Thus, a
reverse of the transcription factor GATA-1/GATA-2 balance normally present during
erythropoiesis, as well as a downregulation of the cofactor of GATA-1, friend of 
GATA-1 (FOG-1), and the coregulating transcription factor nuclear factor
erythroid 2 (NF-E2) was observed after TNFalpha treatment. Moreover, we showed a 
reduction of GATA-1/FOG-1 interaction due to a reduced transcription of GATA-1
and a proteasome-dependent FOG-1 degradation after TNFalpha treatment. These
changes led to an inhibition of erythroid gene expression including Epo receptor 
(EpoR), alpha- and gamma-globin, erythroid-associated factor (ERAF),
hydroxymethylbilane synthetase (HMBS), and glycophorin A (GPA). An analysis of
distinct signaling pathway activations then revealed an activation of p38 by TNF,
as well as a corresponding involvement of this mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) in the cytokine-dependent inhibition of erythroid differentiation. Indeed 
the p38 inhibitor, SB203580, abrogated the inhibitory effect of TNFalpha on the
major erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 as well as erythroid marker
expression in Epo-induced TF-1 cells. Overall, these data contribute to a better 
understanding of cytokine-dependent anemia, by giving first hints about key
erythroid transcription factor modulations after TNFalpha treatment as well as an
involvement of p38 in the inhibition of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 18805401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(21):6681-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01061-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
8.

Molecular hallmarks of endogenous chromatin complexes containing master
regulators of hematopoiesis.

Wozniak RJ(1), Keles S, Lugus JJ, Young KH, Boyer ME, Tran TM, Choi K, Bresnick
EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Department of
Pharmacology, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Combinatorial interactions among trans-acting factors establish transcriptional
circuits that orchestrate cellular differentiation, survival, and development.
Unlike circuits instigated by individual factors, efforts to identify gene
ensembles controlled by multiple factors simultaneously are in their infancy. A
paradigm has emerged in which the important regulators of hematopoiesis GATA-1
and GATA-2 function combinatorially with Scl/TAL1, another key regulator of
hematopoiesis. The underlying mechanism appears to involve preferential assembly 
of a multimeric complex on a composite DNA element containing WGATAR and E-box
motifs. Based on this paradigm, one would predict that GATA-2 and Scl/TAL1 would 
commonly co-occupy such composite elements in cells. However, chromosome-wide
analyses indicated that the vast majority of conserved composite elements were
occupied by neither GATA-2 nor Scl/TAL1. Intriguingly, the highly restricted set 
of GATA-2-occupied composite elements had characteristic molecular hallmarks,
specifically Scl/TAL1 occupancy, a specific epigenetic signature, specific
neighboring cis elements, and preferential enhancer activity in GATA-2-expressing
cells. Genes near the GATA-2-Scl/TAL1-occupied composite elements were regulated 
by GATA-2 or GATA-1, and therefore these fundamental studies on combinatorial
transcriptional mechanisms were also leveraged to discover novel GATA
factor-mediated cell regulatory pathways.

PMCID: PMC2573226
PMID: 18779319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Dec;217(3):809-18. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21558.

The angiopoietin-2 gene of endothelial cells is up-regulated in hypoxia by a HIF 
binding site located in its first intron and by the central factors GATA-2 and
Ets-1.

Simon MP(1), Tournaire R, Pouyssegur J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, CNRS UMR
6543, University of Nice, Centre A. Lacassagne, Nice, France. simonmp@unice.fr

Angiopoietins are ligands of the endothelial cell tyrosine kinase receptor Tie2. 
Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) is widely expressed in human normal adult tissues and
promotes blood vessel maturation and stabilization by inducing Tie2 receptor
phosphorylation. In contrast, the antagonistic ligand Angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) is
up-regulated by hypoxia, expressed only at sites of vascular remodeling and plays
a crucial role in destabilizing vessels for normal or pathological angiogenesis. 
Ang-2 expression is tightly regulated at transcriptional and post-transcriptional
levels. To characterize the regulatory sequences of the human Ang-2 gene we
cloned a fragment of around 8.5 kb upstream of the Ang-2 coding sequence and
analyzed the luciferase reporter activity of constructs of various lengths in
endothelial and non-endothelial cells. We isolated a minimal promoter sequence
sufficient to promote significant Ang-2 non-cell type specific transcription.
Moreover, we identified sequences conferring endothelial specificity. Indeed,
sequence analysis of the fragment revealed the presence of several potential
binding sites for specific endothelial regulatory factors like GATA or Ets. Using
GATA-2 and Ets-1 co-transfection and overexpression assay, we showed that these
two factors are able to induce Ang-2 promoter activation. We also show that
hypoxic regulation of Ang-2 is HIF-dependent and demonstrate that HIF-1alpha
binds in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC) to an evolutionary
conserved Hypoxia-Responsive Element (HRE) located in the first intron of the
Ang-2 gene. In conclusion, our study provides new elements in favor of HIF
involvement in Ang-2 hypoxic regulation and identifies Ets-1 and particularly
GATA-2 as central factors in endothelial specific Ang-2 expression.

PMID: 18720385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Curr Biol. 2008 Aug 26;18(16):1234-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.07.048.

Fli1 acts at the top of the transcriptional network driving blood and endothelial
development.

Liu F(1), Walmsley M, Rodaway A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS Oxford, United Kingdom.

Blood and endothelium arise in close association during development, possibly
from a common precursor, the hemangioblast [1-4]. Genes essential for blood and
endothelial development contain functional ETS binding sites, and binding and
expression data implicate the transcription factor, friend leukaemia integration 
1 (Fli1) [5-10]. However, loss-of-function phenotypes in mice, although suffering
both blood and endothelial defects, have thus far precluded the conclusion that
Fli1 is essential for these two lineages [11, 12]. By using Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that loss of Fli1 function results in a substantial reduction or
absence of hemangioblasts, revealing an absolute requirement. TUNEL assays show
that the cells are eventually lost by apoptosis, but only after the regulatory
circuit has been disrupted by loss of Fli1. In addition, a constitutively active 
form of Fli1 is sufficient to induce expression of key hemangioblast genes, such 
as Scl/Tal1, Lmo2, Gata2, Etsrp, and Flk1. Epistasis assays show that Fli1
expression is induced by Bmp signaling or Cloche, depending on the hemangioblast 
population, and in both cases Fli1 acts upstream of Gata2, Scl, Lmo2, and Etsrp. 
Taken together, these results place Fli1 at the top of the transcriptional
regulatory hierarchy for hemangioblast specification in vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 18718762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Math Med Biol. 2008 Sep;25(3):233-45. doi: 10.1093/imammb/dqn016. Epub 2008 Aug
11.

An enzyme kinetic model of blood island formation.

Matteson A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Mailstop 3368, Texas A & M University, College
Station, TX 77843-3368, USA. drew.matteson@gmail.com

Blood islands are conglomerations of prevascular stem cells that form during
vasculogenesis, a function critical to early vascular and hematopoietic
development. In this paper, a model of blood island formation is proposed
employing the approach of classical enzyme kinetics. Deterministic simulations of
the model show the formation of blood island-like structures. These are compared 
to murine blood islands.

PMID: 18697733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;199(1):113-25. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0128. Epub 2008 Jul 24.

Inhibition of GATA2-dependent transactivation of the TSHbeta gene by ligand-bound
estrogen receptor alpha.

Nagayama K(1), Sasaki S, Matsushita A, Ohba K, Iwaki H, Matsunaga H, Suzuki S,
Misawa H, Ishizuka K, Oki Y, Noh JY, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Transcriptional repression of the TSH-specific beta subunit (TSHbeta) gene has
been regarded to be specific to thyroid hormone (tri-iodothyronine, T(3)) and its
receptors (TRs) in physiological conditions. However, TSHbeta mRNA levels in the 
pituitary were reported to decrease in the administration of pharmacologic doses 
of estrogen (17-beta-estradiol, E(2)) and increase in E(2) receptor (ER)-alpha
null mice. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanism of inhibition of the
TSHbeta gene expression by E(2)-bound E(2)-estrogen receptor 1 (E(2)-ERalpha). In
kidney-derived CV1 cells, transcriptional activity of the TSHbeta promoter was
stimulated by GATA2 and suppressed by THRBs and ERalpha in a ligand-dependent
fashion. Overexpression of PIT1 diminished the E(2)-ERalpha-induced inhibition,
suggesting that PIT1 may protect GATA2 from E(2)-ERalpha targeting by forming a
stable complex with GATA2. Interacting surfaces between ERalpha and GATA2 were
mapped to the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of ERalpha and the Zn finger domain of
GATA2. E(2)-dependent inhibition requires the ERalpha amino-terminal domain but
not the tertiary structure of the second Zn finger motif in E(2)-ERalpha-DBD. In 
the thyrotroph cell line, TalphaT1, E(2) treatment reduced TSHbeta mRNA levels
measured by the reverse transcription PCR. In the human study, despite similar
free thyroxine levels, the serum TSH level was small but significantly higher in 
post- than premenopausal women who possessed no anti-thyroid antibodies (1.90
microU/ml+/-0.13 S.E.M. vs 1.47 microU/ml+/-0.12 S.E.M., P<0.05). Our findings
indicate redundancy between T(3)-TR and E(2)-ERalpha signaling exists in negative
regulation of the TSHbeta gene.

PMID: 18653622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):507-17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.778795.
Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Generation of functional murine cardiac myocytes from induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Mauritz C(1), Schwanke K, Reppel M, Neef S, Katsirntaki K, Maier LS, Nguemo F,
Menke S, Haustein M, Hescheler J, Hasenfuss G, Martin U.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial Organs,
Carl-Neuberg Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):472-5.

BACKGROUND: The recent breakthrough in the generation of induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells, which are almost indistinguishable from embryonic stem (ES) cells,
facilitates the generation of murine disease- and human patient-specific stem
cell lines. The aim of this study was to characterize the cardiac differentiation
potential of a murine iPS cell clone in comparison to a well-established murine
ES cell line.
METHODS AND RESULTS: With the use of a standard embryoid body-based
differentiation protocol for ES cells, iPS cells as well as ES cells were
differentiated for 24 days. Although the analyzed iPS cell clone showed a delayed
and less efficient formation of beating embryoid bodies compared with the ES cell
line, the differentiation resulted in an average of 55% of spontaneously
contracting iPS cell embryoid bodies. Analyses on molecular, structural, and
functional levels demonstrated that iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes show typical 
features of ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated expression of marker genes typical for
mesoderm, cardiac mesoderm, and cardiomyocytes including Brachyury, mesoderm
posterior factor 1 (Mesp1), friend of GATA2 (FOG-2), GATA-binding protein 4
(GATA4), NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5 (Nkx2.5), T-box 5 (Tbx5),
T-box 20 (Tbx20), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), myosin light chain 2 atrial
transcripts (MLC2a), myosin light chain 2 ventricular transcripts (MLC2v),
alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC), and cardiac troponin T in differentiation
cultures of iPS cells. Immunocytology confirmed expression of
cardiomyocyte-typical proteins including sarcomeric alpha-actinin, titin, cardiac
troponin T, MLC2v, and connexin 43. iPS cell cardiomyocytes displayed spontaneous
rhythmic intracellular Ca(2+) fluctuations with amplitudes of Ca(2+) transients
comparable to ES cell cardiomyocytes. Simultaneous Ca(2+) release within clusters
of iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes indicated functional coupling of the cells.
Electrophysiological studies with multielectrode arrays demonstrated
functionality and presence of the beta-adrenergic and muscarinic signaling
cascade in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: iPS cells differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes. In contrast 
to ES cells, iPS cells allow derivation of autologous functional cardiomyocytes
for cellular cardiomyoplasty and myocardial tissue engineering.

PMID: 18625890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1942-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-114975. Epub 2008
Jun 12.

Transcriptional repression of c-Myb and GATA-2 is involved in the biologic
effects of C/EBPalpha in p210BCR/ABL-expressing cells.

Soliera AR(1), Lidonnici MR, Ferrari-Amorotti G, Prisco M, Zhang Y, Martinez RV, 
Donato NJ, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson Medical
College, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Ectopic C/EBPalpha expression in p210(BCR/ABL)-expressing hematopoietic cells
induces granulocytic differentiation, inhibits proliferation, and suppresses
leukemogenesis. To assess the underlying mechanisms, C/EBPalpha targets were
identified by microarray analyses. Upon C/EBPalpha activation, expression of
c-Myb and GATA-2 was repressed in 32D-BCR/ABL, K562, and chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) blast crisis (BC) primary cells but only c-Myb levels decreased
slightly in CD34(+) normal progenitors. The role of these 2 genes for the effects
of C/EBPalpha was assessed by perturbing their expression in K562 cells. Ectopic 
c-Myb expression blocked the proliferation inhibition- and
differentiation-inducing effects of C/EBPalpha, whereas c-Myb siRNA treatment
enhanced C/EBPalpha-mediated proliferation inhibition and induced changes in gene
expression indicative of monocytic differentiation. Ectopic GATA-2 expression
suppressed the proliferation inhibitory effect of C/EBPalpha but blocked in part 
the effect on differentiation; GATA-2 siRNA treatment had no effects on
C/EBPalpha induction of differentiation but inhibited proliferation of K562
cells, alone or upon C/EBPalpha activation. In summary, the effects of C/EBPalpha
in p210(BCR/ABL)-expressing cells depend, in part, on transcriptional repression 
of c-Myb and GATA-2. Since perturbation of c-Myb and GATA-2 expression has
nonidentical consequences for proliferation and differentiation of K562 cells,
the effects of C/EBPalpha appear to involve dif-ferent transcription-regulated
targets.

PMCID: PMC2518896
PMID: 18550858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;121(1):50-4. doi: 10.1159/000124381. Epub 2008 May 7.

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis.

Szczerbal I(1), Chmurzynska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis was determined. BAC clones harboring sequences of
selected genes CEBPA (SSC6q12), CEBPB (SSC17q23), CEBPD (SSC4q15), CEBPG
(SSC6q12), PPARG (SSC13q24), SREBF1 (SSC10q17), DDIT3 (SSC12q15), GATA2 (SSC13q24
-->q31) and GATA3 (SSC5p12) were mapped by FISH. The positions of these genes in 
the human and pig genomes were compared. A potential role of the genes encoding
adipogenesis factors as candidate genes for fatness traits as well as
obesity-related phenotypes is discussed.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18544926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. EMBO J. 2008 Jul 9;27(13):1886-95. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.113. Epub 2008 Jun 5.

Impaired embryonic haematopoiesis yet normal arterial development in the absence 
of the Notch ligand Jagged1.

Robert-Moreno A(1), Guiu J, Ruiz-Herguido C, López ME, Inglés-Esteve J, Riera L, 
Tipping A, Enver T, Dzierzak E, Gridley T, Espinosa L, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Oncologia Molecular, IDIBELL, Gran Via km 2.7 Hospitalet, Barcelona,
Spain.

Specific deletion of Notch1 and RBPjkappa in the mouse results in abrogation of
definitive haematopoiesis concomitant with the loss of arterial identity at
embryonic stage. As prior arterial determination is likely to be required for the
generation of embryonic haematopoiesis, it is difficult to establish the specific
haematopoietic role of Notch in these mutants. By analysing different
Notch-ligand-null embryos, we now show that Jagged1 is not required for the
establishment of the arterial fate but it is required for the correct execution
of the definitive haematopoietic programme, including expression of GATA2 in the 
dorsal aorta. Moreover, successful haematopoietic rescue of the Jagged1-null AGM 
cells was obtained by culturing them with Jagged1-expressing stromal cells or by 
lentiviral-mediated transduction of the GATA2 gene. Taken together, our results
indicate that Jagged1-mediated activation of Notch1 is responsible for regulating
GATA2 expression in the AGM, which in turn is essential for definitive
haematopoiesis in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC2486417
PMID: 18528438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):835-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.146. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Sakuranetin induces adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells through enhanced expression of
PPARgamma2.

Saito T(1), Abe D, Sekiya K.

Author information: 
(1)National Agricultural Research Center for Western Region, 1-3-1 Senyu-cho,
Zentsuji 765-8508, Kagawa, Japan.

Sakuranetin (5,4'-dihydroxy-7-methoxyflavone) belongs to the flavanone class of
polyphenols predominantly known as phytoalexin in rice plant. In this study, we
demonstrate that sakuranetin strongly induces differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, as evidenced by increased triglyceride accumulation and
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH) activity. In addition, even in the
absence of adipogenic hormonal stimuli, sakuranetin strongly induced adipogenesis
and expression of genes that are critical for the adipocytes phenotype.
Time-course analyses indicated that sakuranetin induces PPARgamma2 expression
without prior induction of C/EBPbeta, a transcriptional regulator of PPARgamma2
in adipogenesis. In 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, the transcriptional factors GATA-2 and 
GATA-3 are known to down-regulate adipogenesis by direct binding to the C/EBPbeta
protein and to the GATA-binding site on the PPARgamma2 promoter. We found that
sakuranetin significantly reduced the expression of GATA-2. Moreover, we observed
that sakuranetin stimulated glucose uptake in differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
These results suggest that sakuranetin may contribute to maintain glucose
homeostasis in animals.

PMID: 18522800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2008 Sep 15;310(6):479-91. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21220.

Patterns of angiogenic and hematopoietic gene expression during brown trout
embryogenesis.

Marschallinger J(1), Steinbacher P, Haslett JR, Sänger AM, Rescan PY, Stoiber W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic Biology, Division of Zoology and Functional Anatomy, 
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

In this article, whole mount in situ hybridization is used to examine early blood
vessel and blood cell development in the embryos of the brown trout Salmo trutta 
lacustris. cDNAs encoding for the angiogenic markers fli1 and flk1, and for the
hematopoietic markers gata1 and gata2, were identified from an expressed sequence
tag library of rainbow trout. Results show that fli1, flk1 and gata2 are
activated in bilateral bands of the lateral trunk mesoderm before the onset of
somitogenesis, shortly followed by gata1. These bands then converge toward the
ventral midline to form the intermediate cell mass (ICM) (anterior ICM).
Subsequent axial vasculogenesis and initial blood cell formation involve a clear 
spatial separation of fli1 and gata gene expression. Fli1 staining is most
intense within the axial vessel (dorsal aorta, posterior cardinal vein) forming
and lateral ICM cells, whereas binding of gata1 and gata2 probes becomes confined
to the central portion of ICM cells beneath the dorsal aorta. This is followed by
a first wave of angiogenesis, indicated by expression of fli1 and flk1. This
gives rise to the intersegmental, dorsal longitudinal anastomotic and intestinal 
vessels. Further angiogenesis and hematopoiesis are activated in the "posterior
ICM" of the tail. Here, the absence of gata1 indicates that hematopoiesis in this
tissue generates myeloid rather than erythroid cells. The results supplement and 
validate previous, now historical morphological work in salmonids, thus aiding
the elucidation of a comprehensive general scheme of angiogenic and hematopoietic
development in the teleost embryo.

PMID: 18512703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biol Reprod. 2008 Oct;79(4):598-607. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.068304. Epub
2008 May 21.

Loss of the protein NUPR1 (p8) leads to delayed LHB expression, delayed ovarian
maturation, and testicular development of a sertoli-cell-only syndrome-like
phenotype in mice.

Million Passe CM(1), White CR, King MW, Quirk PL, Iovanna JL, Quirk CC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences Program, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, 
Indiana 47405, USA.

The high mobility group factor NUPR1, also known as p8 and com1, plays a role in 
temporal expression of the beta subunit of luteinizing hormone, LHB, during
gonadotroph development. At Embryonic Day (e) 16.5, LHB is detectable in
wild-type (Nupr1(+/+)) but not Nupr1 knockout (Nupr1(-/-)) mice. LHB is initiated
by e17.5 in Nupr1(-/-) mice, and expression is fully recovered by Postnatal Day
(p) 2. Factors indicative of pituitary maturation, GATA2, CGA, and TSH, are not
differentially expressed in Nupr1(-/-) and Nupr1(+/+) embryos at e17.5.
Therefore, the delay in LHB expression does not appear to result from delayed
pituitary development. In addition, the role of NUPR1 in gonadotropin expression 
appears specific for LHB, as no difference in FSHB is observed in Nupr1(-/-) and 
Nupr1(+/+) embryos. The gonads are also impacted by the absence of NUPR1. Ovaries
of female Nupr1(-/-) mice lack corpora lutea (CL) at 8 wk, an age at which CL are
present in all Nupr1(+/+) littermates. Sexual maturity is recovered by 11 wk in
Nupr1(-/-) mice. Conversely, the testes of Nupr1(-/-) males appear normal through
8 mo of age. By 10 mo, however, these mice develop a condition in which a
significant number of seminiferous tubules lack germ cells, an abnormality
reminiscent of human Sertoli-cell-only syndrome. NUPR1 is undetectable in
Nupr1(+/+) gonadotrophs by p2 and remains absent in adulthood, but quantitative
PCR analysis indicates Nupr1(+/+) adult ovaries and testes express Nupr1 mRNA.
Therefore, the ovarian and testicular phenotypes may be due to the loss of NUPR1 
directly at the gonads.

PMID: 18495683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2008 Jun 1;180(11):7516-24.

Anthrax lethal toxin enhances TNF-induced endothelial VCAM-1 expression via an
IFN regulatory factor-1-dependent mechanism.

Warfel JM(1), D'Agnillo F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology, Division of Hematology,
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration,
Bethesda, MD 20892.

Impaired host defenses and vascular dysfunction are hallmarks of the late,
antibiotic-refractory stages of systemic anthrax infection. Anthrax lethal toxin 
(LT), a key virulence factor of Bacillus anthracis, was previously shown to
enhance VCAM-1 expression on primary human endothelial cells suggesting a
causative link between dysregulated adhesion molecule expression and the poor
immune response and vasculitis associated with anthrax. In this study, we report 
that LT amplification of TNF-induced VCAM-1 expression is driven
transcriptionally by the cooperative activation of NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory
factor-1 (IRF-1). LT enhancement of NF-kappaB phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation correlated temporally with a delayed reaccumulation of
IkappaBalpha, while increased induction of IRF-1 was linked to STAT1 activation. 
LT failed to augment TNF-induced ICAM-1 or E-selectin expression, two adhesion
molecules regulated by NF-kappaB, but not IRF-1. These results suggest that LT
can differentially modulate NF-kappaB target genes and highlight the importance
of IRF-1 in VCAM-1 enhancement. Altering the activity of key transcription
factors involved in host response to infection may be a critical mechanism by
which LT contributes to anthrax pathogenesis.

PMID: 18490752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):C213-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00422.2007. Epub 2008 May 7.

Transcription factor PU.1 is expressed in white adipose and inhibits adipocyte
differentiation.

Wang F(1), Tong Q.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service,
Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PU.1 transcription factor is a critical regulator of hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. Because PU.1 interacts with transcription factors GATA-2 and
C/EBPalpha, and both are involved in the regulation of adipogenesis, we
investigated whether PU.1 plays a role in the regulation of adipocyte
differentiation. Our data indicate that PU.1 is expressed in white adipose
tissue. PU.1 protein can also be detected in cultured 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Forced
expression of PU.1 in 3T3-L1 cells inhibits adipocyte differentiation, whereas
deletion of the transactivation domain of PU.1 abolishes this effect. The
inhibition of adipocyte differentiation by PU.1 is achieved, at least in part,
through repression of the transcriptional activity of C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta.
Furthermore, GATA-2 and PU.1 have an additive inhibitory effect on C/EBP
transactivation and adipogenesis. Finally, the expression of PU.1 is increased in
white adipose of obese mice.

PMID: 18463231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jul;99(7):1407-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00842.x. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

Evi-1 promotes para-aortic splanchnopleural hematopoiesis through up-regulation
of GATA-2 and repression of TGF-b signaling.

Sato T(1), Goyama S, Nitta E, Takeshita M, Yoshimi M, Nakagawa M, Kawazu M,
Ichikawa M, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Evi-1 is a zinc-finger transcriptional factor whose inappropriate expression
leads to leukemic transformation in mice and humans. Recently, it has been shown 
that Evi-1 regulates proliferation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells at
embryonic stage via GATA-2 up-regulation; however, detailed mechanisms underlying
Evi-1-mediated early hematopoiesis are not fully understood. We therefore
evaluated hematopoietic potential of Evi-1 mutants using a cultivation system of 
murine para-aortic splanchnopleural (P-Sp) regions, and found that both the first
zinc finger domain and the acidic domain were required for Evi-1-mediated
hematopoiesis. The hematopoietic potential of Evi-1 mutants was likely to be
related to its ability to up-regulate GATA-2 expression. We also showed that the 
decreased colony forming capacity of Evi-1-deficient P-Sp cells was successfully 
recovered by inhibition of TGF-b signaling, using ALK5 inhibitor or retroviral
transfer of dominant-negative-type Smad3. Our findings suggest that Evi-1
promotes hematopoietic stem/progenitor expansion at the embryonic stage through
up-regulation of GATA-2 and repression of TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 18452556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. FASEB J. 2008 May;22(5):1356-68. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-9965.com.

Receptor-mediated tobacco toxicity: acceleration of sequential expression of
alpha5 and alpha7 nicotinic receptor subunits in oral keratinocytes exposed to
cigarette smoke.

Arredondo J(1), Chernyavsky AI, Jolkovsky DL, Pinkerton KE, Grando SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Irvine, C340 Medical
Sciences I, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Tobacco products and nicotine alter the cell cycle and lead to squamatization of 
oral keratinocytes (KCs) and squamous cell carcinoma. Activation of nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) elicits Ca(2+) influx that varies in magnitude
between different nAChR subtypes. Normal differentiation of KCs is associated
with sequential expression of the nAChR subtypes with increasing Ca(2+)
permeability, such as alpha5-containing alpha3 nAChR and alpha7 nAChR. Exposure
to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) or an equivalent concentration of nicotine
accelerated by severalfold the alpha5 and alpha7 expression in KCs, which could
be abolished by mecamylamine and alpha-bungarotoxin with different efficacies,
suggesting the following sequence of autoregulation of the expression of nAChR
subtypes: alpha3(beta2/beta4) > alpha3(beta2/beta4)alpha5 > alpha7 > alpha7. This
conjecture was corroborated by results of quantitative assays of subunit mRNA and
protein levels, using nAChR-specific pharmacologic antagonists and small
interfering RNAs. The genomic effects of ETS and nicotine involved the
transcription factor GATA-2 that showed a multifold increase in quantity and
activity in exposed KCs. Using protein kinase inhibitors and dominant negative
and constitutively active constructs, we characterized the principal signaling
cascades mediating a switch in the nAChR subtype. Cumulative results indicated
that the alpha3(beta2/beta4) to alpha3(beta2/beta4)alpha5 nAChR transition
predominantly involved protein kinase C, alpha3(beta2/beta4)alpha5 to alpha7
nAChR transition-Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and p38 MAPK, and 
alpha7 self-up-regulation-the p38 MAPK/Akt pathway, and JAK-2. These results
provide a mechanistic insight into the genomic effects of ETS and nicotine on KCs
and characterize signaling pathways mediating autoregulation of stepwise
overexpression of nAChR subtypes with increasing Ca(2+) permeability in exposed
cells. These observations have salient clinical implications, because a switch in
the nAChR subunit composition can bring about a corresponding switch in receptor 
function, leading to profound pathobiologic effects observed in KCs exposed to
tobacco products.

PMID: 18450646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2071-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.018200. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Activation of Eklf expression during hematopoiesis by Gata2 and Smad5 prior to
erythroid commitment.

Lohmann F(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Box 1020, 1 Gustave Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The hierarchical progression of stem and progenitor cells to their more-committed
progeny is mediated through cell-to-cell signaling pathways and intracellular
transcription factor activity. However, the mechanisms that govern the genetic
networks underlying lineage fate decisions and differentiation programs remain
poorly understood. Here we show how integration of Bmp4 signaling and Gata factor
activity controls the progression of hematopoiesis, as exemplified by the
regulation of Eklf during establishment of the erythroid lineage. Utilizing
transgenic reporter assays in differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells as well 
as in the murine fetal liver, we demonstrate that Eklf expression is initiated
prior to erythroid commitment during hematopoiesis. Applying phylogenetic
footprinting and in vivo binding studies in combination with newly developed
loss-of-function technology in embryoid bodies, we find that Gata2 and Smad5
cooperate to induce Eklf in a progenitor population, followed by a switch to
Gata1-controlled regulation of Eklf transcription upon erythroid commitment. This
stage- and lineage-dependent control of Eklf expression defines a novel role for 
Eklf as a regulator of lineage fate decisions during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18448565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Apr 29;9:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-43.

Molecular characterization of senescence marker protein-30 gene promoter:
identification of repressor elements and functional nuclear factor binding sites.

Rath B(1), Pandey RS, Debata PR, Maruyama N, Supakar PC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar,
751023, India. bandita27278@rediffmail.com

BACKGROUND: Senescence marker protein-30 (SMP30), whose expression declines
during aging in rat liver, has been proposed as an important aging marker.
Besides apoptosis, SMP30 also protects cells against various other injuries by
enhancement of membrane calcium-pump activity. The mechanism of this differential
gene expression mechanism is not known. DNA-protein interactions, mutation
analysis and luciferase reporter assay studies have been performed to elucidate
the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of SMP30 gene.
RESULTS: We have characterized up to -2750 bp of the promoter by DNA-protein
interactions studies. Twenty eight transcription factor binding sites have been
identified by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). Transient transfection of 5' and 3' -deleted promoter-reporter constructs
and luciferase assay illustrated the region between -128/+157 bp is sufficient to
drive promoter activity. We have mapped an essential regulatory region between
-513 to -352 bp which causes a drastic decline of reporter activity. This region 
contains CdxA, GATA2 and SRY transcription factor binding sites. Individual
mutation of these three sites showed increase in reporter activity. Mutation in
SRY site (-403/-368) showed maximum increase in reporter activity among these
three sites. Therefore, we suggest that SRY like protein may be acting as a
strong repressor of SMP30 gene along with CdxA and GATA-2. We also report that
mutation of both Sp1 (172/-148 bp) and a C/EBPbeta (-190/-177 bp) transcription
binding site located adjacent to each other on SMP30 gene promoter, causes a
significant enhancement in reporter activity than individual mutation, thus may
be causing the repression of SMP30 promoter activity.
CONCLUSION: These studies provide novel insights into the mechanism that regulate
SMP30 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2386801
PMID: 18442420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Pharmacol Sci. 2008 Mar;106(3):332-5.

Progress in allergy signal research on mast cells: regulation of allergic airway 
inflammation through toll-like receptor 4-mediated modification of mast cell
function.

Yamashita M(1), Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan. yamamasa@faculty.chiba-u.jp

In a mouse experimental asthma model, the administration of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), particularly at low doses, enhances the levels of
ovalbumin (OVA)-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation. In an effort to clarify
the cellular and molecular basis for the LPS effect, we demonstrate that the
OVA-induced eosinophilic inflammation in the lung is dramatically increased by
administration of LPS at the priming phase in wild-type mice, whereas such an
increase was not observed in mast cell deficient mice. Adoptive transfer of bone 
marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) from wild type but not from Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)-deficient mice restored the increased eosinophilic inflammation in mast
cell-deficient mice. Moreover, in vitro analysis revealed that treatment of BMMC 
with LPS resulted in sustained up-regulation of GATA1 expression and increased
production of Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) upon restimulation. Thus,
mast cells appear to control allergic airway inflammation after their activation 
and modulation through TLR4-mediated induction of GATA1 proteins and subsequent
increase in Th2 cytokine production.

PMID: 18360088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1525-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.011767. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

The stepwise specification of embryonic stem cells to hematopoietic fate is
driven by sequential exposure to Bmp4, activin A, bFGF and VEGF.

Pearson S(1), Sroczynska P, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester
University, Wilmslow Road, M20 4BX, Manchester, UK.

The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells offers a powerful approach to
study mechanisms implicated in cell fate decision. A major hurdle, however, is to
promote the directed and efficient differentiation of ES cells toward a specific 
lineage. Here, we define in serum-free media the minimal factor requirement
controlling each step of the differentiation process, resulting in the production
of highly enriched hematopoietic progenitors. Four factors - Bmp4, activin A,
bFGF (Fgf2) and VEGF (VegfA) - are sufficient to drive the selective and
efficient differentiation of mouse ES cells to hematopoiesis. Each of these
factors appears to regulate a step of the process: Bmp4 promotes the very
efficient formation of mesoderm; bFGF and activin A induce the differentiation of
these mesodermal precursors to the hemangioblast fate; and VEGF is required for
the production of fully committed hematopoietic progenitors. The stimulation of
mesodermal precursors by bFGF and activin A switches on very rapidly the
hematopoietic program, allowing us to dissect the molecular events leading to the
formation of the hemangioblast. Runx1, Scl (Tal1) and Hhex expression is
upregulated within 3 hours of stimulation, whereas upregulation of Lmo2 and Fli1 
is observed later. Interestingly, increased expression levels of genes such as
cMyb, Pu.1 (Sfpi1), Gata1 and Gata2 are not observed at the onset of
hemangioblast commitment. This stepwise control of differentiation is extremely
efficient, giving rise to a very high frequency of hematopoietic precursors, and 
provides an optimal system for understanding the molecular machineries involved
in blood progenitor commitment.

PMID: 18339678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1186-201. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0821. Epub 2008 
Feb 28.

Functional network reconstruction reveals somatic stemness genetic maps and
dedifferentiation-like transcriptome reprogramming induced by GATA2.

Huang TS(1), Hsieh JY, Wu YH, Jen CH, Tsuang YH, Chiou SH, Partanen J, Anderson
H, Jaatinen T, Yu YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, No.
155, Sec 2, Li-Nong Street, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Somatic stem cell transplantation holds great promise in regenerative medicine.
The best-characterized adult stem cells are mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), neural
stem cells (NSCs), and CD133(+) hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The applications
of HSCs are hampered since these cells are difficult to maintain in an
undifferentiated state in vitro. Understanding genes responsible for stem cell
properties and their interactions will help on this issue. The construction of
stem cell genetic networks will also help to develop rational strategies to
revert somatic cells back to a stem-like state. We performed a systemic study on 
human CD133(+) HSCs, NSCs, MSCs, and embryonic stem cells and two different
progenies of CD133(+) HSCs, microvascular endothelial cells (MVECs) and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Genes abundant in each or in all three
somatic stem cells were identified. We also observed complex genetic networks
functioning in postnatal stem cells, in which several genes, such as PTPN11 and
DHFR, acted as hubs to maintain the stability and connectivity of the whole
genetic network. Eighty-seven HSC genes, including ANGPT1 and GATA2, were
independently identified by comparing CD34(+)CD33(-)CD38(-) hematopoietic stem
cells with CD34(+) precursors and various matured progenies. Introducing GATA2
into MVECs resulted in dedifferentiation-like transcriptome reprogramming, with
HSC genes (such as ANGPT1) being up and endothelial genes (such as EPHB2) being
down. This study provides a foundation for a more detailed understanding of human
somatic stem cells. Expressing the newly discovered stem cell genes in matured
cells might lead to a global reversion of somatic transcriptome to a stem-like
status.

PMID: 18308945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Exp Med. 2008 Mar 17;205(3):611-24. doi: 10.1084/jem.20070544. Epub 2008 Feb
25.

Antagonism of FOG-1 and GATA factors in fate choice for the mast cell lineage.

Cantor AB(1), Iwasaki H, Arinobu Y, Moran TB, Shigematsu H, Sullivan MR, Akashi
K, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. alan.cantor@childrens.harvard.edu

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1 requires direct physical interaction 
with the cofactor friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) for its essential role in erythroid
and megakaryocytic development. We show that in the mast cell lineage, GATA-1
functions completely independent of FOG proteins. Moreover, we demonstrate that
FOG-1 antagonizes the fate choice of multipotential progenitor cells for the mast
cell lineage, and that its down-regulation is a prerequisite for mast cell
development. Remarkably, ectopic expression of FOG-1 in committed mast cell
progenitors redirects them into the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and granulocytic
lineages. These lineage switches correlate with transcriptional down-regulation
of GATA-2, an essential mast cell GATA factor, via switching of GATA-1 for GATA-2
at a key enhancer element upstream of the GATA-2 gene. These findings illustrate 
combinatorial control of cell fate identity by a transcription factor and its
cofactor, and highlight the role of transcriptional networks in lineage
determination. They also provide evidence for lineage instability during early
stages of hematopoietic lineage commitment.

PMCID: PMC2275384
PMID: 18299398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2008;82:55-83. doi: 10.1016/S0070-2153(07)00003-8.

Epigenetic control of complex loci during erythropoiesis.

Wozniak RJ(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, 385 Medical Sciences Center, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms involving dynamic changes in posttranslational histone
modifications commonly control gene transcription and therefore the execution of 
all cellular differentiation programs. The differentiation of hematopoietic stem 
cells into specific progenitor cells and the diverse blood cell types represents 
a particularly powerful system for the study of epigenetic mechanisms. The
hematopoietic system allows one to define mechanisms underlying the establishment
and regulation of histone modification patterns covering entire genes and/or
chromosomes at distinct stages of differentiation. This chapter reviews progress 
in elucidating principles underlying epigenetic control of complex loci,
specifically focusing on genes differentially expressed during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18282517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 19;105(7):2421-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0707082105. Epub 2008 Feb 4.

The orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription
factor II is a critical regulator of adipogenesis.

Xu Z(1), Yu S, Hsu CH, Eguchi J, Rosen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription
factor II (COUP-TFII; Nr2f2) is expressed in adipose tissue in vivo and declines 
during differentiation. Overexpression of COUP-TFII prevents adipogenesis,
whereas shRNA-mediated reduction of COUP-TFII promotes differentiation, as shown 
by increased lipid accumulation and elevated expression of fat cell marker
proteins. Furthermore, reduction of COUP-TFII allows uncommitted fibroblasts to
be differentiated into fat cells. COUP-TFII represses the expression of a number 
of proadipogenic factors in adipocytes, with direct action noted at the CAAT
enhancer-binding protein alpha promoter. We show that COUP-TFII acts downstream
of hedgehog signaling and is required for the full antiadipogenic effect of this 
pathway. This effect is mediated in part by interaction with GATA factors.
COUP-TFII and GATA2 are physically associated and repress target gene expression 
in an additive manner. Taken together, our data demonstrate that COUP-TFII
represents an endogenous suppressor of adipogenesis, linking antiadipogenic
extracellular signals to the core transcriptional cascade.

PMCID: PMC2268152
PMID: 18250317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 12;105(6):2076-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711824105. Epub 2008 Feb 4.

Gain-of-function mutation of GATA-2 in acute myeloid transformation of chronic
myeloid leukemia.

Zhang SJ(1), Ma LY, Huang QH, Li G, Gu BW, Gao XD, Shi JY, Wang YY, Gao L, Cai X,
Ren RB, Zhu J, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin
Road II, Shanghai 200025, China.

Acquisition of additional genetic and/or epigenetic abnormalities other than the 
BCR/ABL fusion gene is believed to cause disease progression in chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) from chronic phase to blast crisis (BC). To gain insights into the
underlying mechanisms of progression to BC, we screened DNA samples from CML
patients during blast transformation for mutations in a number of transcription
factor genes that are critical for myeloid-lymphoid development. In 85 cases of
CML blast transformation, we identified two new mutations in the coding region of
GATA-2, a negative regulator of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell
differentiation. A L359V substitution within zinc finger domain (ZF) 2 of GATA-2 
was found in eight cases with myelomonoblastic features, whereas an in-frame
deletion of 6 aa (delta341-346) spanning the C-terminal border of ZF1 was
detected in one patient at myeloid BC with eosinophilia. Further studies
indicated that L359V not only increased transactivation activity of GATA-2 but
also enhanced its inhibitory effects on the activity of PU.1, a major regulator
of myelopoiesis. Consistent with the myelomonoblastic features of CML
transformation with the GATA-2 L359V mutant, transduction of the GATA-2 L359V
mutant into HL-60 cells or BCR/ABL-harboring murine cells disturbed
myelomonocytic differentiation/proliferation in vitro and in vivo, respectively. 
These data strongly suggest that GATA-2 mutations may play a role in acute
myeloid transformation in a subset of CML patients.

PMCID: PMC2538883
PMID: 18250304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Sci China C Life Sci. 2008 Mar;51(3):191-8. doi: 10.1007/s11427-008-0038-4.

CREB-binding proteins (CBP) as a transcriptional coactivator of GATA-2.

Jiang H(1), Liu L, Yang S, Tomomi T, Toru N.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Ludong University, Yantai, 264025, China.

The GATA family consists of six members, GATA 1-6. In this study, we focused on
GATA-2, which is expressed predominantly in hematopoietic progenitor cells and
plays the key role in keeping these cells in the undifferentiated status.
CREB-binding proteins (CBP) are essential transcriptional coactivators for a
large number of regulated DNA-binding transcription factors, including GATA-1.
But there have been no reports on whether CBP is still a co-activator of GATA-2. 
Here, we used the immunoprecipitation and pull-down experiments to show that the 
GATA-2 and CBP were physically binding together, and clarified the binding sites 
CH1, CH3, CH452 and CT1430 in CBP and N-finger, C-finger and N-C-finger in
GATA-2. Luciferase assay results in our experiment indicated that CBP could
increase GATA-2 transcriptional activity in the dose-dependent manner. GATA-1 is 
mainly expressed in differentiated hematopoietic cells, but still has overlap
expression with GATA-2. CBP is a coactivator of GATA-2 and GATA-1. The
investigation on the mechanism that could decide whether CBP binds to GATA-2 to
keep hematopoietic cells in the progenitor status or to GATA-1 to start
differentiation will be a very interesting and very meaningful project in the
near future.

PMID: 18246306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Exp Hematol. 2008 Apr;36(4):424-32. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.11.015. Epub 2008 
Feb 4.

Combinatorial regulation of novel erythroid gene expression in zebrafish.

Galloway JL(1), Wingert RA, Thisse C, Thisse B, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass., USA.

OBJECTIVE: The specification and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into
red blood cells requires precise coordination by multiple transcription factors. 
Most genes important for erythroid maturation are regulated by the Gata family of
DNA-binding proteins. Previously, we identified three novel genes kelch-repeat
containing protein (krcp), kiaa0650, and testhymin/glucocorticoid inducible
transcript 1 (glcci1) to be expressed in erythroid cells in a Gata-independent
manner, and we sought to further understand how these transcripts are regulated
during zebrafish hematopoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We employed a loss-of-function approach, using
combinations of antisense morpholinos to hematopoietic transcription factors and 
assayed for changes in gene expression in zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: Upon examination of embryos deficient for Gata1, Gata2, Biklf, and/or
Scl, we found distinct gene combinations were required for expression of the
novel genes. While krcp expression was dependent upon Gata1 and Biklf, kiaa0650
expression was greatly reduced and glcci1 was maintained in
Gata1/Gata2/Biklf-deficient embryos. As with the gata1 gene, kiaa0650 and krcp
required Scl for blood expression. Although reduced, glcci1 was expressed in
posterior blood precursors in the absence of Scl and Gata2.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identifies glcci1 as having Scl-independent expression in 
the posterior hematopoietic mesoderm, suggesting that its posterior expression is
activated by factors upstream or parallel to Scl and Gata2. Additionally, these
studies establish that blood gene expression programs are regulated by
transcription factors acting in combination during erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC2390894
PMID: 18243489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):232-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.020.

Exchange of GATA factors mediates transitions in looped chromatin organization at
a developmentally regulated gene locus.

Jing H(1), Vakoc CR, Ying L, Mandat S, Wang H, Zheng X, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):154-6.

Enhancers can regulate designate promoters over long distances by forming
chromatin loops. Whether chromatin loops are lost or reconfigured during gene
repression is largely unexplored. We examined the chromosome conformation of the 
Kit gene that is expressed during early erythropoiesis but is downregulated upon 
cell maturation. Kit expression is controlled by sequential occupancy of two GATA
family transcription factors. In immature cells, a distal enhancer bound by
GATA-2 is in physical proximity with the active Kit promoter. Upon cell
maturation, GATA-1 displaces GATA-2 and triggers a loss of the enhancer/promoter 
interaction. Moreover, GATA-1 reciprocally increases the proximity in nuclear
space among distinct downstream GATA elements. GATA-1-induced transitions in
chromatin conformation are not simply the consequence of transcription inhibition
and require the cofactor FOG-1. This work shows that a GATA factor exchange
reconfigures higher-order chromatin organization, and suggests that de novo
chromatin loop formation is employed by nuclear factors to specify repressive
outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2254447
PMID: 18243117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):154-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.008.

Linking differential chromatin loops to transcriptional decisions.

Apostolou E(1), Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Genetics and Biotechnology, Biomedical
Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 4 Soranou Efesiou Street, Athens, Greece.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):232-42.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 control proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic
progenitor cells via transcriptional regulation. In this issue of Molecular Cell,
Jing et al. (2008) demonstrate that GATA factor exchange on the Kit locus directs
a transcriptional switch by reconfiguring chromatin loops.

PMID: 18243110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genes Cells. 2008 Feb;13(2):159-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01158.x.

Reduced BMP4 abundance in Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice result in uropathies
resembling human CAKUT.

Hoshino T(1), Shimizu R, Ohmori S, Nagano M, Pan X, Ohneda O, Khandekar M,
Yamamoto M, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba
305-8577, Japan.

Constitutive loss of transcription factor GATA-2 leads to embryonic lethality
from primitive erythropoietic failure. We serendipitously discovered an essential
contribution of GATA-2 to urogenital development when the hematopoietic
deficiency of Gata2 null mutant animals was complemented by a Gata2 yeast
artificial chromosome (YAC) transgene; these mice died from a perinatal lethal
urogenital abnormality. Here, we report the generation and analysis of Gata2
hypomorphic mutant (Gata2(fGN)/(/fGN)) mice, which suffered from hydronephrosis
and megaureter, as do the YAC-rescued Gata2 null mutants. Gata2(fGN)/(/fGN)
mutants exhibit anteriorly displaced ureteric budding from the Wolffian duct as
well as reduced BMP4 expression in the intermediate mesoderm derivatives in a
manner that is temporally coincident with ureteric bud emergence. In Bmp4 mutant 
heterozygotes, rostral displacement of the initial bud site on the Wolffian duct 
results in abnormal urogenital development. We show here that Bmp4 mRNA is
reduced approximately twofold in Gata2(fGN)/(/fGN) mice (as in Bmp4 null
heterozygotes), and that GATA-2 trans-activates a Bmp4 first intron
element-directed reporter plasmid in co-transfection assays. These experiments
taken together implicate GATA-2 as a direct regulator of Bmp4 transcription. The 
pathophysiology described in Gata2 hypomorphic mutant animals resembles human
congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.

PMID: 18233958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Endocr Pathol. 2008 Spring;19(1):17-26. doi: 10.1007/s12022-008-9014-6.

ACTH and alpha-subunit are co-expressed in rare human pituitary corticotroph cell
adenomas proposed to originate from ACTH-committed early pituitary progenitor
cells.

Suzuki M(1), Egashira N, Kajiya H, Minematsu T, Takekoshi S, Tahara S, Sanno N,
Teramoto A, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

The functional differentiation of pituitary cells and adenomas follows the
combination of transcription factors and co-factors in three cell lineages
[growth hormone-prolactin-thyroid-stimulating hormone lineage,
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)/pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) lineage, and
follicular stimulating hormone (FSH)/luteinizing hormone (LH) lineage], which
include Pit-1, GATA-2, SF-1, NeuroD1/beta2, Tpit, ERalpha, and others. Only
rarely are hormones from different lineages co-expressed in the same adenoma
cells. Most corticotroph cell adenomas belonging to the ACTH/POMC lineage are
mono-hormonal. In our study of 89 corticotroph cell adenomas, 5 cases expressed
both ACTH and alpha-subunit; these adenomas did not express any other anterior
pituitary hormones or subunits. To clarify the mechanism involved, we studied the
transcription factors that regulate pituitary cell differentiation. NeuroD1 and
T-pit, markers of the ACTH/POMC lineage, and SF-1 and DAX-1, related to the
LH/FSH cell lineage were expressed in all cases. GATA2, a synergistic factor in
the gonadotroph cell lineage with SF-1, was also expressed in three of five
cases. As ACTH and alpha-subunit are the earliest hormones to appear during
development, we speculate that these particular adenomas are derived from
committed ACTH progenitor cells. The molecular process governing functional
differentiation of these adenomas requires further investigation.

PMID: 18228160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Ukr Biokhim Zh (1999). 2007 Jul-Aug;79(4):67-75.

[Some aspects of glutathione S-transferase P1-1 gene transcription regulation in 
human placenta].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Slonchak AM, Martseniuk OP, Rzeszowska-Wolny J, Vidlak P, Obolens'ka MIu.

Glutathione S-transferase P1-1 is the main phase II xenobiotic metabolism enzyme 
in human placenta. Low level of its gene expression and corresponding ineffective
protection of fetus from toxic compounds is associated with pregnancy disorders
such as preeclampsia and abnormalities of fetus development. It was previously
reported that environmental radioactive contamination caused down-regulation of
GSTP1 transcription in human placenta, but mechanisms responsible for such
changes were unclear. In the present study we have found that observed changes in
transcription of this gene are not caused by promoter methylation because GSTP1
promoter was not methylated in any of analyzed 91 placental samples. Regulation
of GSTP1 by methylation or transcription factors was not previously studied in
human placenta. Using "Gene Expression Atlas" online software the placental
expression profile of transcription factors known to interact with GSTP1 promoter
in other cell types, was identified. According to computer analysis the genes
coding for GATA2, GATA3, Fos-B, Nrf3 and MafK transcription factors are highly
expressed in human placenta, while genes coding for c-Fos, Juns, Mafs, ERbeta,
RARalpha and NF-kappaB factors have moderate level of expression. Competitive
EMSA provided the evidence that ARE and NF-kappaB-like sites specifically
interacted with placental nuclear proteins. Among these proteins transcription
factors AP-1 and NF-kappaB were identified using corresponding consensus
oligonucleotides as competitors in EMSA.

PMID: 18219993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):8976-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709364200. Epub 2008
Jan 21.

Defining the functional boundaries of the Gata2 locus by rescue with a linked
bacterial artificial chromosome transgene.

Brandt W(1), Khandekar M, Suzuki N, Yamamoto M, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is vital for both hematopoietic progenitor cell
function and urogenital patterning. Transgenic mapping studies have shown that
the hematopoietic and urogenital enhancers are located hundreds of kbp 5' and 3' 
to the Gata2 structural gene, and both are vital for embryonic development.
Because the size of mammalian genes, including all of their associated regulatory
elements, can exceed a megabase, transgenic complementation in mice has, in
specific instances, proven to be a formidable hurdle. After incorporating the
Gata2 structural gene as well as the distant hematopoietic and urogenital
enhancers into a single, contiguous piece of DNA by fusing two bacterial
artificial chromosomes (BACs) into one, we formally tested the hypothesis that
the functional boundaries of this locus are contained within this contiguous
genomic span. We show that two independent lines of transgenic mice bearing a
multicopy 413-kbp-linked Gata2 BAC transgene (bearing sequences from -187 to +226
kbp of the locus) are able to fully rescue Gata2 null mutant embryonic lethality 
and that the rescued animals behave and reproduce normally. Surprisingly, the
linked BAC confers expression in the ureteric epithelium, whereas sequences
within any of the overlapping parental BACs and a yeast artificial chromosome
that were originally tested do not, and thus these experiments also define a
novel synthetic enhancer activity that has not been previously described. These
genetic complementation studies define the required outer limits of the Gata2
locus and formally demonstrate that enhancers lying beyond those boundaries are
not necessary for Gata2-regulated viability or fecundity.

PMCID: PMC2276365
PMID: 18211891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):5223-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115857. Epub 2008 
Jan 17.

Repression via the GATA box is essential for tissue-specific erythropoietin gene 
expression.

Obara N(1), Suzuki N, Kim K, Nagasawa T, Imagawa S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance (TARA), University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4836-7.

In response to anemia, erythropoietin (Epo) gene transcription is markedly
induced in the kidney and liver. To elucidate how Epo gene expression is
regulated in vivo, we established transgenic mouse lines expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of a 180-kb mouse Epo gene locus. GFP
expression was induced by anemia or hypoxia specifically in peritubular
interstitial cells of the kidney and hepatocytes surrounding the central vein.
Surprisingly, renal Epo-producing cells had a neuronlike morphology and expressed
neuronal marker genes. Furthermore, the regulatory mechanisms of Epo gene
expression were explored using transgenes containing mutations in the GATA motif 
of the promoter region. A single nucleotide mutation in this motif resulted in
constitutive ectopic expression of transgenic GFP in renal distal tubules,
collecting ducts, and certain populations of epithelial cells in other tissues.
Since both GATA-2 and GATA-3 bind to the GATA box in distal tubular cells, both
factors are likely to repress constitutively ectopic Epo gene expression in these
cells. Thus, GATA-based repression is essential for the inducible and cell
type-specific expression of the Epo gene.

PMID: 18202227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Blood. 2008 Mar 15;111(6):3005-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-098830. Epub 2008
Jan 9.

Runx genes are direct targets of Scl/Tal1 in the yolk sac and fetal liver.

Landry JR(1), Kinston S, Knezevic K, de Bruijn MF, Wilson N, Nottingham WT, Peitz
M, Edenhofer F, Pimanda JE, Ottersbach K, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors such as Scl/Tal1, Lmo2, and Runx1 are essential for the
development of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, the precise mechanisms
by which these factors interact to form transcriptional networks, as well as the 
identity of the genes downstream of these regulatory cascades, remain largely
unknown. To this end, we generated an Scl(-/-) yolk sac cell line to identify
candidate Scl target genes by global expression profiling after reintroduction of
a TAT-Scl fusion protein. Bioinformatics analysis resulted in the identification 
of 9 candidate Scl target transcription factor genes, including Runx1 and Runx3. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that both Runx genes are direct targets
of Scl in the fetal liver and that Runx1 is also occupied by Scl in the yolk sac.
Furthermore, binding of an Scl-Lmo2-Gata2 complex was demonstrated to occur on
the regions flanking the conserved E-boxes of the Runx1 loci and was shown to
transactivate the Runx1 element. Together, our data provide a key component of
the transcriptional network of early hematopoiesis by identifying downstream
targets of Scl that can explain key aspects of the early Scl(-/-) phenotype.

PMID: 18184866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Regen Med. 2008 Jan;3(1):23-31.

Endotoxin-induced silencing of mesoderm induction and functional differentiation:
role of HMGB1 in pluripotency and infection.

Sivasubramaniyan K(1), Atluri RR, Sarda K, Arvind M, Balaji V, Deb KD.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal University, Embryonic Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Program,
Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, #10 Service Road, Domlur Layout,
Bangalore 560071, India.

OBJECTIVES: Mechanisms underpinning Gram-negative bacterial vaginosis-induced
birth anomalies are obscure. Ethical issues limit such studies on
peri-implantation-stage human embryos. Here we have used embryoid bodies (EBs) as
an in vitro model to examine the effect of Gram-negative bacterial
endotoxins/lipopolysaccharides (LPS) on the faithful induction of germ lineages
during embryogenesis. The role of LPS-inducible cytokine and pluripotency-related
DNA-binding protein HMGB1 was also studied in these EBs.
METHODS: EBs derived from the human embryonic stem cell line HUES9 were exposed
to 12.5 pg/ml of LPS for 48 h. The expression profile of the ectoderm, endoderm, 
mesoderm and trophectoderm lineage markers, such as beta III-tubulin, GATA4,
BMP2, Brachury and beta-hCG, were studied, by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence.
Inhibition of mesoderm induction was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis for hANP, cTnT,
ABCG2, GATA2, BMP4 and HAND1. Osteoblast differentiation was induced in the EBs, 
and confirmed by von Kosa and Alizarin red staining. A comet assay was also
carried out to assess the degree of apoptosis in these EBs.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We found that the LPS-treated EBs were selectively
silenced for mesoderm markers and failed to differentiate into functional
osteoblasts. HMGB1 expression was absent in the normal EBs and was found to be
localized in the cytoplasm of the LPS-treated EBs. Overall, our data indicate
that endotoxin-induced HMGB1 expression in the peri-implantation-stage embryos
can bring about severe birth defects of, for example, the bone and heart. This
study also indicates that HMGB1 could be involved in maintenance of pluripotency 
in the human embryonic stem cells by impeding their differentiation.

PMID: 18154460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochemistry. 2008 Jan 22;47(3):859-69. Epub 2007 Dec 23.

Differential GATA factor stabilities: implications for chromatin occupancy by
structurally similar transcription factors.

Lurie LJ(1), Boyer ME, Grass JA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, 1300 University Avenue, 385 Medical Sciences Center, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Whereas the transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 function both uniquely and
redundantly to control blood cell development, the process termed hematopoiesis, 
mechanisms underlying their unique versus common functions are poorly understood.
We used two independent assays to demonstrate that GATA-1 is considerably more
stable than GATA-2 in multiple cellular contexts, even though both factors are
subject to degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Studies with GATA
factor mutants and novel chimeric GATA factors provided evidence that both GATA-1
and GATA-2 have highly unstable zinc finger core modules. The GATA-1 and GATA-2
N-termini both confer stabilization to their respective zinc finger core modules.
In contrast, the GATA-1 and GATA-2 C-termini confer stabilization and
destabilization, respectively. As GATA-2 stabilization via proteasome inhibition 
impairs the capacity of GATA-1 to displace GATA-2 from endogenous chromatin
sites, we propose that differential GATA factor stability is an important
determinant of chromatin target site occupancy and therefore the establishment of
genetic networks that control hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18154321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Feb 15;366(3):827-33. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Differentiation-specific expression of chromatin remodeling factor BRM.

Itoh T(1), Miyake K, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan.

The chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF exclusively contains BRG1 or BRM as an
ATPase subunit, but the physiological relevance of these ATPases is not yet
clear. Here, we studied the developmental regulation of the brm gene. A
differentiation-specific up-regulation of BRM expression was observed with P19,
F9 and C2C12 cells as with neural cells and hepatocytes. The promoter region of
brm contains two putative binding sites for CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta
(C/EBPbeta). Each site partially overlapped with binding sites for GATAs.
C/EBPbeta stimulated the transcriptional activity of the brm promoter but GATA2
and 3 down-regulated the expression. C/EBPbeta bound to the proximal sequences of
the promoter in differentiated cells and was replaced by GATAs which bound to the
overlapping sites in the undifferentiated state. C/EBPbeta and GATAs may
developmentally regulate the expression of brm by mutually exclusive binding.

PMID: 18082132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;28(8):537-40.

[Expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in the bone marrow of patients with Monge's
disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JP(1), Jia NY, Li ZQ, Wang HX, Su J, Li YL, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To find out how GATA-1 and GATA-2 behave in the bone marrow of
patients with Monge's disease.
METHODS: The levels of mRNA in mononuclear cells (MNC) and proteins of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 in the bone marrow of patients with Monge's disease and controls were
determined by RT-PCR and immune cytolysis chemical method.
RESULTS: (1) All patients and controls expressed GATA-1 mRNA (Monge's disease
1.033 +/- 0.146, Control 0.458 +/- 0.076) and GATA-2 mRNA (Monge's disease 0.451 
+/- 0.073, Control 0.185 +/- 0.074). All patients expressed both GATA-1 (positive
cell counts 77.3 +/- 33.3, positive score 135.4 +/- 75.4) and GATA-2 ( positive
cell counts 29.4 +/- 11.4, positive score 48.4 +/- 19.7). All the controls
expressed GATA-1 (positive cell counts 18.1 +/- 11.3, positive score 24.2 +/-
13.4) while 12 of 20 controls expressed GATA-2 ( positive cell counts 5.4 +/-
3.0, positive score 7.3 +/- 4.2). The expression of mRNA and proteins of GATA-1
and GATA-2 in Monge's disease were higher than in controls (P < 0.01). (2) There 
was a positive correlation between GATA-1 and Hb (P < 0.01), as did between mRNA 
and proteins of GATA-1 and GATA-2. (3) Both the proteins of GATA-1 and GATA-2
located only in the cytoplasm but not the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Two of inherent genes, GATA-1 and GATA-2 which were expressed at
higher levels in patients with Monge's disease than in controls might play
significant roles in the pathogenesis of Monge's disease.

PMID: 18078130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Dec;26(11):2989-3002.

Phenotype of V2-derived interneurons and their relationship to the axon guidance 
molecule EphA4 in the developing mouse spinal cord.

Lundfald L(1), Restrepo CE, Butt SJ, Peng CY, Droho S, Endo T, Zeilhofer HU,
Sharma K, Kiehn O.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Locomotor Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Retzius väg 8, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The ventral spinal cord consists of interneuron groups arising from distinct,
genetically defined, progenitor domains along the dorsoventral axis. Many of
these interneuron groups settle in the ventral spinal cord which, in mammals,
contains the central pattern generator for locomotion. In order to better
understand the locomotor networks, we have used different transgenic mice for
anatomical characterization of one of these interneuron groups, called V2
interneurons. Neurons in this group are either V2a interneurons marked by the
postmitotic expression of the transcription factor Chx10, or V2b interneurons
which express the transcription factors Gata2 and Gata3. We found that all V2a
and most V2b interneurons were ipsilaterally projecting in embryos as well as in 
newborns. V2a interneurons were for the most part glutamatergic while V2b
interneurons were mainly GABAergic or glycinergic. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that a large proportion of V2 interneurons expressed the axon guidance molecule
EphA4, a molecule previously shown to be important for correct organization of
locomotor networks. We also showed that V2 interneurons and motor neurons alone
did not account for all EphA4-expressing neurons in the spinal cord. Together,
these findings enable a better interpretation of neural networks underlying
locomotion, and open up the search for as yet unknown components of the mammalian
central pattern generator.

PMID: 18028107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Seikagaku. 2007 Oct;79(10):941-52.

[Function and gene expression regulation of GATA-1 and GATA-2 transcription].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimizu R(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for TARA and Institute for Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

PMID: 18027572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 6;104(45):17692-7. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Gata2, Fli1, and Scl form a recursively wired gene-regulatory circuit during
early hematopoietic development.

Pimanda JE(1), Ottersbach K, Knezevic K, Kinston S, Chan WY, Wilson NK, Landry
JR, Wood AD, Kolb-Kokocinski A, Green AR, Tannahill D, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V,
Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom. jpimanda@unsw.edu.au

Conservation of the vertebrate body plan has been attributed to the evolutionary 
stability of gene-regulatory networks (GRNs). We describe a regulatory circuit
made up of Gata2, Fli1, and Scl/Tal1 and their enhancers, Gata2-3, Fli1+12, and
Scl+19, that operates during specification of hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo. 
We show that the Fli1+12 enhancer, like the Gata2-3 and Scl+19 enhancers, targets
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and relies on a combination of Ets, Gata, and
E-Box motifs. We show that the Gata2-3 enhancer also uses a similar cluster of
motifs and that Gata2, Fli1, and Scl are expressed in embryonic day-11.5 dorsal
aorta where HSCs originate and in fetal liver where they multiply. The three HSC 
enhancers in these tissues and in ES cell-derived hemangioblast equivalents are
bound by each of these transcription factors (TFs) and form a fully connected
triad that constitutes a previously undescribed example of both this network
motif in mammalian development and a GRN kernel operating during the
specification of a mammalian stem cell.

PMCID: PMC2077040
PMID: 17962413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Dec 14;364(2):383-7. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Regulation of adipocyte differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells by
transcription factor GATA-2.

Okitsu Y(1), Takahashi S, Minegishi N, Kameoka J, Kaku M, Yamamoto M, Sasaki T,
Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

GATA-2 is a transcription factor expressed in stem and progenitor cells of
various cell lineages. In this study, we examined the role of GATA-2 in the
differentiation of adipocytes, which are the main components of the
microenvironment for hematopoiesis. Suppression of GATA-2 in TBR343, a
preadipocytic stromal cell line, resulted in the acceleration of adipocyte
differentiation. Conversely, overexpression of GATA-2 induced the resistance of
adipocyte differentiation. In addition, regulatory elements of the GATA-2 gene in
TBR343 are the same as those in hematopoietic cells. These results suggest that
GATA-2 maintains a hematopoietic microenvironment by regulating the
differentiation of adipocytes.

PMID: 17950250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Reprod Dev. 2008 May;75(5):785-94.

Clenbuterol increases muscle fiber size and GATA-2 protein in rat skeletal muscle
in utero.

Downie D(1), Delday MI, Maltin CA, Sneddon AA.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.

Certain beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists, such as clenbuterol, are known to elicit a
muscle-specific anabolism or hypertrophy in both normal and catabolic muscle in a
wide variety of species. However, the underlying mechanism(s) of the
beta(2)-agonist-induced anabolism remains unclear. This study aimed to determine 
the effects of clenbuterol administration in utero on skeletal muscle and to
examine the underlying molecular mechanisms. Pregnant rats were fed clenbuterol
(2 mg/kg diet) from Day 4 of gestation (4 dg) until weanling and fetal samples
were taken from 13.5, 15.5, 17.5, and 19.5 dg and from 1d neonatal pups. Muscles 
were analyzed for total DNA, RNA and protein and sections examined
morphologically for changes in muscle development. Western and
immunohistochemical analyses were performed to identify changes in known myogenic
signaling proteins. Clenbuterol increased the size of both fast and slow fibers
in utero which was associated with a decreased DNA:protein ratio (28%) and an
increased RNA:DNA ratio (36%). Additionally, drug treatment in utero induced a
decrease in the fast:slow fiber ratio (38%). These myogenic changes were
correlated with an increase in the GATA-2 hypertrophic transcription factor at
both 17.5 dg (by 250%) and 19.5 dg (by 40%) in fetuses from clenbuterol treated
dams. In addition, drug treatment resulted in increased membrane association of
PKC-micro at 17.5 dg (325%) and increased PKC-alpha cytosolic abundance (40%) and
PKC-theta membrane abundance at 19.5 dg (250%). These results are the first
demonstration that beta(2)-agonists such as clenbuterol may act through
upregulating the GATA-2 transcription factor and implicate certain PKC isoforms
in the drug-induced regulation of skeletal muscle development.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17948249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008 Jan;14(1):75-87.

Genome-wide expression profiling during protection from colitis by regulatory T
cells.

Kristensen NN(1), Olsen J, Gad M, Claesson MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, University of
Copenhagen, Panum Institute, Denmark. n.n.kristensen@mai.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: In the adoptive transfer model of colitis it has been shown that
regulatory T cells (Treg) can hinder disease development and cure already
existing mild colitis. The mechanisms underlying this regulatory effect of
CD4(+)CD25(+) Tregs are not well understood.
METHODS: To identify pathways of importance for immune regulation in protected
mice we studied the genome-wide expression profile in the inflamed rectum of SCID
mice with CD4(+) T cell transfer colitis and in the uninflamed rectum of mice
protected from colitis by Treg cells. We used DNA microarray technology
(Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array), which enabled an analysis of a 
complete set of RNA transcript levels in each sample. Array results were
confirmed by real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Data were analyzed using combined projections to latent structures and
functional annotation analysis. The colitic samples were clearly distinguishable 
from samples from normal mice by a vast number of inflammation- and growth
factor-related transcripts. In contrast, the Treg-protected animals could not be 
distinguished from either the normal BALB/c mice or the normal SCID mice. mRNA
expression profiles of cytokine, chemokine, and growth factor genes were
significantly altered in colitic as opposed to noncolitic mice. In particular,
the transcription factors STAT3, GATA2, and NFkappaB, the cytokine IL1beta, and
the chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR1 as well as their ligands all seemingly
play central roles in the inflammatory processes.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that these molecules alone or in combination could be
future therapeutic targets.

PMID: 17924563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cytotherapy. 2007;9(8):729-37. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Comparative analysis of mesenchymal stromal cells from murine bone marrow and
amniotic fluid.

Nadri S(1), Soleimani M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and tissue engineering Department, Stem Cell Technology, Tehran,
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Murine mesenchymal stromal cells (mMSC) are a good model for
pre-clinical investigations, and alternative sources of mMSC are subject to
intensive experiments. In the present study, we obtained mMSCs from amniotic
fluid (AF) and compared their characteristics with mMSCs from bone marrow (BM).
METHODS: NMRI mice, 4-6 weeks old, were killed and AF and BM cells collected from
those in the second week of pregnancy. MSC were achieved by adhesion to cell
culture plastic. Isolated cells were assessed for clonogenic capacity, some
surface markers (epitopes) and differentiation potential.
RESULTS: We achieved AF mMSC more readily than BM mMSC. Differences concerning
colony assay and some surface markers of mMSC derived from these two source cells
were observed. Most strikingly, AF mMSC showed no adipogenic differentiation
capacity, in contrast with BM mMSC.
DISCUSSION: Our results show that mMSC from AF are an appropriate source for
pre-clinical investigation. Furthermore, mMSC from different sources of mice vary
in clonogenic capacity, surface markers and differentiation potential.

PMID: 17917881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Oct;30(10):1826-32.

Production and regulation of eotaxin-2/CCL24 in a differentiated human leukemic
cell line, HT93.

Yoshida N(1), Aizu-Yokota E, Sonoda Y, Moriwaki Y, Kishi K, Kasahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyoritsu University of Pharmacy, Minato-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

When a human leukemic cell line, HT93 was incubated with all-trans retinoic acid 
(ATRA), IL-5, or both, this cell line was differentiated into eosinophic lineage,
in that an eosinophilic specific granule proteins, major basic protein (MBP) and 
eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) appeared. Both CD11b and CC chemokine receptor, CCR3 
expression were upregulated, while CD71 expression was downregulated by ATRA or
ATRA+IL-5. Concomitantly, marked production of eotaxin-2/CCL24 was observed, but 
no production of eotaxin-1/CCL11 and eotaxin-3/CCL26 was detected. Since only 20 
to 30% cells incubated with ATRA became positive for CCR3, CCR3(+) population was
enriched by a magnetic activated cell sorter (MACS). Enriched CCR3(+) population 
produced higher eotaxin-2/CCL24 than the CCR3(-) population, indicating that
differentiated eosinophils are capable of producing eotaxin-2/CCL24. During the
ATRA-induced differentiation, expression of a transcriptional factor, GATA-1 was 
significantly increased. Introduction of siRNA against GATA-1 markedly reduced
the ATRA-induced differentiation markers including CD11b and CCR3, as well as
reduced eotaxin-2/CCL24 production. Finally, ATRA-induced differentiation and
eotaxin-2/CCL24 production were greatly enhanced in the GATA-1-overexpressed
clones. These results indicate that the ability to produce eotaxin-2/CCL24 is
acquired during the differentiation into eosinophilic lineage which is dependent 
on GATA-1 expression.

PMID: 17917245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2008;145(3):182-92. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

A comparison of inflammatory mediators released by basophils of asthmatic and
control subjects in response to high-affinity IgE receptor aggregation.

Gilmartin L(1), Tarleton CA, Schuyler M, Wilson BS, Oliver JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, N. Mex. 87131,
USA.

BACKGROUND: In human blood basophils, cross-linking the high-affinity IgE
receptor Fc epsilonRI with multivalent antigen activates a signaling pathway
leading to secretion of inflammatory mediators and cytokine production. Basophils
are known to play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma but there has
been no comprehensive examination of the effectors these cells produce. Here a
study of the transcription and release of a selection of chemokines and cytokines
from basophils was undertaken.
METHODS: A Cartesian antibody array provided an effective method of assaying for 
multiple cytokines and chemokines simultaneously. Results were verified by RT-PCR
and ELISA assays. This allowed the comparison of freshly prepared peripheral
blood basophil responses to cross-linking of the high-affinity IgE receptor, with
and without preincubation with IL-3.
RESULTS: Evidence that human blood basophils produce the chemokines MIP-5,
eotaxin and GM-CSF was provided by antibody array and RT-PCR analyses.
Preincubation with IL-3 enhanced the expression and release of IL-13, IL-8 and
mRNA transcripts encoding MIP-5 and GATA2 in basophils from both asthmatic and
control subjects. Leptin mRNA transcription, storage and release in basophils are
described for the first time.
CONCLUSIONS: Surveying cytokine and chemokines stored and released by peripheral 
blood basophils shows that asthmatic and control subjects share similar profiles 
even when their degranulation responses are distinct. Evidence is provided for
the production of leptin, GM-CSF, eotaxin and MIP-5 by peripheral blood
basophils. IL-3 preincubation enhances the production and release of IL-8 upon
IgE receptor cross-linking.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 17912006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Stem Cell Res. 2007 Oct;1(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2007.09.004.

Effects of fgf2 and oxygen in the bmp4-driven differentiation of trophoblast from
human embryonic stem cells.

Das P(1), Ezashi T, Schulz LC, Westfall SD, Livingston KA, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Christopher S.
Bond Life Sciences Center, 65211, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) differentiate into trophoblast when treated
with BMP4. Here we studied the effects of either low (4 % O(2), L) or atmospheric
O(2) (20% O(2), A) in the presence and absence of FGF2 on H1 hESC cultured in
presence of BMP4. Differentiation progressed from the periphery towards the
center of colonies. It occurred most quickly in the absence of FGF2 and under A
and was slowest in presence of FGF2 and under L. Chorionic gonadotrophin (CG)
production required A while FGF2 suppressed progesterone synthesis under both A
and L. FGF2 was then omitted while we examined trophoblast markers SSEA-1 and
cytokeratin-7 and -8, whose expression also progressed inwards from the periphery
of colonies and occurred more rapidly under A than L. By day 5, most cells
outside central islands of Oct4-positive cells were positive for these antigens
under both conditions and many also expressed HLA-G, a marker of extra-villous
cytotrophoblast. Under A, but not L, CGalpha and CGbeta became prominent in
GATA2-positive, peripherally located, multinucleated cells. In conclusion, BMP4
induced conversion of hESC exclusively towards trophoblast; FGF2 slowed
differentiation, while O(2) accelerated this process and promoted
syncytiotrophoblast formation.

PMCID: PMC2634289
PMID: 19194525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 15;310(2):454-69. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

GATA-2 functions downstream of BMPs and CaM KIV in ectodermal cells during
primitive hematopoiesis.

Dalgin G(1), Goldman DC, Donley N, Ahmed R, Eide CA, Christian JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, School of Medicine, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.

In Xenopus, primitive blood originates from the mesoderm, but extrinsic signals
from the ectoderm are required during gastrulation to enable these cells to
differentiate as erythrocytes. The nature of these signals, and how they are
transcriptionally regulated, is not well understood. We have previously shown
that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are required to signal to ectodermal
cells to generate secondary non-cell-autonomous signal(s) necessary for primitive
erythropoiesis, and that calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaM KIV)
antagonizes BMP signaling. The current studies demonstrate that Gata-2 functions 
downstream of BMP receptor activation in these same cells, and is a direct target
for antagonism by CaM KIV. We show, using loss of function analysis in whole
embryos and in explants, that ectodermal Gata-2 is required for primitive
erythropoiesis, and that BMP signals cannot rescue blood defects caused by
ectoderm removal or loss of ectodermal GATA-2. Furthermore, we provide evidence
that acetylation of GATA-2 is required for its function in primitive blood
formation in vivo. Our data support a model in which Gata-2 is a transcriptional 
target downstream of BMPs within ectodermal cells, while activation of the CaM
KIV signaling pathway alters GATA-2 function posttranslationally, by inhibiting
its acetylation.

PMCID: PMC2049090
PMID: 17850784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Blood. 2007 Dec 15;110(13):4188-97. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Runx1-mediated hematopoietic stem-cell emergence is controlled by a
Gata/Ets/SCL-regulated enhancer.

Nottingham WT(1), Jarratt A, Burgess M, Speck CL, Cheng JF, Prabhakar S, Rubin
EM, Li PS, Sloane-Stanley J, Kong-A-San J, de Bruijn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The transcription factor Runx1/AML1 is an important regulator of hematopoiesis
and is critically required for the generation of the first definitive
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the major vasculature of the mouse embryo. As 
a pivotal factor in HSC ontogeny, its transcriptional regulation is of high
interest but is largely undefined. In this study, we used a combination of
comparative genomics and chromatin analysis to identify a highly conserved 531-bp
enhancer located at position + 23.5 in the first intron of the 224-kb mouse Runx1
gene. We show that this enhancer contributes to the early hematopoietic
expression of Runx1. Transcription factor binding in vivo and analysis of the
mutated enhancer in transient transgenic mouse embryos implicate Gata2 and Ets
proteins as critical factors for its function. We also show that the
SCL/Lmo2/Ldb-1 complex is recruited to the enhancer in vivo. Importantly,
transplantation experiments demonstrate that the intronic Runx1 enhancer targets 
all definitive HSCs in the mouse embryo, suggesting that it functions as a
crucial cis-regulatory element that integrates the Gata, Ets, and SCL
transcriptional networks to initiate HSC generation.

PMCID: PMC2234795
PMID: 17823307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):605-13.

GATA factors induce mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation toward
extraembryonic endoderm.

Zhang C(1), Ye X, Zhang H, Ding M, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China.

The GATA family of transcription factors are implicated in early embryonic
development. There are six factors in this family in vertebrates. GATA4 and GATA6
have been demonstrated to induce mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). We investigated the effect of GATA3 on the 
differentiation of mES cells both in the ES cell and in the embryoid body (EB)
states. The results demonstrate that GATA3 overexpression can initiate the ES
cell differentiation program toward ExE. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA1 and
GATA2 in ES cells and EBs resulted in similar effects. We believe this finding
can augment our understanding of mouse ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17784834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 20;7:97.

A highly conserved regulatory element controls hematopoietic expression of GATA-2
in zebrafish.

Yang Z(1), Jiang H, Zhao F, Shankar DB, Sakamoto KM, Zhang MQ, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1606, USA.
zyanghon@ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: GATA-2 is a transcription factor required for hematopoietic stem cell
survival as well as for neuronal development in vertebrates. It has been shown
that specific expression of GATA-2 in blood progenitor cells requires distal
cis-acting regulatory elements. Identification and characterization of these
elements should help elucidating transcription regulatory mechanisms of GATA-2
expression in hematopoietic lineage.
RESULTS: By pair-wise alignments of the zebrafish genomic sequences flanking
GATA-2 to orthologous regions of fugu, mouse, rat and human genomes, we
identified three highly conserved non-coding sequences in the genomic region
flanking GATA-2, two upstream of GATA-2 and another downstream. Using both
transposon and bacterial artificial chromosome mediated germline transgenic
zebrafish analyses, one of the sequences was established as necessary and
sufficient to direct hematopoietic GFP expression in a manner that recapitulates 
that of GATA-2. In addition, we demonstrated that this element has enhancer
activity in mammalian myeloid leukemia cell lines, thus validating its functional
conservation among vertebrate species. Further analysis of potential
transcription factor binding sites suggested that integrity of the putative HOXA3
and LMO2 sites is required for regulating GATA-2/GFP hematopoietic expression.
CONCLUSION: Regulation of GATA-2 expression in hematopoietic cells is likely
conserved among vertebrate animals. The integrated approach described here,
drawing on embryological, transgenesis and computational methods, should be
generally applicable to analyze tissue-specific gene regulation involving distal 
DNA cis-acting elements.

PMCID: PMC1988811
PMID: 17708765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):3853-61. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Cdc42 critically regulates the balance between myelopoiesis and erythropoiesis.

Yang L(1), Wang L, Kalfa TA, Cancelas JA, Shang X, Pushkaran S, Mo J, Williams
DA, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The Rho GTPase Cdc42 regulates adhesion, migration, and homing, as well as cell
cycle progression, of hematopoietic stem cells, but its role in multilineage
blood development remains unclear. We report here that inducible deletion of
cdc42 in cdc42-floxed mouse bone marrow by the interferon-responsive,
Mx1-Cre-mediated excision led to myeloid and erythroid developmental defects.
Cdc42 deletion affected the number of early myeloid progenitors while suppressing
erythroid differentiation. Cdc42-deficient mice developed a fatal
myeloproliferative disorder manifested by significant leukocytosis with
neutrophilia, myeloid hyperproliferation, and myeloid cell infiltration into
distal organs. Concurrently, Cdc42 deficiency caused anemia and splenomegaly
accompanied with decreased bone marrow erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-Es) and
colony-forming units-erythroid (CFU-Es) activities and reduced immature erythroid
progenitors, suggesting that Cdc42 deficiency causes a block in the early stage
of erythropoiesis. Cdc42 activity is responsive to stimulation by SCF, IL3,
SDF-1alpha, and fibronectin. The increased myelopoiesis and decreased
erythropoiesis of the knockout mice are associated with an altered gene
transcription program in hematopoietic progenitors, including up-regulation of
promyeloid genes such as PU.1, C/EBP1alpha, and Gfi-1 in the common myeloid
progenitors and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors and down-regulation of
proerythroid gene such as GATA-2 in the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.
Thus, Cdc42 is an essential regulator of the balance between myelopoiesis and
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2190607
PMID: 17702896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(12):2226-39. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Isolation, culture and immortalisation of hepatic oval cells from adult mice fed 
a choline-deficient, ethionine-supplemented diet.

Tirnitz-Parker JE(1), Tonkin JN, Knight B, Olynyk JK, Yeoh GC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical, Biomolecular and Chemical Sciences, University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Australia. tirnitz@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

Oval cells have great potential for use in cell therapy to treat liver disease,
however this cannot be achieved until the factors which govern their
proliferation and differentiation are better understood. We describe a method to 
establish primary cultures of murine oval cells, and the derivation of two novel 
lines from these. Primary cultures from the livers of wildtype or TAT-GRE lacZ
transgenic mice subjected to a choline-deficient, ethionine-supplemented diet
comprised up to 80% oval cells at day 7 based on A6 or CK19 staining. Cell lines 
were clonally derived, which underwent spontaneous immortalisation following
prolonged maintenance in culture. Immunostaining and RT-PCR demonstrated they
express hepatocytic and biliary markers and they were therefore termed
"bipotential murine oval liver" (BMOL) cells. Under proliferating culture
conditions, BMOL or BMOL-TAT cells abundantly expressed oval cell and biliary
markers, whereas mature hepatocytic markers were upregulated when the growth
conditions were changed to facilitate differentiation. Hepatic differentiation of
BMOL-TAT cells could be traced by measuring the expression of their lacZ
transgene, which is driven by a promoter element from tyrosine aminotransferase
(TAT), a marker of adult hepatocytes. Interestingly, haematopoietic markers were 
upregulated in superconfluent cultures, indicating a possible multipotentiality. 
None of the cell lines grew in semi-solid agar, nor did they form tumours in nude
mice, suggesting they are non-tumourigenic. These novel murine oval cell lines,
together with a reliable method for isolation and culture of primary oval cells, 
will provide a useful tool for investigating the contribution of oval cells to
liver regeneration.

PMID: 17693121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Inflamm Res. 2007 Aug;56(8):345-51.

Thymoquinone suppressses in vitro production of IL-5 and IL-13 by mast cells in
response to lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

El Gazzar MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA. melgazza@wfubmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Activated mast cells produce Th2 cytokines that regulate allergic
inflammation. We have previously shown that thymoquinone (TQ) attenuated airway
inflammation in a mouse model of allergic airway inflammation. The present study 
investigated whether TQ affects Th2 cytokine response in vitro in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated rat mast cells, RBL-2H3.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RBL-2H3 cells were stimulated for 12 h with 0.1 microg/ml 
LPS in the presence or absence of 10 microM TQ. Th2 cytokine production was
measured in the culture supernatants by ELISA. The mRNA expression of IL-5, IL-
13 and GATA transcription factors was determined by RT-PCR. The expression of the
transcription proteins c-Fos, c- Jun and phospho-c-Jun were determined by western
blotting. The in vivo binding of GATA, AP-1 and NF-AT transcription factors to
IL-5 promoter was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis.
RESULTS: TQ significantly (p <0.05) inhibited LPS-induced IL-5 and IL-13 mRNA
expression and protein production. However, TQ did not affect IL-10 production.
GATA transcription factors are involved in the transcription of IL-5 and IL-13.
TQ had no effect on the expression of AP-1 protein subunits, c-Jun and c-Fos, but
markedly reduced the transcription of GATA-1 and -2 genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that GATA, AP-1 and NF-AT binding to IL-5 promoter
was induced by LPS stimulation and that TQ inhibited GATA binding at the IL-5
promoter but did not affect AP-1 and NF-AT binding.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that TQ inhibits LPS-induced proinflammatory
cytokine production in RBL-2H3 cells by blocking GATA transcription factor
expression and promoter binding which demonstrates the anti-inflammatory effect
of TQ.

PMID: 17687519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2661-7.

Zebrafish homologue irx1a is required for the differentiation of serotonergic
neurons.

Cheng CW(1), Yan CH, Choy SW, Hui MN, Hui CC, Cheng SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong.

Serotonergic (5HT) neurons produce neurotransmitter serotonin, which modulates
various neuronal circuits. The specification and differentiation of 5HT neurons
require both extrinsic signals such as Shh and Fgf, as well as intrinsic
transcription factors such as nkx2.2, mash1, phox2b, Gata2, and pet1. In this
study, we show that iroquois homeodomain factor irx1a, but not irx1b, is
expressed in the 5HT neurons. Knockdown of irx1a by antisense morpholino
nucleotides reveals that it is a critical determinant for the differentiation of 
5HT neurons in the hindbrain. However, irx1a morphants do not show a reduction of
the progenitors of 5HT neurons. Hence, irx1a is not required for the initial
specification but it is required for the complete differentiation of 5HT neurons.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17685478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Cell. 2007 Aug 3;27(3):380-92.

A hierarchical network of transcription factors governs androgen
receptor-dependent prostate cancer growth.

Wang Q(1), Li W, Liu XS, Carroll JS, Jänne OA, Keeton EK, Chinnaiyan AM, Pienta
KJ, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that plays a
key role in prostate cancer. Little is known about the nature of AR
cis-regulatory sites in the human genome. We have mapped the AR binding regions
on two chromosomes in human prostate cancer cells by combining chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with tiled oligonucleotide microarrays. We find that
the majority of AR binding regions contain noncanonical AR-responsive elements
(AREs). Importantly, we identify a noncanonical ARE as a cis-regulatory target of
AR action in TMPRSS2, a gene fused to ETS transcription factors in the majority
of prostate cancers. In addition, through the presence of enriched DNA-binding
motifs, we find other transcription factors including GATA2 and Oct1 that
cooperate in mediating the androgen response. These collaborating factors,
together with AR, form a regulatory hierarchy that governs androgen-dependent
gene expression and prostate cancer growth and offer potential new opportunities 
for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3947890
PMID: 17679089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Hematology. 2007 Aug;12(4):331-5.

GATA-1, -2 and -3 genes expression in bone marrow microenviroment with chronic
aplastic anemia.

Wu X(1), Li Y, Zhu K, Wang Z, Chen S, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Institute of Hematology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, PR
China.

Both bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and transcription factors (GATA-1, GATA-2 
and GATA-3) are important in the normal hematopoiesis and the pathogenesis of
hematopoietic disease. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
expression of GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 genes in the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment from patients with chronic aplastic anemia (cAA) and normal
individuals. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were isolated from BM of patients with cAA 
(8 cases) and normal controls (9 cases). Adherent cells (i.e. BMSCs) were
collected after long-term culture in vitro. The semi-quantitative expression
levels of GATA genes were analyzed by using RT-PCR-enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay (RT-PCR-ELISA). The BMSCs with cAA grew slowly compared with the normal
BMSCs. In BMSCs, only the expression ratio of GATA-3 gene from cAA group (50.0%) 
was significant lower than the normal controls (P < 0.05), the expression ratios 
of other GATA genes from cAA group were similar to the normal controls. There was
no difference in the expression level of GATA-1 gene in the BMSCs between normal 
controls and cAA group. The expression level of GATA-2 gene in BMSCs from cAA was
significantly lower than that from normal controls (P < 0.05). The expression
level of GATA-3 gene in BMSCs from cAA was significantly higher than that from
normal controls (P < 0.05). The dominant expression of GATA-3 gene was found in
the BMSCs from cAA and normal controls. GATA genes can be expressed in the BMSCs 
and may play a role in the regulation of hematopoiesis in normal individuals, as 
well as in patients with cAA. The change of expression levels of GATA genes may
influence the hematopoiesis in BM microenvironment and relate to the pathogenesis
and development of aplastic anemia.

PMID: 17654061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 2007 Nov 15;110(10):3573-81. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Aberrant mast-cell differentiation in mice lacking the stem-cell leukemia gene.

Salmon JM(1), Slater NJ, Hall MA, McCormack MP, Nutt SL, Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor expressed in erythroid, megakaryocyte, and mast-cell lineages. SCL is
essential for growth of megakaryocyte and erythroid progenitors. We have used a
conditional knockout of SCL (SCL(-/Delta)) to examine its function in mast cells,
critical effectors of the immune system. SCL(-/Delta) mice had markedly increased
numbers of mast-cell progenitors (MCPs) within the peritoneal fluid, bone marrow,
and spleen. Fractionation of bone marrow myeloid progenitors demonstrated that
these MCPs were present in the megakaryocyte-erythroid-restricted cell fraction. 
In contrast, unilineage MCPs from control mice were present in the cell fraction 
with granulocyte-macrophage potential. The aberrant mast-cell differentiation of 
SCL(-/Delta) megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors was associated with increased
expression of GATA-2. Despite increased numbers of MCPs in SCL(-/Delta) mice,
numbers of mature tissue mast cells were not increased unless SCL(-/Delta) mice
were treated with IL-3 and stem-cell factor. In part, this may be due to a
requirement for SCL in normal mast-cell maturation: SCL(-/Delta) mast cells had
reduced expression of the high-affinity IgE receptor and mast cell proteases,
MCP-5 and MCP-6. Together, these studies suggest that loss of SCL leads to
aberrant mast-cell differentiation of megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.

PMID: 17644741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Blood. 2007 Oct 15;110(8):2889-98. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Cited2 is required for normal hematopoiesis in the murine fetal liver.

Chen Y(1), Haviernik P, Bunting KD, Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Cited2 (cAMP-responsive elementbinding protein [CBP]/p300-interacting
transactivators with glutamic acid [E] and aspartic acid [D]-rich tail 2) is a
newly identified transcriptional modulator. Knockout of the Cited2 gene results
in embryonic lethality with embryos manifesting heart and neural tube defects.
Cited2-/- fetal liver displayed significant reduction in the numbers of
Lin(-)c-Kit+Sca-1+ cells, Lin(-)c-Kit+ cells, and progenitor cells of different
lineages. Fetal liver cells from Cited2-/- embryos gave rise to markedly reduced 
number of colonies in the colony-forming unit assay. Primary and secondary
transplantation studies showed significantly compromised reconstitution of
T-lymphoid, B-lymphoid, and myeloid lineages in mice that received a transplant
of Cited2-/- fetal liver cells. Competitive reconstitution experiments further
showed that fetal liver hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) function is severely
impaired due to Cited2 deficiency. Microarray analysis showed decreased
expression of Wnt5a and a panel of myeloid molecular markers such as PRTN3, MPO, 
Neutrophil elastase, Cathepsin G, and Eosinophil peroxidase in Cited2-/- fetal
livers. Decreased expression of Bmi-1, Notch1, LEF-1, Mcl-1, and GATA2 was also
observed in Cited2-/- Lin(-)c-Kit+ cells. The present study uncovers for the
first time a novel role of Cited2 in the maintenance of hematopoietic homeostasis
during embryogenesis and thus provides new insights into the molecular regulation
of hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC2018670
PMID: 17644732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1693-9.

Eosinophils from lineage-ablated Delta dblGATA bone marrow progenitors: the
dblGATA enhancer in the promoter of GATA-1 is not essential for differentiation
ex vivo.

Dyer KD(1), Czapiga M, Foster B, Foster PS, Kang EM, Lappas CM, Moser JM, Naumann
N, Percopo CM, Siegel SJ, Swartz JM, Ting-De Ravin S, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases/National Institutes of Health (NIAID/NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
kdyer@niaid.nih.gov

A critical role for eosinophils in remodeling of allergic airways was observed in
vivo upon disruption of the dblGATA enhancer that regulates expression of GATA-1,
which resulted in an eosinophil-deficient phenotype in the DeltadblGATA mouse. We
demonstrate here that bone marrow progenitors isolated from DeltadblGATA mice can
differentiate into mature eosinophils when subjected to cytokine stimulation ex
vivo. Cultured DeltadblGATA eosinophils contain cytoplasmic granules with
immunoreactive major basic protein and they express surface Siglec F and
transcripts encoding major basic protein, eosinophil peroxidase, and GATA-1, -2, 
and -3 to an extent indistinguishable from cultured wild-type eosinophils.
Fibroblast coculture and bone marrow cross-transplant experiments indicate that
the in vivo eosinophil deficit is an intrinsic progenitor defect, and remains
unaffected by interactions with stromal cells. Interestingly, and in contrast to 
those from the wild type, a majority of the GATA-1 transcripts from cultured
DeltadblGATA progenitors express a variant GATA-1 transcript that includes a
first exon (1E(B)), located approximately 3700 bp downstream to the previously
described first exon found in hemopoietic cells (1E(A)) and approximately 42 bp
upstream to another variant first exon, 1E(C). These data suggest that cultured
progenitors are able to circumvent the effects of the DeltadblGATA ablation by
using a second, more proximal, promoter and use this mechanism to generate
quantities of GATA-1 that will support eosinophil growth and differentiation.

PMID: 17641035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Stem Cells. 2007 Jul;25(7):1850-1.

Canine embryo-derived stem cells--toward clinically relevant animal models for
evaluating efficacy and safety of cell therapies.

Schneider MR, Adler H, Braun J, Kienzle B, Wolf E, Kolb HJ.

PMID: 17615273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Jun;16(3):393-402.

Simultaneous differentiation of endothelial and trophoblastic cells derived from 
human embryonic stem cells.

Peiffer I(1), Belhomme D, Barbet R, Haydont V, Zhou YP, Fortunel NO, Li M,
Hatzfeld A, Fabiani JN, Hatzfeld JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Laboratory, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
94801 Villejuif Cedex, France. peiffeisa@yahoo.fr

Here we present a simple two-step in vitro model of vascularized trophoblastic
tissue derived from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. The first step is the
formation of cystic embryoid bodies (EBs) in suspension in a semisolid methyl
cellulose medium, within which an endothelial platelet/endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (PECAM-1(+)) cell network develops. In a second step, deposition of
these EBs on the bottom of nontreated, polystyrene tissue culture plates, leads
by centrifugal outgrowth of the EB to the emergence of an adherent cell layer,
with which a PECAM-1(+) network is associated. Cells of this adherent layer
expressed VE-cadherin (CD144), PECAM-1 (CD31), and alpha-fetoprotein (alpha-FP). 
Trophoblastic differentiation was strongly suggested by the secretion of
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) and by the presence of the
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast marker GB25. The INSL4 gene, a cyto and
syncytio-trophoblast marker, was also highly expressed in the adherent layer, as 
well as other trophoblast genes such as CGA, CDX1, CDX2, and HAND1, compared to
hES cell gene expression taken as reference. In contrast, expression of
self-renewal genes, such as TERT, POU5F1, ZFP42, GDF3, and NODAL were decreased. 
No ectodermal or endodermal genes were expressed, but the mesodermal genes
PECAM-1 and GATA2 were. The possibility of removing the EBs during the second
step would permit analysis of their relative contribution to angiogenesis or
possible hemangioblast formation, compared to that of the trophoblastic adherent 
layer. This primitive vascularized trophoblastic model could also provide a tool 
to study early steps of normal and pathological placental development.

PMID: 17610369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):357-64.

Abrogation of prostaglandin E2/EP4 signaling impairs the development of rag1+
lymphoid precursors in the thymus of zebrafish embryos.

Villablanca EJ(1), Pistocchi A, Court FA, Cotelli F, Bordignon C, Allende ML,
Traversari C, Russo V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Gene Therapy Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy Program,
Scientific Institute H. San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, Milan, Italy.

PGE(2) is involved in a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes;
however, deciphering its role in early mammalian development has been difficult
due to the maternal contribution of PGE(2). To overcome this limitation we have
investigated the role of PGE(2) during T cell development in zebrafish. In this
study, we show that zebrafish ep4a, a PGE(2) receptor isoform of EP4, is
expressed at 26 h postfertilization in the dorsal aorta-posterior cardinal vein
joint region, which has a high homology with the mammal aorta-gonad-mesonephros
area and where definitive hemopoiesis arises. Furthermore, it is expressed in the
presumptive thymus rudiment by 48 h postfertilization. Supplementation of PGE(2) 
results in a strong increase in rag1 levels and cell proliferation in the thymus.
In contrast, the inhibition of PGE(2) production, as well as EP4 blockade,
abrogates the expression of rag1 in the thymus and that of the lymphoid precursor
marker ikaros, not only in the dorsal aorta-posterior cardinal vein joint region 
but also in the newly identified caudal hemopoietic tissue without affecting
early hemopoietic (scl, gata2) and erythropoietic (gata1) markers. These results 
identify ep4a as the earliest thymus marker and define a novel role for the
PGE(2)/EP4 pathway in controlling T cell precursor development in zebrafish.

PMID: 17579056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 1;67(11):5148-55.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis identifies genes that collaborate with
NUP98-HOXD13 during leukemic transformation.

Slape C(1), Hartung H, Lin YW, Bies J, Wolff L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20889-5105, USA.

The t(2;11)(q31;p15) chromosomal translocation results in a fusion between the
NUP98 and HOXD13 genes and has been observed in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) or acute myelogenous leukemia. We previously showed that
expression of the NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene in transgenic mice results in 
an invariably fatal MDS; approximately one third of mice die due to complications
of severe pancytopenia, and about two thirds progress to a fatal acute leukemia. 
In the present study, we used retroviral insertional mutagenesis to identify
genes that might collaborate with NHD13 as the MDS transformed to an acute
leukemia. Newborn NHD13 transgenic mice and littermate controls were infected
with the MOL4070LTR retrovirus. The onset of leukemia was accelerated, suggesting
a synergistic effect between the NHD13 transgene and the genes neighboring
retroviral insertion events. We identified numerous common insertion sites
located near protein-coding genes and confirmed dysregulation of a subset of
these by expression analyses. Among these genes were Meis1, a known collaborator 
of HOX and NUP98-HOX fusion genes, and Mn1, a transcriptional coactivator
involved in human leukemia through fusion with the TEL gene. Other putative
collaborators included Gata2, Erg, and Epor. Of note, we identified a common
insertion site that was >100 kb from the nearest coding gene, but within 20 kb of
the miR29a/miR29b1 microRNA locus. Both of these miRNA were up-regulated,
demonstrating that retroviral insertional mutagenesis can target miRNA loci as
well as protein-coding loci. Our data provide new insights into NHD13-mediated
leukemogenesis as well as retroviral insertional mutagenesis mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1950322
PMID: 17545593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 1;307(1):114-26. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Hand2 determines the noradrenergic phenotype in the mouse sympathetic nervous
system.

Morikawa Y(1), D'Autréaux F, Gershon MD, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, 2000 Percival
Stern Hall, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 has been shown to
play a role in the development of the mammalian sympathetic nervous system (SNS);
however, its precise role could not be uncovered because Hand2 is required for
early embryonic survival. We therefore generated a conditional Hand2 knockout
mouse line by excising Hand2 in Wnt1-Cre-expressing neural crest-derived cells.
These mice die at 12.5 dpc with embryos showing severe cardiovascular and facial 
defects. Crest-derived cells, however, populate sites of SNS development and
proliferate normally. Sympathetic precursors differentiate into neurons and
express the pan-neuronal markers, beta3-tubulin (Tuj1) and Hu showing that Hand2 
is not essential for SNS neuronal differentiation. To determine whether Hand2
regulates noradrenergic differentiation, the levels of the norepinephrine
biosynthetic enzymes, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine beta-hydroxylase
(DBH) was examined. Both enzymes were dramatically reduced in mutant embryos
suggesting that the primary role of Hand2 in the SNS is determination of neuronal
phenotype. Loss of Hand2 did not affect the expression of other members of the
transcriptional circuit regulating SNS development, including Phox2a/b, Mash1 and
Gata2/3; however, Hand2 was required for Hand1 expression. Our data suggest that 
the major role of Hand2 during SNS development is to permit sympathetic neurons
to acquire a catecholaminergic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1952239
PMID: 17531968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Thromb Haemost. 2007 May;97(5):839-46.

Crucial roles of GATA-2 and SP1 in adrenomedullin-affected expression of tissue
factor pathway inhibitor in human umbilical vein endothelial cells exposed to
lipopolysaccharide.

Liu W(1), Zhu ZQ, Wang W, Zu SY, Zhu GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pathophysiology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, 5 Dong 
Dan San Tiao, Beijing, 100005, China.

Adrenomedullin (ADM) is a vasodilator peptide that has a variety of effects,
including antithrombotic activities and resistant roles to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced septic shock. During sepsis, LPS triggers the development of
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) via the tissue factor-dependent
pathway of coagulation. It is unknown whether the antithrombotic activities of
ADM contribute to its resistance to sepsis. In the present study, we investigated
the effects of ADM on tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) (primary
anticoagulant factor) expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) exposed to LPS, and the possible underlying mechanism for these effects.
Exposure of HUVECs to LPS for 12 hours caused significant decrease of TFPI
protein activities and mRNA expression. These effects were abolished by treatment
with ADM (10(-10) to 10(-6) M), cAMP analogue and calcium antagonist.
Accordingly, cAMP antagonist inhibited the counteraction effect of ADM on LPS in 
TFPI expression. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) and Western blot
analysis showed that the protein level of GATA-2 and SP1 transcriptional factors 
and their binding to the corresponding regulatory sequences decreased by LPS
treatment. And these effects of LPS were antagonized by ADM. Promoter-reporter
assays and mutational analysis also confirmed the roles of GATA-2 and SP1 motifs 
from -1247 to -381 bp promoter sequence in TFPI inducible expression. Taken
together, these results indicate that ADM antagonizes the effect of LPS on TFPI
expression, which is mediated by affecting transcriptional factor GATA-2 and SP1 
through cAMP and calcium signaling pathway.

PMID: 17479196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1703-12. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

A Gata2 intronic enhancer confers its pan-endothelia-specific regulation.

Khandekar M(1), Brandt W, Zhou Y, Dagenais S, Glover TW, Suzuki N, Shimizu R,
Yamamoto M, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

GATA-2, a transcription factor that has been shown to play important roles in
multiple organ systems during embryogenesis, has been ascribed the property of
regulating the expression of numerous endothelium-specific genes. However, the
transcriptional regulatory hierarchy governing Gata2 activation in endothelial
cells has not been fully explored. Here, we document GATA-2 endothelial
expression during embryogenesis by following GFP expression in Gata2-GFP knock-in
embryos. Using founder transgenic analyses, we identified a Gata2 endothelium
enhancer in the fourth intron and found that Gata2 regulation by this enhancer is
restricted to the endocardial, lymphatic and vascular endothelium. Whereas
disruption of three ETS-binding motifs within the enhancer diminished its
activity, the ablation of its single E box extinguished endothelial
enhancer-directed expression in transgenic mice. Development of the endothelium
is known to require SCL (TAL1), and an SCL-E12 (SCL-Tcfe2a) heterodimer can bind 
the crucial E box in the enhancer in vitro. Thus, GATA-2 is expressed early in
lymphatic, cardiac and blood vascular endothelial cells, and the
pan-endothelium-specific expression of Gata2 is controlled by a discrete intronic
enhancer.

PMID: 17395646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14665-74. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Context-dependent GATA factor function: combinatorial requirements for
transcriptional control in hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

Wozniak RJ(1), Boyer ME, Grass JA, Lee Y, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

GATA factors are fundamental components of developmentally important
transcriptional networks. By contrast to common mechanisms in which transacting
factors function directly at promoters, the hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and
GATA-2 often assemble dispersed complexes over broad chromosomal regions. For
example, GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupy five conserved regions over approximately 100
kb of the Gata2 locus in the transcriptionally repressed and active states,
respectively, in erythroid cells. Since it is unknown whether the individual
complexes exert qualitatively distinct or identical functions to regulate Gata2
transcription in vivo, we compared the activity of the -3.9 and +9.5 kb sites of 
the Gata2 locus in transgenic mice. The +9.5 site functioned as an autonomous
enhancer in the endothelium and fetal liver of embryonic day 11 embryos, whereas 
the -3.9 site lacked such activity. Mechanistic studies demonstrated critical
requirements for a GATA motif and a neighboring E-box within the +9.5 site for
enhancer activity in endothelial and hematopoietic cells. Surprisingly, whereas
this GATA-E-box composite motif was sufficient for enhancer activity in an
erythroid precursor cell line, its enhancer function in primary human endothelial
cells required additional regulatory modules. These results identify the first
molecular determinant of Gata2 transcription in vascular endothelium, composed of
a core enhancer module active in both endothelial and hematopoietic cells and
regulatory modules preferentially required in endothelial cells.

PMID: 17347142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Blood. 2007 Jun 15;109(12):5481-90. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Dynamic regulation of Gata factor levels is more important than their identity.

Ferreira R(1), Wai A, Shimizu R, Gillemans N, Rottier R, von Lindern M, Ohneda K,
Grosveld F, Yamamoto M, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Three Gata transcription factors (Gata1, -2, and -3) are essential for
hematopoiesis. These factors are thought to play distinct roles because they do
not functionally replace each other. For instance, Gata2 messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression is highly elevated in Gata1-null erythroid cells, yet this does not
rescue the defect. Here, we test whether Gata2 and -3 transgenes rescue the
erythroid defect of Gata1-null mice, if expressed in the appropriate
spatiotemporal pattern. Gata1, -2, and -3 transgenes driven by beta-globin
regulatory elements, directing expression to late stages of differentiation, fail
to rescue erythropoiesis in Gata1-null mutants. In contrast, when controlled by
Gata1 regulatory elements, directing expression to the early stages of
differentiation, Gata1, -2, and -3 do rescue the Gata1-null phenotype. The
dramatic increase of endogenous Gata2 mRNA in Gata1-null progenitors is not
reflected in Gata2 protein levels, invoking translational regulation. Our data
show that the dynamic spatiotemporal regulation of Gata factor levels is more
important than their identity and provide a paradigm for developmental control
mechanisms that are hard-wired in cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 17327407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4200-8. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Cell-cycle-dependent oscillation of GATA2 expression in hematopoietic cells.

Koga S(1), Yamaguchi N, Abe T, Minegishi M, Tsuchiya S, Yamamoto M, Minegishi N.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University Biomedical Engineering Research Organization, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan.

In vitro manipulation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is a key issue in both
transplantation therapy and regenerative medicine, and thus new methods are
required to achieve HSC expansion with self-renewal. GATA2 is a transcription
factor controlling pool size of HSCs. Of interest, continuous overexpression of
GATA2 does not induce HSC proliferation. In this report, we demonstrate that
GATA2 expression, in leukemic and normal hematopoietic cells, oscillates during
the cell cycle, such that expression is high in S phase but low in G(1)/S and M
phase. GATA2 binding to target Bcl-X gene also oscillates in accordance with
GATA2 expression. Using a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-GATA2 fusion protein,
we demonstrate cell-cycle-specific activity of proteasome-dependent degradation
of GATA2. Immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting analysis demonstrated
phosphorylation of GATA2 at cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)-consensus motifs,
S/T(0)P(+1), and interaction of GATA2 with Cdk2/cyclin A2-, Cdk2/cyclin A2-, and 
Cdk4/cyclin D1-phosphorylated GATA2 in vitro. Mutants in phosphorylation motifs
exhibited altered expression profiles of GFP-GATA2 domain fusion proteins. These 
results indicate that GATA2 phosphorylation by Cdk/cyclin systems is responsible 
for the cell-cycle-dependent regulation of GATA2 expression, and suggest the
possibility that a cell-cycle-specific "on-off" response of GATA2 expression may 
control hematopoietic-cell proliferation and survival.

PMID: 17255359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):865-84. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Essential role of GATA2 in the negative regulation of thyrotropin beta gene by
thyroid hormone and its receptors.

Matsushita A(1), Sasaki S, Kashiwabara Y, Nagayama K, Ohba K, Iwaki H, Misawa H, 
Ishizuka K, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Previously we reported that the negative regulation of the TSHbeta gene by T(3)
and its receptor [thyroid hormone receptor (TR)] is observed in CV1 cells when
GATA2 and Pit1 are introduced. Using this system, we further studied the
mechanism of TSHbeta inhibition. The negative regulatory element (NRE), which had
been reported to mediate T(3)-bound TR (T(3)-TR)-dependent inhibition, is
dispensable, because deletion or mutation of NRE did not impair suppression. The 
reporter construct, TSHbeta-D4-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase, which possesses
only the binding sites for Pit1 and GATA2, was activated by GATA2 alone, and this
transactivation was specifically inhibited by T(3)-TR. The Zn finger region of
GATA2 interacts with the DNA-binding domain of TR in a T(3)-independent manner.
The suppression by T(3)-TR was impaired by overexpression of a dominant-negative 
type TR-associated protein (TRAP) 220, an N- and C-terminal deletion construct,
indicating the participation of TRAP220. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
with a thyrotroph cell line, TalphaT1, revealed that T(3) treatment recruited
histone deacetylase 3, reduced the acetylation of histone H4, and caused the
dissociation of TRAP220 within 15-30 min. The reduction of histone H4 acetylation
was transient, whereas the dissociation of TRAP220 persisted for a longer period.
In the negative regulation of the TSHbeta gene by T(3)-TR we report that 1) GATA2
is the major transcriptional activator of the TSHbeta gene, 2) the putative NRE
previously reported is not required, 3) TR-DNA-binding domain directly interacts 
with the Zn finger region of GATA2, and 4) histone deacetylation and TRAP220
dissociation are important.

PMID: 17244762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(1):79-84.

A change in response to Bmp signalling precedes ectodermal fate choice.

Dee CT(1), Gibson A, Rengifo A, Sun SK, Patient RK, Scotting PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, QMC, Nottingham, UK.

Bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp) signalling plays a central role in the decision 
of ectoderm to adopt either neural or non-neural fates. The effects of this
signalling are seen at mid-gastrulation in the activation of genes such as the
Gata factors and the repression of genes such as the SoxB1 transcription factors 
in the non-neural regions. Using zebrafish embryos, we show that this Bmp
signalling does not repress the expression of these same neural markers just 2-3 
hours earlier. Since expression of the Bmp signalling effector, Smad1, only
begins during early gastrulation, we tested the role of Smad1 and Smad5 (which is
maternally expressed) in controlling gene expression both before and during
gastrulation. This showed that the absence of Smad1 does not explain the lack of 
response of neural genes to Bmp signalling at early stages. However, these
experiments showed that expression of the non-neural marker, gata2, is mediated
by Smad5 in the absence of Smad1 at early stages, but is dependent upon Smad1 at 
later stages. Hence, we have shown a dynamic change in the molecular machinery
underlying the Bmp response in the ectoderm during gastrulation stages of
development.

PMID: 17183467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):360-8.

Essential role of GATA transcriptional factors in the activation of mast cells.

Masuda A(1), Hashimoto K, Yokoi T, Doi T, Kodama T, Kume H, Ohno K, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics and Bioinformatics, Center for Neurological Diseases
and Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
amasuda@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Mast cells are pivotal effector cells in IgE-mediated allergic reactions. GATA
transcriptional factors such as GATA-1 and GATA-2 are expressed in mast cells,
and recent studies have revealed that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 are required for
mast cell development. However, the role of GATA transcriptional factors in
differentiated mast cells has remained largely unknown. In this study, we
repressed the activity of GATA-1 and GATA-2 by using three different approaches
(inducible overexpression of a dominant-negative form of GATA, pharmacological
inactivation, or small interfering RNA technology), and analyzed the molecular
mechanisms of GATA transcriptional factors in the activation of mast cells.
Surprisingly, the repression of GATA activity in differentiated mast cells led to
the impairment of cell survival, IgE-induced degranulation, and cytokine
production. Signal transduction and histone modification in the chromatin related
to protein kinase Cbeta were defective in these cells. These results identify
that GATA has a critical role in the activation of mast cell.

PMID: 17182574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):393-405. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

GATA2 functions at multiple steps in hemangioblast development and
differentiation.

Lugus JJ(1), Chung YS, Mills JC, Kim SI, Grass J, Kyba M, Doherty JM, Bresnick
EH, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Molecular mechanisms that regulate the generation of hematopoietic and
endothelial cells from mesoderm are poorly understood. To define the underlying
mechanisms, we compared gene expression profiles between embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived hemangioblasts (Blast-Colony-Forming Cells, BL-CFCs) and their
differentiated progeny, Blast cells. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that
BL-CFCs resembled other stem cell populations. A role for Gata2, one of the
BL-CFC-enriched transcripts, was further characterized by utilizing the in vitro 
model of ES cell differentiation. Our studies revealed that Gata2 was a direct
target of BMP4 and that enforced GATA2 expression upregulated Bmp4, Flk1 and Scl.
Conditional GATA2 induction resulted in a temporal-sensitive increase in
hemangioblast generation, precocious commitment to erythroid fate, and increased 
endothelial cell generation. GATA2 additionally conferred a proliferative signal 
to primitive erythroid progenitors. Collectively, we provide compelling evidence 
that GATA2 plays specific, contextual roles in the generation of Flk-1+ mesoderm,
the Flk-1+Scl+ hemangioblast, primitive erythroid and endothelial cells.

PMID: 17166922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Stem Cell Rev. 2006;2(1):5-10.

Specification and differentiation of serotonergic neurons.

Alenina N(1), Bashammakh S, Bader M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter with multiple functions in the whole
central nervous system. Its synthesis, however, is restricted to a very limited
number of cells in the brainstem raphe nuclei with a vast axonal network. These
cells express markers of the serotonin lineage such as the rate-limiting enzyme
in serotonin synthesis, tryptophan hydroxylase 2, the serotonin transporter, and 
the transcription factor Pet1. Pet1 together with Lmx1b, Nkx2.2, Mash1, Gata2,
Gata3, and Phox2b form a transcriptional network, which specifies the
differentiation of serotonergic neurons around embryonic day 11 in the mouse.
These cells are generated in rhombomeres r1-r3 and r5-r7 caudal to the midbrain- 
hindbrain organizer under the control of the fibroblast growth factors 4 and 8
and sonic hedgehog (SHH) from precursors, which have produced motoneurons before.
Because serotonin is a relevant pathophysiological factor in several neurological
diseases such as bipolar disorder and depression tools to generate or maintain
serotonergic neurons might be of therapeutic value. Such tools can be assessed in
embryonic stem cells, which can be differentiated in vitro to produce
serotonergic neurons. Culture systems for these cells including embryoid bodies
based and monolayer differentiation have been established, which allows the
generation of up to 50% serotonergic neurons in all neurons developed.

PMID: 17142880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jan;236(1):306-13.

Comparative analysis of Gata3 and Gata2 expression during chicken inner ear
development.

Lilleväli K(1), Haugas M, Pituello F, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The inner ear is a complex sensory organ with hearing and balance functions.
Gata3 and Gata2 are expressed in the inner ear, and to gain more insight into
their roles in otic development, we made a detailed expression analysis in
chicken embryos. At early stages, their expression was highly overlapping. At
later stages, Gata2 expression became prominent in vestibular and cochlear
nonsensory epithelia. In contrast to Gata2, Gata3 was mainly expressed in the
developing sensory epithelia, reflecting the importance of this factor in the
sensory-neural development of the inner ear. While the later expression patterns 
of both Gata3 and Gata2 were highly conserved between chicken and mouse,
important differences were observed especially with Gata3 during early otic
development, providing indications of divergent molecular control during placode 
invagination in mice and chickens. We also found indications that the regulatory 
hierarchy observed in mouse, where Gata3 is upstream of Gata2 and Fgf10, could be
conserved in chicken.

PMID: 17103399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2373-9. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Cytokine and integrin stimulation synergize to promote higher levels of GATA-2,
c-myb, and CD34 protein in primary human hematopoietic progenitors from bone
marrow.

Dao MA(1), Nolta JA.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

We have previously shown that engagement of the integrins VLA-4 and VLA-5 to the 
fibronectin fragment CH-296 in combination with cytokines sustained the capacity 
of cultured human CD34(+) cells to undergo hematopoiesis in immunodeficient mice 
for 7 to 12 months, whereas this capacity was rapidly lost in cells cultured in
suspension with the same cytokines. In the current study, we assessed the
molecular pathways that might explain the loss of long-term engraftment capacity 
in cells cultured in suspension. Although the cell cycle profile was similar
between cells cultured in suspension versus on fibronectin, levels of cell death 
were higher in the suspended cultures. While the CDK inhibitors p27Kip1 and
p57Kip2 were present at equal levels in cells from both cultures, low levels of
p21Cip1 were detectable only in the cytoplasmic compartment of cells cultured in 
suspension. Cytoplasmic location of p21Cip1 has been linked to monocytic
differentiation. The levels of c-myb and GATA-2, transcription factors associated
with stem cell maintenance, were higher in cells cultured on fibronectin as
compared with suspension. In contrast, the levels of PU.1, which is induced
during myeloid differentiation, were higher in cells cultured in suspension.
There were no significant differences in surface expression of CD34 on the cells 
after culture, but total CD34 protein, assessed by immunoblotting, was
significantly higher in cells cultured on fibronectin. Our data suggest that, in 
the presence of cytokines, the engagement of VLA-4 and VLA-5 integrins to the
fibronectin fragment CH-296 preserves the expression of specific transcription
factors associated with primitive stem cell maintenance. In contrast, a lack of
integrin engagement leads to the induction of cellular markers associated with
myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1852192
PMID: 17095623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Dev. 2006 Nov 1;20(21):3010-21.

The order of expression of transcription factors directs hierarchical
specification of hematopoietic lineages.

Iwasaki H(1), Mizuno S, Arinobu Y, Ozawa H, Mori Y, Shigematsu H, Takatsu K,
Tenen DG, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital,
Fukuoka, Japan.

The mechanism of lineage specification in multipotent stem cells has not been
fully understood. We recently isolated progenitors with the eosinophil, basophil,
or mast cell lineage potential, all of which originate from granulocyte/monocyte 
progenitors (GMPs). By using these prospectively purified progenitors, we show
here that the expression timing of GATA-2 and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein
alpha (C/EBPalpha) can differentially control their lineage commitment. The
expression of GATA-2 instructed C/EBPalpha-expressing GMPs to commit exclusively 
into the eosinophil lineage, while it induced basophil and/or mast cell lineage
commitment if C/EBPalpha was suppressed at the GMP stage. Furthermore, simply by 
switching the order of C/EBPalpha and GATA-2 transduction, even
lymphoid-committed progenitors recaptured these developmental processes to be
reprogrammed into each of these lineages. We propose that the order of expression
of key transcription factors is critical for their interplay to selectively drive
lineage specification programs, by which stem cells could generate multiple
lineage cells in a hierarchical manner.

PMCID: PMC1620021
PMID: 17079688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):1908-16. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

The paralogous hematopoietic regulators Lyl1 and Scl are coregulated by Ets and
GATA factors, but Lyl1 cannot rescue the early Scl-/- phenotype.

Chan WY(1), Follows GA, Lacaud G, Pimanda JE, Landry JR, Kinston S, Knezevic K,
Piltz S, Donaldson IJ, Gambardella L, Sablitzky F, Green AR, Kouskoff V, Göttgens
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors are key regulators of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), yet 
the molecular mechanisms that control their expression are largely unknown.
Previously, we demonstrated that expression of Scl/Tal1, a transcription factor
required for the specification of HSCs, is controlled by Ets and GATA factors.
Here we characterize the molecular mechanisms controlling expression of Lyl1, a
paralog of Scl also required for HSC function. Two closely spaced promoters
directed expression to hematopoietic progenitor, megakaryocytic, and endothelial 
cells in transgenic mice. Conserved binding sites required for promoter activity 
were bound in vivo by GATA-2 and the Ets factors Fli1, Elf1, Erg, and PU.1.
However, despite coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 by the same Ets and GATA factors,
Scl expression was initiated prior to Lyl1 in embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation assays. Moreover, ectopic expression of Scl but not Lyl1 rescued 
hematopoietic differentiation in Scl-/- ES cells, thus providing a molecular
explanation for the vastly different phenotypes of Scl-/- and Lyl1-/- mouse
embryos. Furthermore, coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 later during development may
explain the mild phenotype of Scl-/- adult HSCs.

PMID: 17053063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4015-24.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic
differentiation of sympathetic neurons.

Lucas ME(1), Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology Program, Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 105
Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2, together with Ascl1,
Phox2a, Phox2b and Gata2/Gata3, is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins in
neural crest-derived precursor cells during sympathetic neuron generation. Hand2 
overexpression experiments and the analysis of its function at the Dbh promotor
implicated Hand2 in the control of noradrenergic gene expression. Using the
zebrafish hand2 deletion mutant hands off, we have now investigated the
physiological role of hand2 in the development of sympathetic ganglia. In hands
off mutant embryos, sympathetic precursor cells aggregate to form normal
sympathetic ganglion primordia characterized by the expression of phox2b, phox2a 
and the achaete-scute family member zash1a/ascl1. The expression of the
noradrenergic marker genes th and dbh is strongly reduced, as well as the
transcription factors gata2 and tfap2a (Ap-2alpha). By contrast, generic neuronal
differentiation seems to be unaffected, as the expression of elavl3 (HuC) is not 
reduced in hands off sympathetic ganglia. These results demonstrate in vivo an
essential and selective function of hand2 for the noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons, and implicates tfap2a and gata2 as downstream effectors.

PMID: 17008447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cas Lek Cesk. 2006;145(8):619-24.

[EVI1 and its role in myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloid leukemia and other
malignant diseases].

[Article in Czech]

Fuchs O(1).

Author information: 
(1)UHKT, Praha. ota.fuchs@uhkt.cz

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) gene was identified as a common
locus of retroviral integration in myeloid tumors found in mice. EVI1 gene is
highly conserved through evolution and human gene EVI1 on chromosome 3q26 encodes
zinc fingers-containing transcription factor. EVI1 is expressed in
nonhematopoietic tissues but not in normal blood or bone marrow. EVI1 was
detected in hematopoietic cells in retrovirus-induced myeloid leukemias in mice
and several reports documented EVI1 expression in human myelodysplastic syndromes
and other hematologic malignancies without 3q26 translocations. EVI1 is
abnormally expressed in human myeloid leukemias that are associated with the
t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22), inv(3)(q21q26) and other chromosomal
rearrangements. EVI1 is overexpressed in some ovarian cancers and human colon
cancer cell lines and may play a role in the initiation and/or progression of
solid tumors, as well as hematopoietic malignancies. EVI1 is a transcriptional
repressor which inhibits transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) family
signalling by binding signal transducers (Smad proteins) and recruiting
transcriptional corepressors. TGFbeta is an important regulator of proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and migration of cells. EVI1 inhibits TGFbeta-mediated
apoptosis. Knockdown of EVI1 function by small interference RNA increases the
sensitivity of malignant cells to TGFbeta-mediated or other inducer-mediated
apoptosis. Overexpressed EVI-1 blocks granulocyte and erythroid differentiation
and possess the ability of growth promotion in some types of cells. EVI1
functions in some cases as a transcriptional activator which stimulates for
example GATA2 and GATA3 promoters. The study of EVI1 target genes will help to
clear the mechanism by which EVI1 upregulates cell proliferation, impairs cell
differentiation, and induces cell transformation.

PMID: 16995417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Blood. 2007 Jan 15;109(2):516-23. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Smad1 expands the hemangioblast population within a limited developmental window.

Zafonte BT(1), Liu S, Lynch-Kattman M, Torregroza I, Benvenuto L, Kennedy M,
Keller G, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Chanin Rm 501, 1300 Morris Park Ave, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is an important regulator of
hematovascular development. However, the progenitor population that responds to
BMP signaling is undefined, and the relative role of downstream mediators
including Smad1 is unclear. We find that Smad1 shows a distinctive expression
profile as embryonic stem (ES) cells undergo differentiation in the embryoid body
(EB) system, with peak levels in cell populations enriched for the hemangioblast.
To test the functional relevance of this observation, we generated an ES cell
line that allows temporal control of ectopic Smad1 expression. Continuous
expression of Smad1 from day 2 of EB culture does not disturb hematopoiesis,
according to colony assays. In contrast, a pulse of Smad1 expression exclusively 
between day 2 and day 2.25 expands the population of progenitors for primitive
erythroblasts and other hematopoietic lineages. This effect correlates with
increased levels of transcripts encoding markers for the hemangioblast, including
Runx1, Scl, and Gata2. Indeed, the pulse of Smad1 induction also expands the
blast colony-forming cell (BL-CFC) population at a level that is fully sufficient
to explain subsequent increases in hematopoiesis. Our data demonstrate that Smad1
expression is sufficient to expand the number of cells that commit to
hemangioblast fate.

PMCID: PMC1785093
PMID: 16990609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(19):7056-67.

Distinct functions of dispersed GATA factor complexes at an endogenous gene
locus.

Grass JA(1), Jing H, Kim SI, Martowicz ML, Pal S, Blobel GA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The reciprocal expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 during hematopoiesis is an
important determinant of red blood cell development. Whereas Gata2 is
preferentially transcribed early in hematopoiesis, elevated GATA-1 levels result 
in GATA-1 occupancy at sites upstream of the Gata2 locus and transcriptional
repression. GATA-2 occupies these sites in the transcriptionally active locus,
suggesting that a "GATA switch" abrogates GATA-2-mediated positive
autoregulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with genomic
microarray analysis and quantitative ChIP analysis with GATA-1-null cells
expressing an estrogen receptor ligand binding domain fusion to GATA-1 revealed
additional GATA switches 77 kb upstream of Gata2 and within intron 4 at +9.5 kb. 
Despite indistinguishable GATA-1 occupancy at -77 kb and +9.5 kb versus other
GATA switch sites, GATA-1 functioned uniquely at the different regions. GATA-1
induced histone deacetylation at and near Gata2 but not at the -77 kb region. The
-77 kb region, which was DNase I hypersensitive in both active and inactive
states, conferred equivalent enhancer activities in GATA-1- and GATA-2-expressing
cells. By contrast, the +9.5 kb region exhibited considerably stronger enhancer
activity in GATA-2- than in GATA-1-expressing cells, and other GATA switch sites 
were active only in GATA-1- or GATA-2-expressing cells. Chromosome conformation
capture analysis demonstrated higher-order interactions between the -77 kb region
and Gata2 in the active and repressed states. These results indicate that
dispersed GATA factor complexes function via long-range chromatin interactions
and qualitatively distinct activities to regulate Gata2 transcription.

PMCID: PMC1592882
PMID: 16980610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37345-52. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

GATA-1-mediated transcriptional repression yields persistent transcription factor
IIB-chromatin complexes.

Martowicz ML(1), Grass JA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and GATA-2, which have distinct and
overlapping roles to regulate blood cell development, are reciprocally expressed 
during erythropoiesis. GATA-1 directly represses Gata2 transcription, and reduced
GATA-2 synthesis promotes red blood cell development. Gata2 repression involves
"GATA switches" in which GATA-1 displaces GATA-2 from Gata2 regulatory regions.
We show that extragenic GATA switch sites occupied by GATA-2 associate with as
much RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and basal transcription factors as present at the
active Gata2 promoters. Pol II bound to GATA switch sites in the active locus was
phosphorylated on serine 5 of the carboxyl-terminal domain, indicative of
elongation competence. GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 from GATA switch
sites reduced Pol II recruitment to all sites except the far upstream -77-kb
region. Surprisingly, TFIIB occupancy persisted at most sites upon repression.
These results indicate that GATA-2-bound extragenic regulatory elements recruit
Pol II, GATA-1 binding expels Pol II, and despite the persistent TFIIB-chromatin 
complexes, Pol II recruitment is blocked.

PMID: 16963445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2006 Sep;210(1):1-9.

GATA transcription factors and hematological diseases.

Harigae H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. harigae@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

The development of mature blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells is regulated 
by transcription factors that control and coordinate the expression of
lineage-specific genes. The GATA family consists of six transcription factors
that function in hematopoietic and endodermal development. Among them, GATA-1 is 
expressed in erythroid, megakaryocytic, eosinophil and mast cell lineages, and
GATA-2 is expressed in stem and progenitor cells, at more immature stage compared
with GATA-1. Based on the characteristic phenotypes of GATA-1 and GATA-2 mutant
mice, it has been suggested that mutations of these GATA genes in humans may
result in the onset of certain clinical diseases. To date, mutations of GATA-1
gene have been found in inherited anemia and thrombocytopenia, and Down
syndrome-related acute leukemia, which exhibits megakaryocytic phenotypes and
frequently occurs in patients with Down syndrome. In contrast, no mutation of
GATA-2 gene has been identified in hematological diseases; however, we found the 
expression level of GATA-2 is significantly decreased in CD34 positive cells in
patients with aplastic anemia. Since GATA-2 functions in the proliferation of
hematopoietic stem cells, the reduction of GATA-2 expression in CD34 positive
cells may result in the decreased number of hematopoietic stem cells, which is
the characteristic feature of aplastic anemia. Based on these lines of evidence, 
some types of hematological diseases may be defined as transcription factor
diseases.

PMID: 16960339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS Genet. 2006 Aug 25;2(8):e139. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

GATA2 is associated with familial early-onset coronary artery disease.

Connelly JJ(1), Wang T, Cox JE, Haynes C, Wang L, Shah SH, Crosslin DR, Hale AB, 
Nelson S, Crossman DC, Granger CB, Haines JL, Jones CJ, Vance JM,
Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ, Kraus WE, Hauser ER, Gregory SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States.

The transcription factor GATA2 plays an essential role in the establishment and
maintenance of adult hematopoiesis. It is expressed in hematopoietic stem cells, 
as well as the cells that make up the aortic vasculature, namely aortic
endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. We have shown that GATA2 expression is
predictive of location within the thoracic aorta; location is suggested to be a
surrogate for disease susceptibility. The GATA2 gene maps beneath the Chromosome 
3q linkage peak from our family-based sample set (GENECARD) study of early-onset 
coronary artery disease. Given these observations, we investigated the
relationship of several known and novel polymorphisms within GATA2 to coronary
artery disease. We identified five single nucleotide polymorphisms that were
significantly associated with early-onset coronary artery disease in GENECARD.
These results were validated by identifying significant association of two of
these single nucleotide polymorphisms in an independent case-control sample set
that was phenotypically similar to the GENECARD families. These observations
identify GATA2 as a novel susceptibility gene for coronary artery disease and
suggest that the study of this transcription factor and its downstream targets
may uncover a regulatory network important for coronary artery disease
inheritance.

PMCID: PMC1557786
PMID: 16934006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;145(1):39-44. Epub 2006 Jun
29.

Microinjecting recombinant rainbow trout Ea4-peptide of pro-IGF-I into zebrafish 
embryos causes abnormal development in heart, red blood cells, and vasculature.

Chun CZ(1), Chen TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, U-3125
Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

E-peptides and mature insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are produced from
pre-pro-IGFs during post-translational processing and co-secreted into the
circulation. Previously, we reported that introduction of a transgene encoding
the secreted form of rainbow trout (rt) Ea4-peptide or human (h) Eb-peptide into 
newly fertilized eggs of medaka (Oryzias latipes) and zebrafish (Danio rerio)
resulted in developmental defects in heart, red blood cells and vasculature. In
addition to vasculature and red blood cell developmental defects, multiple
phenocopies of heart developmental defects categorized by developmental arrest at
cardiomyocyte, heart tube and heart looping stages were also observed. These
results raise a question of whether rtEa4- or hEb-peptide exerts pleiotropic
inhibitory effects on heart, vasculature and red blood cell development in fish
embryos. To answer this question, various amounts of recombinant rtEa4-peptide
were microinjected into zebrafish eggs at 1.5, 2.5 and 5.5 h post-fertilization
(hpf). Although a dose-dependent developmental defect in heart, vasculature and
red blood cells was observed in embryos microinjected with rtEa4-peptide at 1.5
and 2.5 hpf, the heart development in all of the microinjected embryos was
arrested at the cardiomyocyte stage. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Nkx2.5,
GATA5, VEGF, GATA1 and GATA2 genes in defective embryos were significantly
reduced by rtEa4-peptide. These results confirm our previous findings that rtEa4-
or hEb-peptide exhibits pleiotropic effects in inhibiting heart, vasculature and 
red blood cell development in zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 16914384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2006 Dec 1;108(12):3736-8. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Acetylation of GATA-1 is required for chromatin occupancy.

Lamonica JM(1), Vakoc CR, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

All 3 hematopoietic GATA transcription factors, GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3, are
acetylated, although the in vivo role of this modification remains unclear. We
examined the functions of an acetylation-defective mutant of GATA-1 in maturing
erythroid cells. We found that removal of the acetylation sites in GATA-1 does
not impair its nuclear localization, steady-state protein levels, or its ability 
to bind naked GATA elements in vitro. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments revealed that mutant GATA-1 was dramatically impaired in
binding to all examined cellular target sites in vivo, including genes that are
normally activated and repressed by GATA-1. Together, these results suggest that 
acetylation regulates chromatin occupancy of GATA-1. These findings point to a
novel function for transcription factor acetylation, perhaps by facilitating
protein interactions required for stable association with chromatin templates in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC1895476
PMID: 16888089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Hematol. 2006 Jul;84(1):38-42.

Induction of erythroid-specific genes by overexpression of GATA-2 in K562 cells.

Harigae H(1), Okitsu Y, Yokoyama H, Fujiwara T, Inomata M, Takahashi S, Minegishi
N, Kaku M, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. harigae@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

GATA transcription factors have been shown to play important roles in
hematopoiesis. GATA-2 is expressed in stem and progenitor cells, and has been
speculated to control the proliferation and maintain the immaturity of these
cells. To examine whether the function of GATA-2 is changeable according to the
differentiation stage, we established GATA-2 overexpressing subclones of K562,
which is a leukemic cell line committed to the erythroid lineage. Via an increase
in the GATA-2 expression level, the expression levels of erythroid-specific genes
including alpha-, beta-, and gamma-globin were increased compared to control
cells, while the expression level of GATA-1 was unchanged. Expression of the
transferrin receptor was also increased in GATA-2 overexpressing K562 cells when 
examined by flow cytometry. In addition, the heme content of GATA-2
overexpressing K562 cells was more than 2 times higher than control cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that GATA-2 protein binding to the 
GATA element in alpha-globin LCR was increased in GATA-2 overexpressing K562
cells. These findings suggest that GATA-2 could induce erythroid-specific genes
without competition with GATA-1 when expressed in erythroid-committed cells, and 
thus further suggest that temporal and spatial regulation may be important for
displaying specific functions of GATA-2.

PMID: 16867900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hear Res. 2007 May;227(1-2):32-40. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Information for gene networks in inner ear development: a study centered on the
transcription factor gata2.

Holley MC(1), Kneebone A, Milo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Addison Building,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. m.c.holley@shef.ac.uk

The search for molecular mechanisms to stimulate sensory regeneration in the
mammalian inner ear is commonly based upon developmental studies. This has
revealed many genes that regulate the differentiation of sensory cells. A major
challenge is to place these genes into the context of functional networks that
describe developmental processes more fully and increase the chances of
identifying useful therapeutic targets. We used a novel approach to identify
genes that are functionally related to the transcription factor gata2. Temporal
profiles of gene expression were derived from three conditionally immortal cell
lines and clustered to those of gata2 by applying the gamma model for
oligonucleotide signals, a statistical method that allows quantitative analysis
of oligonucleotide array data. We derived an objective list of 28 genes that
clustered with gata2 in all three cell lines. A number of these genes have known 
functional links with gata2. Genes encoding CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins
(C/EBP) and signal transducer and activation of transcription 3 (Stat3) are
especially interesting as they are known to bind gata proteins directly. The
results provide strong evidence that our experimental approach can reveal
functional relationships between genes that regulate fundamental processes in the
differentiation of sensory cells in the inner ear.

PMID: 16797894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cytotherapy. 2006;8(3):228-42.

Undifferentiated mouse mesenchymal stem cells spontaneously express neural and
stem cell markers Oct-4 and Rex-1.

Lamoury FM(1), Croitoru-Lamoury J, Brew BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Centre for Immunology, St Vincent's Hospital, Corner 
West and Boundary Streets, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia. j.lamoury@cfi.unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Previous adult stem cells studies have provided evidence that BM
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) exhibit multilineage differentiation capacity. These
properties of MSC prompted us to explore the neural potential of MSC with a view 
to their use for the treatment of demyelinating disorders, such as multiple
sclerosis. Indeed, issues such as the identification of a subset of stem cells
that is neurally fated, methods of expansion and optimal stage of differentiation
for transplantation remain poorly understood.
METHODS: In order to isolate mouse (m) MSC from BM, we used and compared the
classic plastic-adhesion method and one depleting technique, the
magnetic-activated cell sorting technique.
RESULTS: We established and optimized culture conditions so that mMSC could be
expanded for more than 360 days and 50 passages. We also demonstrated that
undifferentiated mMSC express the neural markers nestin, MAP2, A2B5, GFAP, MBP,
CNPase, GalC, O1 under standard culture conditions before transplantation. The
pluripotent stem cell marker Oct-4 and the embryonic stem cell marker Rex-1 are
spontaneously expressed by untreated mMSC. The lineage-negative mMSC (CD5- CD11b-
Ly-6G- Ter119- CD45R- c-kit/CD117-) overexpressed Oct-4, O1 and A2B5 in the first
days of culture compared with the non-sorted MSC. Finally, we identified a
distinct subpopulation of mMSC that is primed towards a neural fate, namely
Sca-1+/nestin+ mMSC.
DISCUSSION: These results should facilitate the optimal timing of harvesting a
neurally fated subpopulation of mMSC for transplantation into animal models of
human brain diseases.

PMID: 16793732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Stem Cells. 2006 Sep;24(9):2014-22. Epub 2006 May 25.

Tal1/Scl gene transduction using a lentiviral vector stimulates highly efficient 
hematopoietic cell differentiation from common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)
embryonic stem cells.

Kurita R(1), Sasaki E, Yokoo T, Hiroyama T, Takasugi K, Imoto H, Izawa K, Dong Y,
Hashiguchi T, Soda Y, Maeda T, Suehiro Y, Tanioka Y, Nakazaki Y, Tani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Division of Molecular and Clinical Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

The development of embryonic stem cell (ESC) therapies requires the establishment
of efficient methods to differentiate ESCs into specific cell lineages. Here, we 
report the in vitro differentiation of common marmoset (CM) (Callithrix jacchus) 
ESCs into hematopoietic cells after exogenous gene transfer using vesicular
stomatitis virus-glycoprotein-pseudotyped lentiviral vectors. We transduced
hematopoietic genes, including tal1/scl, gata1, gata2, hoxB4, and lhx2, into CM
ESCs. By immunochemical and morphological analyses, we demonstrated that
overexpression of tal1/scl, but not the remaining genes, dramatically increased
hematopoiesis of CM ESCs, resulting in multiple blood-cell lineages. Furthermore,
flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that CD34, a hematopoietic stem/progenitor 
cell marker, was highly expressed in tal1/scl-overexpressing embryoid body cells.
Similar results were obtained from three independent CM ESC lines. These results 
suggest that transduction of exogenous tal1/scl cDNA into ESCs is a promising
method to induce the efficient differentiation of CM ESCs into hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells.

PMID: 16728561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Pituitary. 2006;9(1):11-8.

Pituitary tumors arising from glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit-deficient mice
contain transcription factors and receptors present in thyrotropes.

Sarapura VD(1), Wood WM, Woodmansee WW, Haakinson DJ, Dowding JM, Gordon DF,
Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80045, USA. virginia.sarapura@uchsc.edu

Glycoprotein-hormone alpha-subunit deficient (alphaSUnull) mice are hypothyroid
and hypogonadal due to the absence of functional TSH, LH and FSH, despite normal 
production of the corresponding beta subunits. Pituitary tumors spontaneously
developing in alphaSUnull mice were propagated in hypothyroid mice. The purpose
of the current studies was to compare the gene expression profile of these
alphaSUnull tumors with previously characterized TtT-97 thyrotropic tumors. A
group of animals bearing each tumor type was treated with thyroid hormone (T4)
prior to tumor removal. Both tumor types equally expressed TSHbeta mRNA, which
significantly decreased when exposed to T4, whereas alpha-subunit mRNA was absent
in alphaSUnull tumors. Northern blot analysis was performed using cDNA probes for
the following transcription factors: Pit1, GATA2, pLIM, Msx1, Ptx1 and Ptx2. Both
tumors were found to contain identical transcripts with similar responses to T4, 
with the exception of Pit1. In contrast to the signal pattern seen in TtT-97,
only two bands were seen in alphaSUnull tumors, which were similar in size to
those in alphaTSH cells, a thyrotropic cell line that lacks TSHbeta-subunit
expression and Pit1 protein. However, western blot analysis revealed a protein
band in the alphaSUnull tumors consistent with Pit1, while this signal was absent
in alphaTSH cells. Northern blot analysis was also performed with specific cDNA
probes for the following receptors: TRbeta1, TRbeta2, TRalpha1, non-T3 binding
alpha2, RXRgamma and Sst5. Similarly-sized transcripts were found in both types
of tumor, although the signal for Sst5 was seen in T4-treated alphaSUnull tumors 
only with a more sensitive RT-PCR analysis. The overall similarity between the
two tumor types renders the alphaSUnull tumor as a suitable thyrotropic tumor
model.

PMID: 16703404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. FEBS Lett. 2006 May 29;580(13):3153-60. Epub 2006 May 2.

Erythropoietin production: Molecular mechanisms of the antagonistic actions of
cyclic adenosine monophosphate and interleukin-1.

Batmunkh C(1), Krajewski J, Jelkmann W, Hellwig-Bürgel T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538
Luebeck, Germany.

Erythropoietin (Epo) mRNA expression is suppressed by interleukin 1 (IL-1).
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) can increase Epo mRNA and Epo protein
levels in IL-1 treated HepG2 cells to some extent. To identify molecular
mechanisms of this reaction we investigated three transcription factors
(NF-kappaB, GATA-2 and HIF-1) that control the Epo gene. Western blot analyses
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) revealed that IL-1 strongly
activated NF-kappaB, which is a likely suppressor of the Epo promoter. Treatment 
of the cells with dibutyryl-cAMP (Bt2-cAMP) inhibited the activation of NF-kappaB
by IL-1. Bt2-cAMP increased GATA-2 DNA binding. Since GATA-2 is a suppressor of
the Epo promoter, GATA-2 activation was unlikely to cause the increase of Epo
mRNA expression in IL-1 treated cells. Furthermore, Western blots, EMSAs and
reporter gene studies showed that Bt2-cAMP was without effect on the
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF-1. Thus, NF-kappaB is probably the
primary transcription factor by which cAMP counteracts the inhibition of Epo gene
expression by IL-1.

PMID: 16684536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Development. 2006 Jun;133(11):2155-65. Epub 2006 May 3.

The GATA2 transcription factor negatively regulates the proliferation of neuronal
progenitors.

El Wakil A(1), Francius C, Wolff A, Pleau-Varet J, Nardelli J.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 7000, Cytosquelette et Développement, Faculté de Médecine
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Postmitotic neurons are produced from a pool of cycling progenitors in an orderly
fashion that requires proper spatial and temporal coordination of proliferation, 
fate determination, differentiation and morphogenesis. This probably relies on
complex interplay between mechanisms that control cell cycle, specification and
differentiation. In this respect, we have studied the possible implication of
GATA2, a transcription factor that is involved in several neuronal specification 
pathways, in the control of the proliferation of neural progenitors in the
embryonic spinal cord. Using gain- and loss-of-function manipulations, we have
shown that Gata2 can drive neural progenitors out of the cycle and, to some
extent, into differentiation. This correlates with the control of cyclin D1
transcription and of the expression of the p27/Kip1 protein. Interestingly, this 
functional aspect is not only associated with silencing of the Notch pathway but 
also appears to be independent of proneural function. Consistently, GATA2 also
controls the proliferation capacity of mouse embryonic neuroepithelial cells in
culture. Indeed, Gata2 inactivation enhances the proliferation rate in these
cells. By contrast, GATA2 overexpression is sufficient to force such cells and
neuroblastoma cells to stop dividing but not to drive either type of cell into
differentiation. Furthermore, a non-cell autonomous effect of Gata2 expression
was observed in vivo as well as in vitro. Hence, our data have provided evidence 
for the ability of Gata2 to inhibit the proliferation of neural progenitors, and 
they further suggest that, in this regard, Gata2 can operate independently of
neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 16672344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Immunol. 2007 Feb;44(5):926-33. Epub 2006 May 2.

p38 MAP kinase drives the expression of mast cell-derived IL-9 via activation of 
the transcription factor GATA-1.

Stassen M(1), Klein M, Becker M, Bopp T, Neudörfl C, Richter C, Heib V,
Klein-Hessling S, Serfling E, Schild H, Schmitt E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
stassenm@uni-mainz.de

Mast cells are able to produce a huge panel of mediators including the Th2-type
cytokine IL-9, which is considered to be a key mediator for the pathogenesis of
allergic asthma, but detailed information on the regulation of IL-9 transcription
in mast cells has been scarce. Herein we provide evidence that the
erythroid/myeloid transcription factor GATA-1, which is not expressed in Th2
cells, is a potent activator of IL-9 expression in murine bone marrow-derived
mast cells (BMMC). Furthermore, in mast cells, but not in Th2 cells, production
of IL-9 is sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase. As transactivation mediated
by GATA-1 is also sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase, and GATA-1 is a
target for p38 MAP kinase-mediated phosphorylation in vitro, we conclude that
both signaling molecules represent a part of a mast cell-specific signaling
network that regulates the expression of IL-9.

PMID: 16650898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:77-87. Epub 2006 Mar 21.

Identification of cis and trans-acting transcriptional regulators in
chondroinduced fibroblasts from the pre-phenotypic gene expression profile.

Yates KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Orthopedic Research, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. kyates@partners.org

Cell differentiation is regulated via expression of successive sets of genes. In 
an in vitro model of chondrocyte differentiation, human dermal fibroblasts (hDFs)
cultured in collagen sponges are induced to express cartilage matrix genes after 
7 days' culture with demineralized bone powder (DBP). A shift in expression of
many other genes occurs within 3 days, before chondroblast phenotypic genes are
detectable. In this study, the pre-chondrogenic gene expression profile was used 
as a starting point to derive information on transcriptional regulation of
chondrocyte differentiation induced by DBP. Putative cis regulatory elements were
identified by comparing promoter regions from three genes that are highly
upregulated in chondroinduced hDFs (BIGH3, COL1A2, and FN1) [Zhou, S., Glowacki, 
J., Yates, K.E, 2004. Comparison of TGF-beta/BMP pathways signaled by
demineralized bone powder and BMP-2 in human dermal fibroblasts. J. Bone Min.
Res. 19, 1732-1741] and whose products are known to interact in the matrix [Kim, 
J.E., et al., 2002. Molecular properties of wild-type and mutant betaIG-H3
proteins. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43, 656-661]. The effect of DBP on
nuclear protein binding to cis elements was measured with an array-based assay.
Nuclear extracts from hDFs cultured in DBP/collagen sponges for 3 days showed
increased binding to several cis elements belonging to the families that were
identified by promoter analysis. Of note, those elements represented targets of
both signal-activated and developmentally regulated transcription factors. Direct
measurement of mRNAs showed increased gene expression of both types of
transcription factors in chondroinduced hDFs, including NFKB2 (290% of control), 
RELA (160%), and GATA2 (190%). Moreover, DBP increased gene expression of
chondrogenic transcription factors SOX9 (160% of control) and RUNX2 (180%).
Immunoblot analysis showed that DBP increased both expression (200% of control)
and phosphorylation (300%) of the Creb protein, a transcription factor that is
downstream of several signal transduction pathways. Inhibition of protein kinase 
A, protein kinase C, or MAP kinase in hDFs cultured in DBP/collagen sponges
reduced induction of BIGH3 to approximately 50% of control. These results suggest
that both signal-activated and developmentally controlled transcriptional
mechanisms contribute to chondroinduction of hDFs by DBP.

PMCID: PMC1533912
PMID: 16644146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Clin Invest. 2006 May;116(5):1327-36. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Mast cell IL-4 expression is regulated by Ikaros and influences encephalitogenic 
Th1 responses in EAE.

Gregory GD(1), Raju SS, Winandy S, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3010, USA.

When exposed to a pathogen, a naive CD4(+) T cell is forced to make a cell fate
decision that leads to a polarized population of Th1 IFN-gamma- or Th2 IL-4-
producing cells. Although IL-4 has traditionally been considered a factor that
promotes Th2 cell differentiation, recent evidence has demonstrated that the site
and timing of IL-4 expression in an immune response determines its ultimate
effects on CD4(+) T cell fate. Using a mast cell (MC) reconstitution model, we
demonstrate that MC-derived IL-4 promoted Th1 responses in vivo. Furthermore, MCs
from genetically disparate mouse strains varied in their potential for IL-4
expression. Independent of the activation mode, MCs from Th1-prone C57BL/6 mice
exhibited a more robust Il4 response than did the Th2-prone strain Balb/c. The
hierarchy of IL-4 expression potential was directly associated with the degree of
basal chromatin accessibility at cis-regulatory elements conserved noncoding
sequence-1 and V(A) enhancer within the Th2 locus. GATA1/2 and Ikaros, factors
with opposing roles in chromatin remodeling, acted at these sites. We propose
that GATA and Ikaros proteins coordinately fine-tune accessibility at the Il4
locus during development to variably regulate IL-4 expression. These events
likely contribute to the genetically determined heterogeneity in Th1 responses
that underlie susceptibility to many diseases.

PMCID: PMC1440706
PMID: 16628252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 1;312(11):2028-39. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Activity of a novel PDGF beta-receptor enhancer during the cell cycle and upon
differentiation of neuroblastoma.

Kaneko M(1), Yang W, Matsumoto Y, Watt F, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Chemistry and Cell Biology,
Göteborg University, Box 420, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.

PDGF acts as an autocrine and paracrine factor in certain tumors through
upregulation of the PDGF beta-receptor expression. In order to elucidate the
control mechanism for the receptor expression, we have isolated an enhancer from 
two P1 clones that together contain a 102 kb NotI region covering the entire
human PDGFRB gene. They were partially digested with TspI and cloned into the
PDGFRB enhancer trap vector to make a library for identification of enhancers.
The digested DNA containing enhancer was identified by expression of GFP when
transfected in PDGF beta-receptor expressing cells. One of the enhancer clones
was further examined by making several deletion mutants in a luciferase vector.
This enhancer was most active in neuroblastoma cells, IMR32 and BE2, but less
active in hemangioma and in smooth muscle cell lines. Chip assay revealed that
SP1, AP2, and GATA2 bound the enhancer in BE2 cells. Their interaction occurred
dependently of the cell cycle and synchronously with their binding to the
promoter. Transfection of GATA2 alone or with Ets, which binds adjacent to GATA, 
resulted in differentiation of BE2 cells in parallel with increased PDGF
beta-receptor expression. Furthermore, over-expression of the PDGF beta-receptor 
in BE2 cells induced neurite extension.

PMID: 16624290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Immunol. 2006 May 1;176(9):5267-75.

Notch signaling requires GATA-2 to inhibit myelopoiesis from embryonic stem cells
and primary hemopoietic progenitors.

de Pooter RF(1), Schmitt TM, de la Pompa JL, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH,
Zúñiga-Pflücker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook and Women's
Research Institute, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The bone marrow and thymus, although both hemopoietic environments, induce very
distinct differentiation outcomes. The former supports hemopoietic stem cell
self-renewal and multiple hemopoietic lineages, while the latter supports T
lymphopoiesis almost exclusively. This distinction suggests that the thymic
environment acts to restrict the hemopoietic fates available to thymic
immigrants. In this study, we demonstrate that the addition of the Notch ligand
Delta-like-1 (Dll-1) to an in vitro system that otherwise supports myelopoiesis, 
greatly reduces the myelopoietic potential of stem cells or uncommitted
progenitors. In contrast, committed myeloid progenitors mature regardless of the 
presence of Dll-1. The block in myelopoiesis is the direct result of Notch
signaling within the hemopoietic progenitor, and Dll-1-induced signals cause a
rapid increase in the expression of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2. 
Importantly, in the absence of GATA-2, Dll-1-induced signals fail to inhibit
commitment to the myeloid fate. Taken together, our results support a role for
GATA-2 in allowing Dll-1 to restrict non-T cell lineage differentiation outcomes.

PMID: 16621992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;20(6):1366-77. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Pituitary-specific Gata2 knockout: effects on gonadotrope and thyrotrope
function.

Charles MA(1), Saunders TL, Wood WM, Owens K, Parlow AF, Camper SA, Ridgway EC,
Gordon DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0618, USA.

GATA2 is expressed in the pituitary during development and in adult gonadotropes 
and thyrotropes. It is proposed to be important for gonadotrope and thyrotrope
cell fate choice and for TSH production. To test this idea, we produced a
pituitary-specific knockout of Gata2, designed so that the DNA-binding
zinc-finger region is deleted in the presence of a pituitary-specific recombinase
transgene. These mice have reduced secretion of gonadotropins basally and in
response to castration challenge, although the mice are fertile. GATA2 deficiency
also compromises thyrotrope function. Mutants have fewer thyrotrope cells at
birth, male Gata2-deficient mice exhibit growth delay from 3-9 wk of age, and
adult mutants produce less TSH in response to severe hypothyroidism after
radiothyroidectomy. Therefore, Gata2 appears to be dispensable for gonadotrope
and thyrotrope cell fate and maintenance, but important for optimal gonadotrope
and thyrotrope function. Gata2-deficient mice exhibit elevated levels of Gata3
transcripts in the pituitary gland, suggesting that GATA3 can compensate for
GATA2.

PMID: 16543408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2615-25.

Transcriptional link between blood and bone: the stem cell leukemia gene and its 
+19 stem cell enhancer are active in bone cells.

Pimanda JE(1), Silberstein L, Dominici M, Dekel B, Bowen M, Oldham S, Kallianpur 
A, Brandt SJ, Tannahill D, Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Blood and vascular cells are generated during early embryogenesis from a common
precursor, the hemangioblast. The stem cell leukemia gene (SCL/tal 1) encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for the normal
development of blood progenitors and blood vessels. We have previously
characterized a panel of SCL enhancers including the +19 element, which directs
expression to hematopoietic stem cells and endothelium. Here we demonstrate that 
SCL is expressed in bone primordia during embryonic development and in adult
osteoblasts. Despite consistent expression in cells of the osteogenic lineage,
SCL protein is not required for bone specification of embryonic stem cells. In
transgenic mice, the SCL +19 core enhancer directed reporter gene expression to
vascular smooth muscle and bone in addition to blood and endothelium. A 644-bp
fragment containing the SCL +19 core enhancer was active in both blood and bone
cell lines and was bound in vivo by a common array of Ets and GATA transcription 
factors. Taken together with the recent observation that a common progenitor can 
give rise to blood and bone cells, our results suggest that the SCL +19 enhancer 
targets a mesodermal progenitor capable of generating hematopoietic, vascular,
and osteoblastic progeny.

PMCID: PMC1430329
PMID: 16537906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2202-7. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Combinatorial Gata2 and Sca1 expression defines hematopoietic stem cells in the
bone marrow niche.

Suzuki N(1), Ohneda O, Minegishi N, Nishikawa M, Ohta T, Takahashi S, Engel JD,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)-Exploratory Research for Advanced
Technology (ERATO) Environmental Response Project, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577,
Japan.

The interaction between stem cells and their supportive microenvironment is
critical for their maintenance, function, and survival. Whereas hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) are among the best characterized of tissue stem cells, their
precise site of residence (referred to as the niche) in the adult bone marrow has
not been precisely defined. In this study, we found that a Gata2 promoter directs
activity in all HSCs. We show that HSCs can be isolated efficiently from bone
marrow cells by following Gata2-directed GFP fluorescence, and that they can also
be monitored in vivo. Each individual GFP-positive cell lay in a G0/G1 cell cycle
state, in intimate contact with osteoblasts beside the endosteum, at the edge of 
the bone marrow. We conclude that the HSC niche is composed of solitary cells and
that adult bone marrow HSC are not clustered.

PMCID: PMC1413708
PMID: 16461905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2286-91. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Regulation of allergic airway inflammation through Toll-like receptor 4-mediated 
modification of mast cell function.

Nigo YI(1), Yamashita M, Hirahara K, Shinnakasu R, Inami M, Kimura M, Hasegawa A,
Kohno Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

In a mouse experimental asthma model, the administration of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), particularly at low doses, enhances the levels of
ovalbumin (OVA)-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation. In an effort to clarify
the cellular and molecular basis for the LPS effect, we demonstrate that the
OVA-induced eosinophilic inflammation in the lung is dramatically increased by
the administration of LPS in wild-type mice, whereas such increase was not
observed in mast-cell-deficient mice or Toll-like receptor (TLR)4-deficient mice.
Adoptive transfer of bone-marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) from wild-type, but
not from TLR4-deficient, mice restored the increased eosinophilic inflammation in
mast-cell-deficient mice. Wild-type BMMCs pretreated with LPS in vitro also
reconstituted the eosinophilic inflammation. Moreover, in vitro analysis revealed
that the treatment of BMMCs with LPS resulted in NF-kappaB activation, sustained 
up-regulation of GATA1 and -2 expression, and increased the capability to produce
IL-5 and -13. Dramatic increases in the expression of IL-5 and -13 and Eotaxin 2 
were detected in LPS-treated BMMCs after costimulation with LPS and IgE/Ag.
Overexpression of GATA1, but not GATA2, in MC9 mast cells resulted in increased
transcriptional activity of IL-4, -5, and -13. Furthermore, the levels of
transcription of Th2 cytokines in BMMCs were decreased by the introduction of
small interfering RNA for GATA1. Thus, mast cells appear to control allergic
airway inflammation after their activation and modulation through TLR4-mediated
induction of GATA1 and subsequent increase in Th2 cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC1413725
PMID: 16461458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):583-600.

Transcriptional changes during neuronal death and replacement in the olfactory
epithelium.

Shetty RS(1), Bose SC, Nickell MD, McIntyre JC, Hardin DH, Harris AM, McClintock 
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience of Sensory
Systems Training Program, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0298, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Sep;30(1):90-107.

The olfactory epithelium has the unusual ability to replace its neurons.We forced
replacement of mouse olfactory sensory neurons by bulbectomy. Microarray,
bioinformatics, and in situ hybridization techniques detected a rapid shift in
favor of pro-apoptotic proteins, a progressive immune response by macrophages and
dendritic cells, and identified or predicted 439 mRNAs enriched in olfactory
sensory neurons, including gene silencing factors and sperm flagellar proteins.
Transcripts encoding cell cycle regulators, axonogenesis proteins, and
transcription factors and signaling proteins that promote proliferation and
differentiation were increased at 5-7 days after bulbectomy and were expressed by
basal progenitor cells or immature neurons. The transcription factors included
Nhlhl, Hes6, Lmycl, c-Myc, Mxd4, Idl,Nmycl, Cited2, c-Myb, Mybll, Tead2, Dpl,
Gata2, Lmol, and Soxll. The data reveal significant similarities with embryonic
neurogenesis and make several mechanistic predictions, including the roles of the
transcription factors in the olfactory sensory neuron lineage.

PMID: 16456926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Leukemia. 2006 Mar;20(3):417-25.

The GATA site-dependent hemogen promoter is transcriptionally regulated by GATA1 
in hematopoietic and leukemia cells.

Yang LV(1), Wan J, Ge Y, Fu Z, Kim SY, Fujiwara Y, Taub JW, Matherly LH, Eliason 
J, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Hemgn (a gene symbol for hemogen in mouse, EDAG in human and RP59 in rat) encodes
a nuclear protein that is highly expressed in hematopoietic tissues and acute
leukemia. To characterize its regulatory mechanisms, we examined the activities
of a Hemgn promoter containing 2975 bp of 5' flanking sequence and 196 bp of 5'
untranslated region (5' UTR) sequence both in vitro and in vivo: this promoter is
preferentially activated in a hematopoietic cell line, not in nonhematopoietic
cell lines, and is sufficient to drive the transcription of a lacZ transgene in
hematopoietic tissues in transgenic mice. Mutagenesis analyses showed that the 5'
UTR including two highly conserved GATA boxes is critical for the promoter
activity. GATA1, not GATA2, binds to the GATA binding sites and transactivates
the Hemgn promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, the expression of
human hemogen (EDAG) transcripts were closely correlated with levels of GATA1
transcripts in primary acute myeloid leukemia specimens. This study suggests that
the Hemgn promoter contains critical regulatory elements for its transcription in
hematopoietic tissues and Hemgn is a direct target of GATA1 in leukemia cells.

PMID: 16437149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Physiol Genomics. 2006 Apr 13;25(2):250-62. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Gene expression in ductus arteriosus and aorta: comparison of birth and oxygen
effects.

Costa M(1), Barogi S, Socci ND, Angeloni D, Maffei M, Baragatti B, Chiellini C,
Grasso E, Coceani F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pisa, Italy.

Ductus arteriosus (DA) closure is initiated by oxygen rise postnatally and
progresses in two, functional-to-permanent, stages. Here, using GeneChip Arrays
in rats (normoxic and hyperoxic fetus, normoxic newborn), we examined whether
oxygen alone duplicates the birth process in affecting DA genes. In addition, by 
comparing DA with aorta (Ao), we identified features in postnatal gene profile
marking transitional adjustments in a closing (DA) vs. a persistent (Ao) vessel. 
We found changes in neonatal DA denoting enhanced formation and action of the
constrictor endothelin-1 (ET-1). Likewise, ANG II type 1 receptor was
upregulated, and the compound was a constrictor. Conversely, relaxant PGE2 became
less effective. Among agents for functional closure, only ET-1 was affected
similarly by oxygen and birth. Coincidentally, neonatal DA showed enhanced
contractile drive with upregulation of Rho-Rho kinase and calcium signaling along
with downregulation of contractile proteins. The latter effect was shared by
oxygen. Changes denoting active remodeling were also seen in neonatal but not
hyperoxic fetal DA. Ao, unlike DA, exhibited postnatal variations in
noradrenergic, purinergic, and PGI2 systems with opposing effects on vasomotion. 
Contraction and remodeling processes were also less affected by birth, whereas
lipid and glucose metabolism were upregulated. We conclude that several agents,
including ANG II as novel effector, promote functional closure of DA, but only
ET-1 is causally coupled with oxygen. Oxygen has no role in processes for
permanent closure. Functional closure is associated with downregulation of
contractile apparatus, and this may render neonatal DA less amenable to tone
manipulation. Conceivably, activation of metabolism in neonatal Ao is a
distinguishing feature for transitional adaptations in the permanent vasculature.

PMID: 16418320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Metab. 2006 Jan;3(1):25-34.

Hedgehog signaling plays a conserved role in inhibiting fat formation.

Suh JM(1), Gao X, McKay J, McKay R, Salo Z, Graff JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, NB5 118, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2006 Jan;3(1):1-2.

Hedgehog (Hh) signals regulate invertebrate and vertebrate development, yet the
role of the cascade in adipose development was undefined. To analyze a potential 
function, we turned to Drosophila and mammalian models. Fat-body-specific
transgenic activation of Hh signaling inhibits fly fat formation. Conversely,
fat-body-specific Hh blockade stimulated fly fat formation. In mammalian models, 
sufficiency and necessity tests showed that Hh signaling also inhibits mammalian 
adipogenesis. Hh signals elicit this function early in adipogenesis, upstream of 
PPARgamma, potentially diverting preadipocytes as well as multipotent mesenchymal
prescursors away from adipogenesis and toward osteogenesis. Hh may elicit these
effects by inducing the expression of antiadipogenic transcription factors such
as Gata2. These data support the notion that Hh signaling plays a conserved role,
from invertebrates to vertebrates, in inhibiting fat formation and highlighting
the potential of the Hh pathway as a therapeutic target for osteoporosis,
lipodystrophy, diabetes, and obesity.

PMID: 16399502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 May;20(5):1073-89. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

MED220/thyroid receptor-associated protein 220 functions as a transcriptional
coactivator with Pit-1 and GATA-2 on the thyrotropin-beta promoter in
thyrotropes.

Gordon DF(1), Tucker EA, Tundwal K, Hall H, Wood WM, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center-Fitzsimons, Mail Stop 8106, P.O. Box 6511, Aurora,
Colorado 80049, USA. david.gordon@uchsc.edu

Mediator (MED) 220/thyroid receptor-associated protein (TRAP) 220 is a
transcriptional mediator that interacts with liganded thyroid/steroid hormone
receptors. MED220 haploinsufficient heterozygotes exhibited hypothyroidism and
reduced TSHbeta transcripts, suggesting a specific function for TSHbeta
transcription. We previously demonstrated that Pit-1 and GATA-2 can bind to a
composite element within the proximal TSHbeta promoter and synergistically
activate transcription. We detected MED220 expression in TtT-97 thyrotropes by
Northern and Western blot analysis. Cotransfections in CV-1 cells showed that
Pit-1, GATA-2, or MED220 alone did not markedly stimulate the TSHbeta promoter.
However, Pit-1 plus GATA-2 resulted in an 10-fold activation, demonstrating
synergistic cooperativity. Titration of MED220 resulted in a further
dose-dependent stimulation up to 25-fold that was promoter specific.
Glutathione-S-transferase interaction studies showed that MED220 or GATA-2 each
bound the homeodomain of Pit-1, whereas MED220 interacted independently with each
zinc finger of GATA-2 but not with either terminus. MED220 interacted with GATA-2
and Pit-1 over a broad region of its N terminus. These regions of interaction
were also important for maximal function. Coimmunoprecipitation confirmed that
all three factors can interact in thyrotropes and chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated in vivo occupancy on the proximal TSHbeta promoter. Thus, the
TSHbeta gene is maximally activated by a combination of three thyrotrope
transcription factors that act via both protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions.

PMID: 16396960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Endocrinology. 2006 Apr;147(4):1654-63. Epub 2005 Dec 29.

Role of prophet of Pit1 (PROP1) in gonadotrope differentiation and puberty.

Vesper AH(1), Raetzman LT, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109-0618,
USA.

The prophet of Pit1 (PROP1) gene is essential for normal gonadotropin production 
in both humans and mice. Transgenic mice that overexpress PROP1 in gonadotropes
and thyrotropes have transient hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and increased risk
of pituitary adenomas. Here we report a temporal study of pituitary gonadotrope
terminal differentiation and hypogonadism, delayed onset of puberty, and
transient growth insufficiency in the transgenic males. The Prop1 transgenic mice
recover from their abnormalities and exhibit normal size and fertility at 3
months. The relatively normal expression pattern of GnRH receptor (Gnrhr)
suggests that the pituitary gonadotrope cell lineage is appropriately specified, 
but the ability to synthesize LH and FSH is impaired by excess PROP1. We report
no obvious abnormalities in expression of the transcription factors early growth 
response 1, NR5A1, GATA2, TBX19, and NR0B1, or the TGFbeta pathway members
including activin, inhibin, and activin receptors. Thus, overexpression of PROP1 
may influence gonadotrope development by a novel mechanism. Microarray analysis
identified the inhibitory transmembrane receptor gene Klrg1 and the protease gene
Prss28 as candidates for involvement in this process. We hypothesize that
variation in PROP1 expression could affect the growth spurt and the onset of
puberty in humans.

PMID: 16384867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Jul;13(7):1064-74. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Overexpression of Ets-1 in human hematopoietic progenitor cells blocks erythroid 
and promotes megakaryocytic differentiation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P, Morsilli O, Gabbianelli M, Pagliuca A, Mazzeo S, Testa U, 
Peschle C, Marziali G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Ets-1 is a widely expressed transcription factor implicated in development,
tumorigenesis and hematopoiesis. We analyzed Ets-1 gene expression during human
erythroid and megakaryocytic (MK) differentiation in unilineage cultures of CD34+
progenitor cells. During erythroid maturation, Ets-1 is downmodulated and
exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm through an active mechanism mediated
by a leucine-rich nuclear export signal. In contrast, during megakaryocytopoiesis
Ets-1 increases and remains localized in the nucleus up to terminal maturation.
Overexpression of Ets-1 in erythroid cells blocks maturation at the
polychromatophilic stage, increases GATA-2 and decreases both GATA-1 and
erythropoietin receptor expression. Conversely, Ets-1 overexpressing
megakaryocytes are characterized by enhanced differentiation and maturation,
coupled with upmodulation of GATA-2 and megakaryocyte-specific genes. We show
that Ets-1 binds to and activates the GATA-2 promoter, in vitro and in vivo,
indicating that one of the pathways through which Ets-1 blocks erythroid and
promotes MK differentiation is via upmodulation of GATA-2 expression.

PMID: 16294212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 22;102(47):17065-70. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Chromatin domain activation via GATA-1 utilization of a small subset of dispersed
GATA motifs within a broad chromosomal region.

Im H(1), Grass JA, Johnson KD, Kim SI, Boyer ME, Imbalzano AN, Bieker JJ,
Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
WI 53706, USA.

Cis elements that mediate transcription factor binding are abundant within
genomes, but the rules governing occupancy of such motifs in chromatin are not
understood. The transcription factor GATA-1 that regulates red blood cell
development binds with high affinity to GATA motifs, and initial studies suggest 
that these motifs are often unavailable for occupancy in chromatin. Whereas
GATA-2 regulates the differentiation of all blood cell lineages via GATA motif
binding, the specificity of GATA-2 chromatin occupancy has not been studied. We
found that conditionally active GATA-1 (ER-GATA-1) and GATA-2 occupy only a small
subset of the conserved GATA motifs within the murine beta-globin locus. Kinetic 
analyses in GATA-1-null cells indicated that ER-GATA-1 preferentially occupied
GATA motifs at the locus control region (LCR), in which chromatin accessibility
is largely GATA-1-independent. Subsequently, ER-GATA-1 increased promoter
accessibility and occupied the betamajor promoter. ER-GATA-1 increased erythroid 
Krüppel-like factor and SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex occupancy at
restricted LCR sites. These studies revealed three phases of beta-globin locus
activation: GATA-1-independent establishment of specific chromatin structure
features, GATA-1-dependent LCR complex assembly, and GATA-1-dependent promoter
complex assembly. The differential utilization of dispersed GATA motifs therefore
establishes spatial/temporal regulation and underlies the multistep activation
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1287986
PMID: 16286657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Mol Neurosci. 2005;27(3):281-92.

Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors select shared and unique target genes in
the noradrenergic cell type.

Rychlik JL(1), Hsieh M, Eiden LE, Lewis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.

The noradrenergic cell type is characterized by the expression of proteins
involved in the biosynthesis, transport, and secretion of noradrenaline and is
dependent on the sequential and combinatorial expression of numerous
transcription factors, including Phox2a, Phox2b, dHAND, GATA2, GATA3, and MASH1. 
Phox2a and Phox2b transactivate the promoter of the gene encoding the
noradrenergic biosynthetic enzyme, dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH), and dHAND
potentiates the activity of Phox2a. In this study, we use chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to identify target genes of the Phox2 proteins and
dHAND. All three proteins are bound to the DBH and PHOX2B promoter regions in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. The interaction between Phox2a and dHAND is analyzed
by fluorescent anisotropy, which demonstrates that dHAND causes an eightfold
increase in the affinity of Phox2a for its recognition sites on the DBH promoter 
region. The Phox2 proteins are not found on the genes encoding other
noradrenergic enzymatic or transport proteins but are reciprocally bound to each 
other's promoters in SH-SY5Y cells. Together with Phox2a and Phox2b, dHAND is
bound to the PHOX2B promoter and is also associated with the GATA2 and eHAND
genes in the absence of the Phox2 proteins. These results demonstrate the direct 
interactions of the Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors within a noradrenergic 
cell type. The Phox2 proteins were found to share all target genes, whereas dHAND
binds to genes independently of Phox2a.

PMID: 16280598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Blood. 2006 Mar 1;107(5):1857-63. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Redirecting differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors by a transcription
factor, GATA-2.

Kitajima K(1), Tanaka M, Zheng J, Yen H, Sato A, Sugiyama D, Umehara H, Sakai E, 
Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School and Graduate School of Frontier
Biosciences, Osaka University, Yamada-oka 2-2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

GATA-2 is a zinc finger transcription factor essential for differentiation of
immature hematopoietic cells. We analyzed the function of GATA-2 by a combined
method of tetracycline-dependent conditional gene expression and in vitro
hematopoietic differentiation from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells using OP9
stroma cells (OP9 system). In the presence of macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (M-CSF), the OP9 system induced macrophage differentiation. GATA-2
expression in this system inhibited macrophage differentiation and redirected the
fate of hematopoietic differentiation to other hematopoietic lineages. GATA-2
expression commencing at day 5 or day 6 induced megakaryocytic or erythroid
differentiation, respectively. Expression levels of PU.1, a hematopoietic
transcription factor that interferes with GATA-2, appeared to play a critical
role in differentiation to megakaryocytic or erythroid lineages. Transcription of
PU.1 was affected by histone acetylation induced by binding of GATA-2 to the PU.1
promoter region. This study demonstrates that the function of GATA-2 is modified 
in a context-dependent manner by expression of PU.1, which in turn is regulated
by GATA-2.

PMID: 16254139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;24(9):543-52.

GATA-2 and HNF-3beta regulate the human alcohol dehydrogenase 1A (ADH1A) gene.

Dannenberg LO(1), Chen HJ, Edenberg HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, 46202, USA. edenberg@iupui.edu

In this paper, we have identified several distal cis-acting elements that
contribute to the regulation and tissue- specificity of ADH1A, which encodes an
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) that metabolizes ethanol. A negative element from bp 
-1873 to -1558, relative to the translational start site, decreased
transcriptional activity to 52% in H4IIE-C3 cells and 70% in CV-1 cells. A
positive element from bp -2459 to -2173 increased transcriptional activity
twofold in H4IIE-C3 cells and 1.7-fold in CV-1 cells. Gel mobility shift and
supershift assays demonstrated that GATA-2 bound a region within this positive
element. A tissue-specific regulatory element from bp -6380 to -5403 increased
transcription twofold in H4IIE-C3 cells while decreasing transcription to 86% in 
CV-1 cells. Within this tissue-specific fragment, the region from bp -5668 to
-5403 increased transcription 1.7-fold in H4IIE-C3 cells and 1.3-fold in CV-1
cells. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF- 3beta) bound a region of the
tissue-specific element in CV-1 cells, but not in H4IIE-C3 cells. Positive
regulation of the ADH1A gene may be influenced by GATA-2 binding, while
differences in HNF-3beta binding in cells/tissues may contribute to tissue
specificity.

PMID: 16153155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Apoptosis. 2005 Oct;10(5):1063-78.

Hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-2 promotes upregulation of alpha globin
and cell death in FL5.12 cells.

Brecht K(1), Simonen M, Kamke M, Heim J.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research Basel, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
karin.brecht@bluewin.ch

Recently we showed that alpha globin is a novel pro-apoptotic factor in
programmed cell death in the pro-B cell line, FL5.12. Alpha globin was also
upregulated in various other cell lines after different apoptotic stimuli. Under 
withdrawal of IL-3, overexpression of alpha globin accelerated apoptosis in
FL5.12. Here, we have studied how transcription of alpha globin is placed in the 
broader context of apoptosis. We used Affymetrix chip technology and RT QPCR to
compare expression patterns of FL5.12 cells growing with or without IL-3 to
search for transcription factors which were concomitantly upregulated with alpha 
globin. The erythroid-specific transcription factor GATA-2 was the earliest and
most prominently upregulated candidate. GATA-1 was expressed at low levels and
was weakly induced while GATA-3 was completely absent. To evaluate the influence 
of GATA-2 on alpha globin expression and cell viability we overexpressed GATA-2
in FL5.12 cells. Interestingly, high expression of GATA-2 resulted in cell death 
and elevated alpha globin levels in FL5.12 cells. Transduction of antisense
GATA-2 prevented both increase of GATA-2 and alpha globin under apoptotic
conditions and delayed cell death. We suggest a role of GATA-2 in apoptosis
besides its function in maintenance and proliferation of immature hematopoietic
progenitors.

PMID: 16151640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Tissue Res. 2005 Nov;322(2):269-77. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

Induction of GH, PRL, and TSH beta mRNA by transfection of Pit-1 in a human
pituitary adenoma-derived cell line.

Miyai S(1), Yoshimura S, Iwasaki Y, Takekoshi S, Lloyd RV, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Bohseidai
Isehara Campus, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan. osamura@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

The functional development of pituitary cells depends on the expression of a
combination of transcription factors and co-factors. Pituitary-specific
transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) is required for the expression of growth hormone
(GH), prolactin (PRL), and the thyroid-stimulating hormone beta subunit (TSH
beta) and acts synergistically with the estrogen receptor (ER) and GATA-binding
protein 2 (GATA-2) to induce PRL and TSH beta expression, respectively. The
glycoprotein hormone alpha subunit (alpha SU) is the first hormone to be
expressed during pituitary development. In addition to being expressed in
follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone (LH), and TSH cells, alpha SU
is reported to co-localize with GH in pituitary cells. These findings have led to
the suggestion that the expression of Pit-1 in cells of the alpha SU-based
gonadotropin cell lineage might also lead to the expression of GH. In this study,
we transfected HP 75 cells (derived from a human non-functioning pituitary
adenoma that expressed alpha SU and LH beta) with Pit-1 by using an adenovirus
FLAG-Pit-1 construct. Most of the transfected cells expressed GH mRNA, with fewer
cells expressing PRL and TSH beta mRNA. The HP 75 cells expressed the genes for
ER and GATA-2, thus allowing their expression of GH, PRL, and TSH beta mRNA in
response to Pit-1. These results support the hypothesis that GH can be induced in
cells that possess an active alpha SU gene and shed light on the basic molecular 
mechanism that drives the development of GH, PRL, and TSH beta expression in the 
alpha SU-based gonadotroph lineage.

PMID: 16133148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35184-94. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

The long terminal repeat (LTR) of ERV-9 human endogenous retrovirus binds to NF-Y
in the assembly of an active LTR enhancer complex NF-Y/MZF1/GATA-2.

Yu X(1), Zhu X, Pi W, Ling J, Ko L, Takeda Y, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Institute of Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The solitary ERV-9 long terminal repeat (LTR) located upstream of the HS5 site in
the human beta-globin locus control region exhibits prominent enhancer activity
in embryonic and erythroid cells. The LTR enhancer contains 14 tandemly repeated 
subunits with recurrent CCAAT, GTGGGGA, and GATA motifs. Here we showed that in
erythroid K562 cells these DNA motifs bound the following three transcription
factors: ubiquitous NF-Y and hematopoietic MZF1 and GATA-2. These factors and
their target DNA motifs exhibited a hierarchy of DNA/protein and protein/protein 
binding affinities: NF-Y/CCAAT > NF-Y/GATA-2 > NF-Y/MZF1 > MZF1/GTGGGGA;
GATA-2/GATA. Through protein/protein interactions, NF-Y bound at the CCAAT motif 
recruited MZF1 and GATA-2, but not Sp1 and GATA-1, and stabilized their binding
to the neighboring GTGGGGA and GATA sites to assemble a novel LTR enhancer
complex, NF-Y/MZF1/GATA-2. In the LTR-HS5-epsilonp-GFP plasmid integrated into
K562 cells, mutation of the CCAAT motif in the LTR enhancer to abolish NF-Y
binding inactivated the enhancer, closed down the chromatin structure of the
epsilon-globin promoter, and silenced transcription of the green fluorescent
protein gene. The results indicated that NF-Y bound at the CCAAT motifs assembled
a robust LTR enhancer complex, which could act over the intervening DNA to
remodel the chromatin structure and to stimulate the transcription of the
downstream gene locus.

PMID: 16105833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. EMBO Rep. 2005 Sep;6(9):879-84.

The transcription factor GATA2 regulates differentiation of brown adipocytes.

Tsai J(1), Tong Q, Tan G, Chang AN, Orkin SH, Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a specialized mammalian tissue and a site of
adaptive thermogenesis. Although the metabolic functions of brown and white
adipocytes are distinct, terminal differentiation of both adipocyte lineages is
regulated by well-characterized common transcription factors. However, the early 
stages of adipocyte differentiation and regulation of precursor cells are not
well understood. We report here that GATA2 is expressed in brown adipocyte
precursors, and its expression is downregulated in a differentiation-dependent
manner. Constitutive expression of GATA2 suppressed expression of BAT-specific
genes in brown adipocytes, whereas disruption of a GATA2 allele in brown
preadipocytes resulted in significantly elevated differentiation and expression
of several markers of brown adipogenesis. Collectively, these results show that
GATA2 functions to suppress brown adipocyte differentiation, whereas reduction of
GATA2 promotes brown adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1369165
PMID: 16082385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 1;33(13):4357-67. Print 2005.

An Oct-1 binding site mediates activation of the gata2 promoter by BMP signaling.

Oren T(1), Torregroza I, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The gata2 gene encodes a transcription factor implicated in regulating early
patterning of ectoderm and mesoderm, and later in numerous cell-specific gene
expression programs. Activation of the gata2 gene during embryogenesis is
dependent on the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway, but the
mechanism for how signaling controls gene activity has not been defined. We
developed an assay in Xenopus embryos to analyze regulatory sequences of the
zebrafish gata2 promoter that are necessary to mediate the response to BMP
signaling during embryogenesis. We show that activation is Smad dependent, since 
it is blocked by expression of the inhibitory Smad6. Deletion analysis identified
an octamer binding site that is necessary for BMP-mediated induction, and that
interacts with the POU homeodomain protein Oct-1. However, this element is not
sufficient to transfer a BMP response to a heterologous promoter, requiring an
additional more proximal cooperating element. Based on recent studies with other 
BMP-dependent promoters (Drosophila vestigial and Xenopus Xvent-2), our studies
of the gata2 gene suggest that POU-domain proteins comprise a common component of
the BMP signaling pathway, cooperating with Smad proteins and other
transcriptional activators.

PMCID: PMC1182169
PMID: 16061939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell. 2005 Aug 5;19(3):381-91.

Histone H3 lysine 9 methylation and HP1gamma are associated with transcription
elongation through mammalian chromatin.

Vakoc CR(1), Mandat SA, Olenchock BA, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Methylation of histones modulates chromatin structure and function. Whereas
methylation of histone H3 on lysines 4, 36, and 79 has been linked with gene
activation, methylation of H3 on lysines 9 and 27 and histone H4 on lysine 20 is 
associated with heterochromatin and some repressed genes within euchromatin.
Here, we show that H3K9 di- and trimethylation occur in the transcribed region of
active genes in mammalian chromatin. This modification is dynamic, as it
increases during activation of transcription and is rapidly removed upon gene
repression. Heterochromatin Protein 1gamma (HP1gamma), a protein containing a
chromo-domain that recognizes H3K9 methylation, is also present in the
transcribed region of all active genes examined. Both the presence of HP1gamma
and H3K9 methylation are dependent upon elongation by RNA polymerase II. These
findings demonstrate novel roles for H3K9 methylation and HP1gamma in
transcription activation.

PMID: 16061184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(16):7005-20.

GATA motifs regulate early hematopoietic lineage-specific expression of the Gata2
gene.

Kobayashi-Osaki M(1), Ohneda O, Suzuki N, Minegishi N, Yokomizo T, Takahashi S,
Lim KC, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is essential for definitive hematopoiesis, which
developmentally emerges from the para-aortic splanchnopleura (P-Sp). The
expression of a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter placed under the control
of a 3.1-kbp Gata2 gene regulatory domain 5' to the distal first exon (IS)
mirrored that of the endogenous Gata2 gene within the P-Sp and yolk sac (YS)
blood islands of embryonic day (E) 9.5 murine embryos. The P-Sp- and YS-derived
GFP(+) fraction of flow-sorted cells dissociated from E9.5 transgenic embryos
contained far more CD34(+)/c-Kit(+) cells than the GFP(-) fraction did. When
cultured in vitro, the P-Sp GFP(+) cells generated both immature hematopoietic
and endothelial cell clusters. Detailed transgenic mouse reporter expression
analyses demonstrate that five GATA motifs within the 3.1-kbp Gata2 early
hematopoietic regulatory domain (G2-EHRD) were essential for GFP expression
within the dorsal aortic wall, where hemangioblasts, the earliest precursors
possessing both hematopoietic and vascular developmental potential, are thought
to reside. These results thus show that the Gata2 gene IS promoter is regulated
by a GATA factor(s) and selectively marks putative hematopoietic/endothelial
precursor cells within the P-Sp.

PMCID: PMC1190224
PMID: 16055713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Exp Hematol. 2005 Aug;33(8):857-64.

Pivotal role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) in
regulation of erythroid progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation.

Nagasawa E(1), Abe Y, Nishimura J, Yanase T, Nawata H, Muta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to reveal the role of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) in erythropoiesis.
METHODS: The effects of PPARgamma ligands on cellular proliferation and
differentiation were investigated in erythroid colony-forming cells (ECFCs)
purified from human peripheral blood.
RESULTS: RT-PCR analysis revealed that PPARgamma mRNA is expressed in ECFCs.
Synthetic PPARgamma ligands, troglitazone or pioglitazone, suppressed cellular
proliferation without inducing apoptosis and delayed maturation of ECFCs, as
determined by flow cytometry. The delay in erythroid maturation by troglitazone
was confirmed by the down-regulation of gamma-globin, beta-globin and GATA-1
mRNA, and the maintenance of GATA-2 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that PPARgamma modulates the differentiation
process of erythroid progenitor cells, and plays a crucial role in regulating the
balance of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 16038777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2005 Jul 15;65(14):6089-96.

Synergistic induction of DOC-2/DAB2 gene expression in transitional cell
carcinoma in the presence of GATA6 and histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Zhou J(1), Hernandez G, Tu SW, Scholes J, Chen H, Tseng CP, Hsieh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9110, USA.

The down-regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene, which encodes a unique phosphoprotein
modulating signal pathways elicited by exogenous stimuli, is often associated
with several cancer types; however, the underlying mechanism is still unknown.
Dramatically different expression levels of DOC-2/DAB2 mRNA and protein are
observed among several human transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) cell lines,
suggesting that transcriptional regulation may play a role in these cells. In
this study, we have shown that the histone acetylation status associated with the
5' upstream regulatory sequence of DOC-2/DAB2 gene is one of the key determinants
for its gene expression. In addition, GATA6 but not other GATA family members,
such as GATA2 and GATA4, can specifically induce DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity,
although GATA transcription factors share a very similar DNA-binding sequence. We
also show that increased histone acetylation and the presence of GATA6 have a
synergistic effect on DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity, which results in the
elevation of DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression. Thus, we conclude that
transcriptional regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene in human TCC is determined by
histone acetylation and a specific transcription factor (i.e., GATA6), which
underlie the reduced DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression in TCC cells.

PMID: 16024609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2005 Aug;23(5):449-63.

SCL, GATA-2 and Lmo2 expression in neurogenesis.

Herberth B(1), Minkó K, Csillag A, Jaffredo T, Madarász E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Neural
Cell Biology Group, Szigony u. 43, 1083 Budapest, Hungary. herberth@koki.hu

SCL, Lmo2 and GATA factors form common transcription complexes during
hematopoietic differentiation. The overlapping expression of SCL with GATA-2 and 
GATA-3 in the developing brain indicated that these factors might collaborate
also in the course of neural tissue differentiation. The expression pattern of
Lmo2 in the developing CNS, however, is not well understood. Here, we show that
neural cells in the early embryonic chick mid- and hindbrain express SCL and
GATA-2, while Lmo2 is expressed only in vascular elements. The lack of Lmo2
transcripts in neural cells demonstrated that SCL and GATA-2 cannot form common
complexes with Lmo2 in the developing brain. In the course of neural tissue
genesis, GATA-2 mRNA appeared prior to the SCL transcript. While GATA-2
expression decreased with maturation, SCL expression persisted at a high level
also in post-neurogenic periods. The temporal pattern of SCL and GATA-2/3
expression was investigated also in vitro, in the course of induced neurogenesis 
by NE-4C neural stem cells. While GATA-2 expression increased from the very
beginning of differentiation, SCL expression appeared only in more differentiated
cells expressing proneural genes. GATA-3 expression, on the other hand, was
detected only in advanced stages of the neuronal maturation, which were
characterised by the activation of the Math2 neuronal gene. Similarly to the
hematopoietic differentiation, GATA-2 expression precedes the activation of both 
SCL and GATA-3, and may play roles in the activation of the SCL gene in neuronal 
development. In contrast to hematopoietic differentiation, however, our results
failed to demonstrate co-assembling of GATA factors or SCL with Lmo2. While
overlapping expression of GATA-2/3 and SCL was detected, Lmo2 activation could
not be demonstrated in neural cells in the investigated period of neuronal
development.

PMID: 16011889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30712-22. Epub 2005 Jul 8.

Identification of binding sites of EVI1 in mammalian cells.

Yatsula B(1), Lin S, Read AJ, Poholek A, Yates K, Yue D, Hui P, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510-8023, USA.

The leukemia-associated protein EVI1 possesses seven zinc fingers within an
N-terminal domain (amino acids 1-250) that binds to GACAAGATA. Single amino acid 
missense mutants of EVI1 were developed that failed to bind DNA either in vitro, 
as assessed by gel shift assay, or in vivo, as shown by transactivation studies. 
Specifically, mutation R205N lacks high affinity binding to the GACAAGATA motif. 
Putative EVI1 target genes were identified by using an EVI1-(1-250)-VP16 fusion
protein that acts as a transcriptional activator with the binding specificity of 
EVI1. Sixteen genes induced in NIH 3T3 cells by wild type EVI1-VP16 but not by
mutant forms were identified. Sequence analysis revealed evolutionarily conserved
GACAAGATA-like motifs within 10 kb of their transcription start sites, and by
chromatin immunoprecipitation in fibroblasts, we showed occupancy of many of
these sites by EVI1-VP16. To assess whether native EVI1 binds to these sites in
EVI1-transformed myeloid cells, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation in
32Dcl3 and NFS58 cells, using anti-EVI1 antisera, and we showed that the majority
of these sites is bound by wild type EVI1. These putative target genes include
Gadd45g, Gata2, Zfpm2/Fog2, Skil (SnoN), Klf5 (BTEB2), Dcn, and Map3k14 (Nik). In
this study we demonstrated for the first time that the N-terminal DNA binding
domain of EVI1 has the capacity to bind to endogenous genes. We hypothesized that
these genes play a critical role in EVI1-induced transformation.

PMID: 16006653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Stem Cells. 2005 Sep;23(8):1035-43. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Downregulation of NANOG induces differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to 
extraembryonic lineages.

Hyslop L(1), Stojkovic M, Armstrong L, Walter T, Stojkovic P, Przyborski S,
Herbert M, Murdoch A, Strachan T, Lako M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Genetics, University of
Newcastle International Centre for Life, Newcastle NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.

The homeobox transcription factor Nanog has been proposed to play a crucial role 
in the maintenance of the undifferentiated state of murine embryonic stem cells. 
A human counterpart, NANOG, has been identified, but its function and
localization have not hitherto been described. We have used a combination of RNA 
interference and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to study NANOG 
in human embryonic stem and embryonic carcinoma cells. Transfection of
NANOG-specific small interfering RNAs reduced levels of NANOG transcript and
protein and induced activation of the extraembryonic endoderm-associated genes
GATA4, GATA6, LAMININ B1, and AFP as well as upregulation of
trophectoderm-associated genes CDX2, GATA2, hCG-alpha, and hCG-beta.
Immunostaining of preimplantation human embryos showed that NANOG was expressed
in the inner cell mass of expanded blastocysts but not in earlier-stage embryos, 
consistent with a role in the maintenance of pluripotency. Taken together, our
findings suggest that NANOG acts as a gatekeeper of pluripotency in human
embryonic stem and carcinoma cells by preventing their differentiation to
extraembryonic endoderm and trophectoderm lineages.

PMID: 15983365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2003 May;19(3):312-6.

[The investigation of hematopoietic capacity of HPP-CFC derived from murine
embryonic stem cells in vitro and in vivo].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu B(1), Hou CM, Wu Y, Zhang SX, Mao N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China.

The hematopoietic system of the mouse arises from extraembryonic mesoderm that
migrate through primitive streak to the presumptive yolk sac at day 7.0 of
gestation. However, the mechanisms regulating mesoderm commitment to
hematopoietic lineages remain poorly understood. Previous studies demonstrated
that the development kinetics and growth factor responsiveness of hematopoietic
precursors derived from embryonic stem cells (ES cells) is similar to that found 
in the yolk sac, indicating that the onset of hematopoiesis within the embryoid
bodies (EBs) parallels that found in the embryo. Furthermore, in vitro
differentiation of ES cells to hematopoietic cells is valuable for establishment 
of therapeutic clone against a variety of hematological disorders. Despite the
identification of multipotential hematopoietic progenitors in EBs, a subset of
more primitive progenitors, identical to the high proliferative potential
colony-forming cells (HPP-CFC) derived from human and murine hematopoietic
tissues, have not been clearly identified regarding particular their replating
potential in vitro. HPP-CFC is among the most primitive hematopoietic multipotent
precursors cultured in vitro. In this study, our aim was to investigate the in
vitro and in vivo hematopoietic capacity of HPP-CFC within the day 12 EBs, rather
than the expansion of more committed progenitors. In this study the HPP-CFC could
be detected within EBs differentiated for 5 to 14 days of murine ES cells, but
the development dynamics of the HPP-CFC differed greatly among distinct serum
lots. Qualitatively HPP-CFC is capable of forming secondary colonies. As to our
expectation the ES cells-derived HPP-CFC demonstrated similar regeneration
capacity to those from yolk sac, giving rise to secondary granulocyte,
erythrocyte, macrophage and mast cells, however largely differed from the
counterparts of adult bone marrow. In addition, by RT-PCR ES cells-derived
HPP-CFC were found to express transcription factors associated closely with stem 
cell proliferation including SCL, GATA-2 and AML1 as well as various receptors of
hematopoietic growth factors such as c-kit, GM-CSF receptor and interleukin 3
receptor et al. Finally, in order to understand the in vivo hematopoietic
capacity of the ES cells-derived HPP-CFC, spleen colony-forming unit (CFU-S)
assay was performed. Nevertheless, typical CFU-S was not observed after
transplantation of the day 12 EB cells or HPP-CFC colonies into lethally
irradiated adult murine. In conclusion the HPP-CFC differentiated from murine ES 
cells displayed robust hematopoietic activity in vitro, however their in vivo
reconstitution ability was not detected. The difference between in vitro and in
vivo hematopoietic activities of ES cells-derived primitive hematopoietic
precursors deserves further investigation.

PMID: 15969013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Genes Cells. 2005 Jul;10(7):693-704.

Rapid turnover of GATA-2 via ubiquitin-proteasome protein degradation pathway.

Minegishi N(1), Suzuki N, Kawatani Y, Shimizu R, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, and ERATO Environmental Research Project, University of
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in a number of tissues, including
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, and is crucial for the proliferation and
survival of hematopoietic cells. To further characterize the function of GATA-2, 
we examined the cellular turnover mechanism of GATA-2. In P815 cells, the
half-life of endogenous GATA-2 was found to be as short as 30 min after
cycloheximide treatment. This short half-life was reproducible in other
hematopoietic and neuroblastoma cell lines with moderate variation. We also found
that ultraviolet (UV)-C irradiation markedly represses the GATA-2 protein level
by facilitating the degradation process. Since treatment of the cells with the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 or clasto-Lactacystin substantially abrogated the
effects of cycloheximide and UV-C irradiation and increased the expression level 
of both endogenous and transfected GATA-2, the degradation of GATA-2 seems to
occur through the proteasome pathway. Structure-function analyses with the
GAL4-DNA binding domain (GBD)-GATA-2 fusion protein and GATA-2 deletion mutants
suggested that the protein degradation regulatory elements of GATA-2 reside in
three regions, two of which overlap with the transactivation domain. We also
detected poly ubiquitinated forms of GATA-2. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that GATA-2 is turned over rapidly through the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway.

PMID: 15966900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2005 Apr;38(4):559-63. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Cyclosporin A preferentially attenuates skeletal slow-twitch muscle regeneration.

Miyabara EH(1), Aoki MS, Moriscot AS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e do Desenvolvimento, Instituto de Ciências
Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Calcineurin, a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase, is associated with muscle
regeneration via NFATc1/GATA2-dependent pathways. However, it is not clear
whether calcineurin preferentially affects the regeneration of slow- or
fast-twitch muscles. We investigated the effect of a calcineurin inhibitor,
cyclosporin A (CsA), on the morphology and fiber diameter of regenerating slow-
and fast-twitch muscles. Adult Wistar rats (259.5 +/- 9 g) maintained under
standard conditions were treated with CsA (20 mg/kg body weight, ip) for 5 days, 
submitted to cryolesion of soleus and tibialis anterior (TA) muscles on the 6th
day, and then treated with CsA for an additional 21 days. The muscles were
removed, weighed, frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen. Cryolesion did not alter
the body weight gain of the animals after 21 days of regeneration (P = 0.001) and
CsA significantly reduced the body weight gain (15.5%; P = 0.01) during the same 
period. All treated TA and soleus muscles showed decreased weights (17 and 29%,
respectively, P < 0.05). CsA treatment decreased the cross-sectional area of both
soleus and TA muscles of cryoinjured animals (TA: 2108 +/- 930 vs 792 +/- 640
microm(2); soleus: 2209 +/- 322 vs 764 +/- 439 m(2); P < 0.001). Histological
sections of both muscles stained with Toluidine blue revealed similar
regenerative responses after cryolesion. In addition, CsA was able to minimize
these responses, i.e., centralized nuclei and split fibers, more efficiently so
in TA muscle. These results indicate that calcineurin preferentially plays a role
in regeneration of slow-twitch muscle.

PMID: 15962181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Aug;16(8):3632-41. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Vasopressin-dependent myogenic cell differentiation is mediated by both
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase and calcineurin pathways.

Scicchitano BM(1), Spath L, Musarò A, Molinaro M, Rosenthal N, Nervi C, Adamo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Medical Embryology, University of Rome La
Sapienza, 00161 Roma, Italy.

Arg8-vasopressin (AVP) promotes the differentiation of myogenic cell lines and
mouse primary satellite cells by mechanisms involving the transcriptional
activation of myogenic bHLH regulatory factors and myocyte enhancer factor 2
(MEF2). We here report that AVP treatment of L6 cells results in the activation
of calcineurin-dependent differentiation, increased expression of MEF2 and GATA2,
and nuclear translocation of the calcineurin target NFATc1. Interaction of these 
three factors occurs at MEF2 sites of muscle specific genes. The different
kinetics of AVP-dependent expression of early (myogenin) and late (MCK)
muscle-specific genes correlate with different acetylation levels of histones at 
their MEF2 sites. The cooperative role of calcineurin and
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK) in AVP-dependent differentiation is
demonstrated by the effect of inhibitors of the two pathways. We show here, for
the first time, that AVP, a "novel" myogenesis promoting factor, activates both
the calcineurin and the CaMK pathways, whose combined activation leads to the
formation of multifactor complexes and is required for the full expression of the
differentiated phenotype. Although MEF2-NFATc1 complexes appear to regulate the
expression of an early muscle-specific gene product (myogenin), the activation of
late muscle-specific gene expression (MCK) involves the formation of complexes
including GATA2.

PMCID: PMC1182303
PMID: 15930130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Genet Metab. 2005 Jun;85(2):140-8.

Study of a new PPARgamma2 promoter polymorphism and haplotype analysis in a
French population.

Meirhaeghe A(1), Tanck MW, Fajas L, Janot C, Helbecque N, Cottel D, Auwerx J,
Amouyel P, Dallongeville J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U508, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du Pr. Calmette, BP 245, Lille 
Cedex F-59019, France. Aline.Meirhaeghe-Hurez@pasteur-lille.fr

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) plays a role in
adipocyte differentiation and insulin sensitization. We identified and
characterized a new C/T substitution at position -689 (-689C>T) in the P2
promoter of PPARgamma in a putative GATA binding site. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, both GATA2 and GATA3 proteins could bind weakly to the
wild-type P2 -689 GATA binding site but not to the mutated site. Neither GATA2
nor GATA3 was able to regulate significantly the P2 promoter activity in a
reporter-luciferase assay, whatever the allele at position -689 was, suggesting
that the -689 putative GATA site was probably not a functional target for GATAs. 
However, the presence of the -689T allele rendered the P2 promoter less active at
the basal state. We genotyped a population of 1155 men and women for the -689C>T 
polymorphism and looked for possible associations with anthropometric and lipid
variables. The carriers of the -689T allele had elevated body weight and
LDL-cholesterol concentrations compared with the homozygous for the common
allele. Haplotype analyses including the -681C>G (P3 promoter), -689C>T (P2
promoter), and Pro12Ala (exon B) polymorphisms were performed. Carriers of the
G-T-Ala haplotype (corresponding to the P3 -681C>G, P2 -689C>T and Pro12Ala
polymorphisms in this order) had elevated LDL-cholesterol concentrations and body
weight compared with C-C-Pro individuals. In conclusion, we identified a new
polymorphism in the P2 promoter of PPARgamma. The P3 -681C>G, P2 -689C>T, and
Pro12Ala polymorphisms and related haplotypes were associated with higher body
weight and plasma LDL-cholesterol concentrations.

PMID: 15896659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. EMBO J. 2005 Jun 1;24(11):1976-87. Epub 2005 May 12.

Oncogenic transcription factor Evi1 regulates hematopoietic stem cell
proliferation through GATA-2 expression.

Yuasa H(1), Oike Y, Iwama A, Nishikata I, Sugiyama D, Perkins A, Mucenski ML,
Suda T, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, The Sakaguchi Laboratory, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

The ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi1) is an oncogenic transcription
factor in murine and human myeloid leukemia. We herein show that Evi1 is
predominantly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in embryos and adult
bone marrows, suggesting a physiological role of Evi1 in HSCs. We therefore
investigate the role and authentic target genes of Evi1 in hematopoiesis using
Evi1-/- mice, which die at embryonic day 10.5. HSCs in Evi1-/- embryos are
markedly decreased in numbers in vivo with defective self-renewing proliferation 
and repopulating capacity. Notably, expression rate of GATA-2 mRNA, which is
essential for proliferation of definitive HSCs, is profoundly reduced in HSCs of 
Evi1-/- embryos. Restoration of the Evi1 or GATA-2 expression in Evi1-/- HSCs
could prevent the failure of in vitro maintenance and proliferation of HSC
through upregulation of GATA-2 expression. An analysis of the GATA-2 promoter
region revealed that Evi1 directly binds to GATA-2 promoter as an enhancer. Our
results reveal that GATA-2 is presumably one of critical targets for Evi1 and
that transcription factors regulate the HSC pool hierarchically.

PMCID: PMC1142611
PMID: 15889140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biol Reprod. 2005 Sep;73(3):500-9. Epub 2005 May 11.

A placenta-specific enhancer of the human syncytin gene.

Cheng YH(1), Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine and
Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The cis- and trans-acting factors that are critical for placenta-specific
expression of the human syncytin gene are unknown. We identified a 146-base pair 
(bp) region of the 5'-flanking region of the human syncytin gene from nt-294 to
-148 that is essential for basal gene expression in human BeWo and JEG3
choriocarcinoma cell lines but not in hepatoblastoma and kidney cell lines.
Ligation of the 146-bp fragment to a SV40 promoter or a human beta-globin minimal
promoter markedly enhanced promoter activity in the placenta cells but not in the
liver and kidney cells. DNase I footprint assays indicated that nuclear extracts 
from BeWo cells but not HepG2 cells protected four regions (FP1-FP4) of the
146-bp fragment. Site-directed mutagenesis of an SP1-binding site in FP3 and a
GATA-binding site in FP4 significantly repressed promoter activity in the
placenta cells. Overexpression of SP1 (Sp1 transcription factor) and GATA2 (GATA 
binding protein 2) and GATA3 induced syncytin promoter activity but had little or
no effect on the activities of syncytin promoter fragments containing mutations
in the SP1- and GATA-binding sites. GATA2 and -3 mRNA levels increased markedly
during spontaneous in vitro differentiation of human cytotrophoblast cells when
the cytotrophoblast cells fused to form a syncytium. These findings strongly
suggest that the 146-bp region of the 5'-flanking region (nt-294/-148) of the
human syncytin gene acts as a placenta-specific enhancer. Binding of SP1 and GATA
family members to this enhancer is critical for cell-specific expression of the
syncytin gene.

PMID: 15888734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2005 May;12(4):257-62.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into gonadotrope-like cells in
vitro.

Zhao X(1), Teng R, Asanuma K, Okouchi Y, Johkura K, Ogiwara N, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Organ Technology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. zhaoxu@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: This research was conducted to investigate the potential of mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells to differentiate in vitro into gonadotropes.
METHODS: Undifferentiated ES cells were maintained on mitomycin C-inactivated
fibroblasts in the presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). By a 5-day
hanging drop culture devoid of them, ES cells were induced to form
multidifferentiated structures called embryoid bodies (EBs). Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blotting, and
immunocytochemistry were used to analyze gene expression of gonadotrope markers
in EBs at different time points during the culture.
RESULTS: Homeo box gene expressed in ES cells (Hesx1), LIM homeobox protein 3
(Lhx3), paired like homeodomain factor 1 (Prop1), GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2),
follicle-stimulating hormone beta (FSHbeta), and luteinizing hormone beta
(LHbeta) mRNAs were detected at day 6 EBs and maintained throughout the culture
to day 56. FSHbeta and LHbeta proteins were expressed in EBs from day 6 onward.
Immunofluorescent labeling of FSHbeta and LHbeta showed that specific staining
was restricted to the cytoplasm of some differentiated EB cells. With the
prolongation of EB culture, the number of positive cells increased significantly.
Both monohormonal and bihormonal cells were present, mainly in clusters within
EBs and sparsely distributed among the outermost cells surrounding the EBs.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that mouse ES cells can give rise to mature
gonadotrope-like cells in EBs. It also shows that EBs may serve as a novel model 
system to study the development and function of gonadotropes.

PMID: 15866117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Circulation. 2005 Apr 19;111(15):1946-53.

Phosphorylation of GATA2 by Akt increases adipose tissue differentiation and
reduces adipose tissue-related inflammation: a novel pathway linking obesity to
atherosclerosis.

Menghini R(1), Marchetti V, Cardellini M, Hribal ML, Mauriello A, Lauro D,
Sbraccia P, Lauro R, Federici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Policlinico
Tor Vergata-PTV University Hospital, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Obesity-related inflammation is emerging as a major cause of insulin 
resistance and cardiovascular diseases. GATA2 transcription factor is an
inhibitor of adipogenesis and an activator of vascular cells. We hypothesized
that GATA2 activity is controlled by insulin during adipogenesis, linking
metabolic homeostasis and inflammation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We show that insulin induces GATA2 phosphorylation on serine
401 in a PI-3K/Akt-dependent manner. Insulin-dependent phosphorylation of serine 
401 impairs GATA2 translocation to the nucleus and its DNA binding activity. A
GATA2 mutant not phosphorylable by Akt (GATA2(S401A)) acts similarly to wild-type
GATA2. In contrast, a GATA2 mutant that mimics Akt phosphorylation (GATA2(S401D))
is restrained in the cytoplasm. Cultured preadipocytes bearing GATA2(S401A) do
not convert to adipocytes and express high levels of inflammatory cytokines like 
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1). On the contrary, GATA2(S401D)
preadipocytes differentiate to adipocytes. When GATA2(S401A) preadipocytes are
injected in mice fed a high-fat diet, they do not differentiate adequately into
adipocytes, maintaining the expression of inflammatory markers like MCP-1. In
contrast, injection of GATA2(S401D) preadipocytes in mice fed a high-fat diet
results in development of adipocytes and no expression of inflammatory markers.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA2 could be a new target in the prevention and treatment of
obesity-related inflammation and its complications.

PMID: 15837948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Blood. 2005 Aug 1;106(3):860-70. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Hematopoietic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells progresses through
sequential hematoendothelial, primitive, and definitive stages resembling human
yolk sac development.

Zambidis ET(1), Peault B, Park TS, Bunz F, Civin CI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Sidney Kimmel comprehensive Cancer
Center at John Hokins, The John Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
ezambid1@jhmi.edu

We elucidate the cellular and molecular kinetics of the stepwise differentiation 
of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to primitive and definitive
erythromyelopoiesis from human embryoid bodies (hEBs) in serum-free clonogenic
assays. Hematopoiesis initiates from CD45 hEB cells with emergence of
semiadherent mesodermal-hematoendothelial (MHE) colonies that can generate
endothelium and form organized, yolk sac-like structures that secondarily
generate multipotent primitive hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs),
erythroblasts, and CD13+CD45+ macrophages. A first wave of hematopoiesis follows 
MHE colony emergence and is predominated by primitive erythropoiesis
characterized by a brilliant red hemoglobinization, CD71/CD325a (glycophorin A)
expression, and exclusively embryonic/fetal hemoglobin expression. A second wave 
of definitive-type erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-e's), erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-e's), granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming cells
(GM-CFCs), and multilineage CFCs follows next from hEB progenitors. These stages 
of hematopoiesis proceed spontaneously from hEB-derived cells without requirement
for supplemental growth factors during hEB differentiation. Gene expression
analysis of differentiating hEBs revealed that initiation of hematopoiesis
correlated with increased levels of SCL/TAL1, GATA1, GATA2, CD34, CD31, and the
homeobox gene-regulating factor CDX4 These data indicate that hematopoietic
differentiation of hESCs models the earliest events of embryonic and definitive
hematopoiesis in a manner resembling human yolk sac development, thus providing a
valuable tool for dissecting the earliest events in human HSPC genesis.

PMCID: PMC1895146
PMID: 15831705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):477-84. Epub 2005 Apr 5.

Haploinsufficiency of GATA-2 perturbs adult hematopoietic stem-cell homeostasis.

Rodrigues NP(1), Janzen V, Forkert R, Dombkowski DM, Boyd AS, Orkin SH, Enver T, 
Vyas P, Scadden DT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Technology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02129, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a fundamental role in
generating hematopoietic stem-cells in mammalian development. Less well defined
is whether GATA-2 participates in adult stem-cell regulation, an issue we
addressed using GATA-2 heterozygote mice that express reduced levels of GATA-2 in
hematopoietic cells. While GATA-2+/- mice demonstrated decreases in some
colony-forming progenitors, the most prominent changes were observed within the
stem-cell compartment. Heterozygote bone marrow had a lower abundance of
Lin(-)c-kit(+)Sca-1(+)CD34- cells and performed poorly in competitive
transplantation and quantitative week-5 cobblestone area-forming cell (CAFC)
assays. Furthermore, a stem-cell-enriched population from GATA1+/- marrow was
more quiescent and exhibited a greater frequency of apoptotic cells associated
with decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-xL. Yet the self-renewal
potential of the +/- stem-cell compartment, as judged by serial transplantations,
was unchanged. These data indicate compromised primitive cell proliferation and
survival in the setting of a lower GATA-2 gene dose without a change in the
differentiation or self-renewal capacity of the stem-cells that remain. Thus,
GATA-2 dose regulates adult stem-cell homeostasis by affecting select aspects of 
stem cell function.

PMID: 15811962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Feb;13(1):70-5.

[Expressions of transcription factor GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in bone marrow
stromal cells from patients with leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu XL(1), Li YQ, Wang Z, Yang LJ, Chen SH, Zhang H, Zhu KE, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632,China.

In order to investigate expressions of transcription factor GATA-1 and GATA-2
genes in the bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) from patients with leukemia or
normal controls, bone marrow stromal cells from 34 normal cases and 42 cases with
leukemia were cultured long-term in vitro. Nonadherent cells (bone marrow
hematopoietic cells) and amplified adherent cells (BMSC) were collected
separately. Expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes were analyzed by using
RT-PCR-ELISA; the semi-quantitative expression levels of GATA genes in the BMSCs 
from patients with leukemia were compared with normal controls. The results
showed that expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes could be detected in the BMSCs
and the bone marrow hematopoietic cells from both normal controls and the cases
of leukemia. The expression ratio of GATA-1 in the BMSCs from acute lymphocytic
leukemia (ALL) (85.7%) was similar to the normal controls (88.2%), whereas the
expression ratios in BMSCs from acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) (55.6%) and
chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) (41.2%) were significant lower than the normal 
controls (P < 0.05). The rank of expression level of GATA-1 gene in the BMSCs was
"ALL>AML>normal>CML". There was no difference in the expression level of GATA-2
gene within the BMSCs from normal controls and patients with leukemia. The ranks 
of expression levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in bone marrow hematopoietic
cells were "AML>normal>ALL>CML" and "AML>CML>ALL>normal". The dominant expression
of GATA-2 gene was found in the BMSCs from AML, CML or normal controls. It is
inferred that the expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in the BMSCs of normal
controls and patients with leukemia may influence the regulation of hematopoiesis
in the bone marrow stroma and it is worthy of further study to explore their
roles in pathogenesis and development of leukemia.

PMID: 15748439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 2005 Mar;132(5):1117-26. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

RBPjkappa-dependent Notch function regulates Gata2 and is essential for the
formation of intra-embryonic hematopoietic cells.

Robert-Moreno A(1), Espinosa L, de la Pompa JL, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Oncologia Molecular, IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca Oncologica,
Hospitalet, Barcelona 08907, Spain.

Definitive hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo originates from the aortic floor in 
the P-Sp/AGM region in close association with endothelial cells. An important
role for Notch1 in the control of hematopoietic ontogeny has been recently
established, although its mechanism of action is poorly understood. Here, we show
detailed analysis of Notch family gene expression in the aorta endothelium
between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E10.5. Since Notch requires binding to
RBPjkappa transcription factor to activate transcription, we analyzed the aorta
of the para-aortic splanchnopleura/AGM in RBPjkappa mutant embryos. We found
specific patterns of expression of Notch receptors, ligands and Hes genes that
were lost in RBPjkappa mutants. Analysis of these mutants revealed the absence of
hematopoietic progenitors, accompanied by the lack of expression of the
hematopoietic transcription factors Aml1/Runx1, Gata2 and Scl/Tal1. We show that 
in wild-type embryos, a few cells lining the aorta endothelium at E9.5
simultaneously expressed Notch1 and Gata2, and demonstrate by chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Notch1 specifically associated with the Gata2 promoter
in E9.5 wild-type embryos and 32D myeloid cells, an interaction lost in
RBPjkappamutants. Consistent with a role for Notch1 in regulating Gata2, we
observe increased expression of this gene in 32D cells expressing activated
Notch1. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that activation of Gata2
expression by Notch1/RBPjkappa is a crucial event for the onset of definitive
hematopoiesis in the embryo.

PMID: 15689374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):13163-70. Epub 2005 Jan 25.

GATA transcription factors inhibit cytokine-dependent growth and survival of a
hematopoietic cell line through the inhibition of STAT3 activity.

Ezoe S(1), Matsumura I, Gale K, Satoh Y, Ishikawa J, Mizuki M, Takahashi S,
Minegishi N, Nakajima K, Yamamoto M, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Although GATA-1 and GATA-2 were shown to be essential for the development of
hematopoietic cells by gene targeting experiments, they were also reported to
inhibit the growth of hematopoietic cells. Therefore, in this study, we examined 
the effects of GATA-1 and GATA-2 on cytokine signals. A tamoxifen-inducible form 
of GATA-1 (GATA-1/ERT) showed a minor inhibitory effect on interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent growth of an IL-3-dependent cell line Ba/F3. On the other hand, 
it drastically inhibited TPO-dependent growth and gp130-mediated growth/survival 
of Ba/F3. Similarly, an estradiol-inducible form of GATA-2 (GATA-2/ER) disrupted 
thrombopoietin (TPO)-dependent growth and gp130-mediated growth/survival of
Ba/F3. As for this mechanism, we found that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 directly bound
to STAT3 both in vitro and in vivo and inhibited its DNA-binding activity in gel 
shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, whereas they hardly
affected STAT5 activity. In addition, endogenous GATA-1 was found to interact
with STAT3 in normal megakaryocytes, suggesting that GATA-1 may inhibit STAT3
activity in normal hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, we found that GATA-1
suppressed STAT3 activity through its N-zinc finger domain. Together, these
results suggest that, besides the roles as transcription factors, GATA family
proteins modulate cytokine signals through protein-protein interactions, thereby 
regulating the growth and survival of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15673499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Jan;62(2):214-26.

The transcription factor profile of human mast cells in comparison with monocytes
and granulocytes.

Babina M(1), Schülke Y, Kirchhof L, Guhl S, Franke R, Böhm S, Zuberbier T, Henz
BM, Gombart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital Charité Campus
Mitte, Schumannstr. 20/21, 10117, Berlin, Germany. magda.babina@charite.de

Expression profiles of mRNAs and proteins for various transcription factors were 
determined for human skin mast cells (sMCs), leukemic HMC-1 MCs, monocytes and
granulocytes. By quantitative RT-PCR, sMCs expressed lower levels of c-fos, PU.1,
C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPepsilon than monocytes and granulocytes, but higher levels
of MITF, SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2. At the protein level, MITF, SCL, GATA-2, Elf-1
and c-fos were clearly detectable in sMCs. With the exception of c-fos, these
proteins were absent or expressed only slightly in monocytes and granulocytes.
The expression of NF-E2p45, GATA-1, PU.1, Ets-1, C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon was 
below the detection limit in sMCs, but detectable in other myelocytes. The high
expression of SCL and GATA-2 in sMCs is reminiscent of stem cells. The absence of
C/EBPvarepsilon in sMCs, but strong expression in HMC-1, suggests it may impair
MC maturation. In summary, mature human MCs can be characterized as
C/EBPalpha(low), C/EBPvarepsilon-, PU.1(low), GATA-1(low), GATA-2+, SCL+,
MITF(high).

PMID: 15666093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):129-36. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Gene expression regulation and domain function of hematopoietic GATA factors.

Shimizu R(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

The hierarchical gene regulatory network in hematopoiesis is highly complex,
making elucidation of the processes of specification and differentiation of
hematopoietic cells a challenging task. Recent discoveries have divulged the GATA
factors as central to the genetic control of hematopoiesis. In particular,
hematopoietic development is subject to extensive and precise regulation of
GATA-1 and GATA-2 at the molecular level. We wish to emphasize the regulatory
relationships between GATA-1 and GATA-2 implicated in cell development. An
advanced experimental genetic approach has provided evidence that abnormalities
in this network may result in a variety of blood disorders. The most striking new
finding is the novel pathogenesis arising from GATA-1 dysfunction that leads to
leukemia.

PMID: 15659347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):95-106. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Using the zebrafish model to study GATA transcription factors.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), McReynolds LJ, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Chanin Room 501, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The zebrafish is an established animal model system that profits from the
availability of strong experimental approaches in both genetics and embryology.
As a vertebrate, zebrafish can be used to model many aspects of human development
and disease. GATA transcription factors play important roles in the development
of many organ systems, including those for hematopoietic, cardiovascular,
reproductive, and gut-endoderm derived tissues. The six vertebrate GATA factors
are highly conserved in zebrafish at the level of sequence, expression pattern,
and function. The identification of mutants, establishment of transgenic GFP
reporter fish, and the ease of performing loss- and gain-of-function experiments 
have all contributed new insight into our understanding of the regulation and
function of GATA factors. We review recent advances toward this goal using the
zebrafish system with a focus on hematopoiesis and cardiogenesis, and suggest how
comparative genetics using the zebrafish genes might reveal core conserved
properties, as well as changes in gene function that reflect different
morphogenetic programs utilized by various vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 15659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):71-81. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Regulation of GATA gene expression during vertebrate development.

Burch JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. john.burch@fccc.edu

GATA factors regulate critical events in hematopoietic lineages (GATA-1/2/3), the
heart and gut (GATA-4/5/6) and various other tissues. Transgenic approaches have 
revealed that GATA genes are regulated in a modular fashion by sets of enhancers 
that govern distinct temporal and/or spatial facets of the overall expression
patterns. Efforts are underway to resolve how these GATA gene enhancers are
themselves regulated in order to elucidate the genetic and molecular hierarchies 
that govern GATA expression in particular developmental contexts. These enhancers
also afford a raft of tools that can be used to selectively perturb and probe
various developmental events in transgenic animals.

PMID: 15659342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;25(2):706-15.

Interaction between GATA and the C/EBP family of transcription factors is
critical in GATA-mediated suppression of adipocyte differentiation.

Tong Q(1), Tsai J, Tan G, Dalgin G, Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, 
665 Huntington Ave., Bldg. 1, Rm. 207, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that GATA-2 and GATA-3 are expressed in adipocyte
precursors and control the preadipocyte-to-adipocyte transition. Constitutive
expression of both GATA-2 and GATA-3 suppressed adipocyte differentiation,
partially through direct binding to the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARgamma) promoter and suppression of its basal activity. In the
present study, we demonstrate that both GATA-2 and GATA-3 form protein complexes 
with CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and C/EBPbeta, members of 
a family of transcription factors that are integral to adipogenesis. We mapped
this interaction to the basic leucine zipper domain of C/EBPalpha and a region
adjacent to the carboxyl zinc finger of GATA-2. The interaction between GATA and 
C/EBP factors is critical for the ability of GATA to suppress adipocyte
differentiation. Thus, these results show that in addition to its previously
recognized function in suppressing PPARgamma transcriptional activity,
interaction of GATA factors with C/EBP is necessary for their ability to
negatively regulate adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC543409
PMID: 15632071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):109-16.

Loss of gata1 but not gata2 converts erythropoiesis to myelopoiesis in zebrafish 
embryos.

Galloway JL(1), Wingert RA, Thisse C, Thisse B, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into erythroid or myeloid cell
lineages is thought to depend upon relative levels of the transcription factors
gata1 and pu.1. While loss-of-function analysis shows that gata1 is necessary for
terminal erythroid differentiation, no study has demonstrated that loss of gata1 
alters myeloid differentiation during ontogeny. Here we provide in vivo evidence 
that loss of Gata1, but not Gata2, transforms primitive blood precursors into
myeloid cells, resulting in a massive expansion of granulocytic neutrophils and
macrophages at the expense of red blood cells. In addition to this fate change,
expression of many erythroid genes was found to be differentially dependent on
Gata1 alone, on both Gata1 and Gata2, or independent of both Gata factors,
suggesting that multiple pathways regulate erythroid gene expression. Our studies
establish a transcriptional hierarchy of Gata factor dependence during
hematopoiesis and demonstrate that gata1 plays an integral role in directing
myelo-erythroid lineage fate decisions during embryogenesis.

PMID: 15621534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):522-36.

Zebrafish scl functions independently in hematopoietic and endothelial
development.

Dooley KA(1), Davidson AJ, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The SCL transcription factor is critically important for vertebrate hematopoiesis
and angiogenesis, and has been postulated to induce hemangioblasts, bipotential
precursors for blood and endothelial cells. To investigate the function of scl
during zebrafish hematopoietic and endothelial development, we utilized
site-directed, anti-sense morpholinos to inhibit scl mRNA. Knockdown of scl
resulted in a loss of primitive and definitive hematopoietic cell lineages.
However, the expression of early hematopoietic genes, gata2 and lmo2, was
unaffected, suggesting that hematopoietic cells were present but unable to
further differentiate. Using gene expression analysis and visualization of vessel
formation in live animals harboring an lmo2 promoter-green fluorescent protein
reporter transgene (Tg(lmo2:EGFP)), we show that angioblasts were specified
normally in the absence of scl, but later defects in angiogenesis were evident.
While scl was not required for angioblast specification, forced expression of
exogenous scl caused an expansion of both hematopoietic and endothelial gene
expression, and a loss of somitic tissue. In cloche and spadetail mutants, forced
expression of scl resulted in an expansion of hematopoietic but not endothelial
tissue. Surprisingly, in cloche, lmo2 was not induced in response to scl
over-expression. Taken together, these findings support distinct roles for scl in
hematopoietic and endothelial development, downstream of hemangioblast
development.

PMID: 15617691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):487-97.

Vascular gene expression and phenotypic correlation during differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Gerecht-Nir S(1), Dazard JE, Golan-Mashiach M, Osenberg S, Botvinnik A, Amariglio
N, Domany E, Rechavi G, Givol D, Itskovitz-Eldor J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

The study of the cascade of events of induction and sequential gene activation
that takes place during human embryonic development is hindered by the
unavailability of postimplantation embryos at different stages of development.
Spontaneous differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can occur by
means of the formation of embryoid bodies (EBs), which resemble certain aspects
of early embryos to some extent. Embryonic vascular formation, vasculogenesis, is
a sequential process that involves complex regulatory cascades. In this study,
changes of gene expression along the development of human EBs for 4 weeks were
studied by large-scale gene screening. Two main clusters were identified-one of
down-regulated genes such as POU5, NANOG, TDGF1/Cripto (TDGF,
teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor-1), LIN28, CD24, TERF1 (telomeric repeat
binding factor-1), LEFTB (left-right determination, factor B), and a second of
up-regulated genes such as TWIST, WNT5A, WT1, AFP, ALB, NCAM1. Focusing on the
vascular system development, genes known to be involved in vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis were explored. Up-regulated genes include vasculogenic growth
factors such as VEGFA, VEGFC, FIGF (VEGFD), ANG1, ANG2, TGFbeta3, and PDGFB, as
well as the related receptors FLT1, FLT4, PDGFRB, TGFbetaR2, and TGFbetaR3, other
markers such as CD34, VCAM1, PECAM1, VE-CAD, and transcription factors TAL1,
GATA2, and GATA3. The reproducibility of the array data was verified
independently and illustrated that many genes known to be involved in vascular
development are activated during the differentiation of hESCs in culture. Hence, 
the analysis of the vascular system can be extended to other differentiation
pathways, allocating human EBs as an in vitro model to study early human
development.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Biotechnol. 2004 Dec 14;4:32.

Production of soluble mammalian proteins in Escherichia coli: identification of
protein features that correlate with successful expression.

Dyson MR(1), Shadbolt SP, Vincent KJ, Perera RL, McCafferty J.

Author information: 
(1)The Atlas of Gene Expression Project, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK. mrd@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: In the search for generic expression strategies for mammalian protein
families several bacterial expression vectors were examined for their ability to 
promote high yields of soluble protein. Proteins studied included cell surface
receptors (Ephrins and Eph receptors, CD44), kinases (EGFR-cytoplasmic domain,
CDK2 and 4), proteases (MMP1, CASP2), signal transduction proteins (GRB2, RAF1,
HRAS) and transcription factors (GATA2, Fli1, Trp53, Mdm2, JUN, FOS, MAD, MAX).
Over 400 experiments were performed where expression of 30 full-length proteins
and protein domains were evaluated with 6 different N-terminal and 8 C-terminal
fusion partners. Expression of an additional set of 95 mammalian proteins was
also performed to test the conclusions of this study.
RESULTS: Several protein features correlated with soluble protein expression
yield including molecular weight and the number of contiguous hydrophobic
residues and low complexity regions. There was no relationship between successful
expression and protein pI, grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY), or
sub-cellular location. Only small globular cytoplasmic proteins with an average
molecular weight of 23 kDa did not require a solubility enhancing tag for high
level soluble expression. Thioredoxin (Trx) and maltose binding protein (MBP)
were the best N-terminal protein fusions to promote soluble expression, but MBP
was most effective as a C-terminal fusion. 63 of 95 mammalian proteins expressed 
at soluble levels of greater than 1 mg/l as N-terminal H10-MBP fusions and those 
that failed possessed, on average, a higher molecular weight and greater number
of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity regions.
CONCLUSIONS: By analysis of the protein features identified here, this study will
help predict which mammalian proteins and domains can be successfully expressed
in E. coli as soluble product and also which are best targeted for a eukaryotic
expression system. In some cases proteins may be truncated to minimise molecular 
weight and the numbers of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity
regions to aid soluble expression in E. coli.

PMCID: PMC544853
PMID: 15598350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10263-76.

Multiple, distant Gata2 enhancers specify temporally and tissue-specific
patterning in the developing urogenital system.

Khandekar M(1), Suzuki N, Lewton J, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 4643 Med. Sci. II, 1335
Catherine St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in a complex temporally and
tissue-specific pattern within the developing embryo. Loss-of-function studies in
the mouse showed that GATA-2 activity is first required during very early
hematopoiesis. We subsequently showed that a 271-kbp yeast artificial chromosome 
(YAC) transgene could fully complement the loss of Gata2 hematopoietic function
but that these YAC-rescued Gata2 null mutant mice die perinatally due to
defective urogenital development. The rescuing YAC did not display appropriate
urogenital expression of Gata2, implying the existence of a urogenital-specific
enhancer(s) lying outside the boundaries of this transgene. Here we outline a
coupled general strategy for regulatory sequence discovery, linking
bioinformatics to functional genomics based on the bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) libraries used to generate the mouse genome sequence. Exploiting
this strategy, we screened >1 Mbp of genomic DNA surrounding Gata2 for urogenital
enhancer activity. We found that the spatially and tissue-specific functions for 
Gata2 in the developing urogenital system are conferred by at least three
separate regionally and temporally specific urogenital enhancer elements, two of 
which reside far 3' to the Gata2 structural gene. Including the additional
enhancers that were discovered using this strategy (called BAC trap) extends the 
functional realm of the Gata2 locus to greater than 1 Mbp.

PMCID: PMC529040
PMID: 15542836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Pathol. 2004 Dec;204(5):538-45.

The early transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in classical Hodgkin's
lymphoma.

Schneider EM(1), Torlakovic E, Stühler A, Diehl V, Tesch H, Giebel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Cologne, D-50924 Cologne,
Germany.

Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma (cHL) are
thought to be derived from germinal centre B-cells in almost all cases. However, 
expression profiling has revealed that HRS cells do not show a germinal centre
B-cell-like phenotype. Although the nature of this aberrant phenotype and the
underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown, it has been reported that
the activity of NOTCH1 plays an important role in the growth and survival of HRS 
cells. In some leukaemic cell lines, the effect of Notch signalling is mediated
by the early transcription factor GATA-2. This and the fact that HRS cells lack
expression of PU.1, which can repress Gata-2, led to an investigation of GATA-2
expression in HRS cells. GATA-2 expression was found in all the cHL-derived cell 
lines studied, but not in a Burkitt lymphoma-derived cell line. In addition, 50% 
of biopsies from patients with cHL contained GATA-2-expressing HRS cells. In
contrast, neither normal germinal centre B-cells nor malignant cells of nodular
lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma or diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma expressed GATA-2. Thus, GATA-2 expression was found specifically 
in HRS cells of cHL, suggesting that GATA-2 is important in establishing the
abnormal B-cell phenotype of HRS cells.

Copyright (c) 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15538755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dev Dyn. 2004 Dec;231(4):775-81.

Partially overlapping expression of Gata2 and Gata3 during inner ear development.

Lilleväli K(1), Matilainen T, Karis A, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Gata2 and Gata3 belong to the Gata family of transcription factors in vertebrates
that bind to a consensus "GATA" DNA sequence. The Gata3 gene is one of the
earliest markers for the developing mouse inner ear. Ear morphogenesis is blocked
in Gata3-deficient embryos, whereas nothing was known of the role of Gata2 in
mouse inner ear. Here, we have compared the expression patterns of Gata2 and
Gata3 during normal inner ear development and investigated their relationship in 
mice where either Gata3 or Gata2 has been inactivated. The expression of the two 
Gata genes is highly overlapping at embryonic day (E)10.5 but becomes
increasingly distinct later. Whereas Gata2 is predominantly expressed in the
dorsal vestibular system, Gata3 was detected mainly in the ventral cochlear duct 
and ganglion. No phenotypic abnormalities were observed in the inner ear of
Gata2-/- embryos before lethality at E10.5 and Gata3 expression was unchanged. In
contrast, a delay and strong reduction of Gata2 expression was detected in
Gata3-/- otic epithelium.

Copyright (c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15499560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 1;173(9):5564-73.

The interaction between GATA proteins and activator protein-1 promotes the
transcription of IL-13 in mast cells.

Masuda A(1), Yoshikai Y, Kume H, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host Defense, Center for Neural Disease and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. amasuda@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

IL-13 is considered to be a key modulator in the pathogenesis of Th2-induced
allergic inflammation, although little is known about the regulation of IL-13
transcription in mast cells. In T cells, involvement of GATA-3 in cell
type-specific expression of the IL-13 gene has been reported. However, the
mechanisms that induce rapid transactivation of the IL-13 gene in response to
various types of stimulation have hitherto remained unknown. In this report, we
describe our investigation of the promoter region necessary for IL-13
transcription; we have found that both AP-1 and GATA proteins are indispensable
for IL-13 transcription in mouse mast cells. In our investigation, we focused on 
the functional interaction between GATA and AP-1 in the IL-13 promoter context.
Transfection experiments have revealed that GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins are able
to associate with AP-1 proteins. We have also shown that overexpression of GATA-1
induced excess AP-1 binding to the IL-13 promoter as well as a significant
increase in IL-13 production in mast cells. The results of the present study have
shown that direct interaction between AP-1 and GATA proteins plays an important
role in IL-13 transcription in mast cells.

PMID: 15494506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1724-32. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

Dynamic GATA factor interplay at a multicomponent regulatory region of the GATA-2
locus.

Martowicz ML(1), Grass JA, Boyer ME, Guend H, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology
Program, Department of Pharmacology, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Given the simplicity of the DNA sequence that mediates binding of GATA
transcription factors, GATA motifs reside throughout chromosomal DNA. However,
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis has revealed that GATA-1 discriminates
exquisitely among these sites. GATA-2 selectively occupies the -2.8-kilobase (kb)
region of the GATA-2 locus in the active state despite there being numerous GATA 
motifs throughout the locus. The GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 is
tightly coupled to repression of GATA-2 transcription. We have used high
resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation to show that GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupy
two additional regions, -3.9 and -1.8 kb of the GATA-2 locus. GATA-1 and GATA-2
had distinct preferences for occupancy at these regions, with GATA-1 and GATA-2
occupancy highest at the -3.9- and -1.8-kb regions, respectively. Activation of
an estrogen receptor fusion to GATA-1 (ER-GATA-1) induced similar kinetics of
ER-GATA-1 occupancy and GATA-2 displacement at the sites. In the
transcriptionally active state, DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs) were detected 
at the -3.9- and -1.8-kb regions, with a weak HS at the -2.8-kb region. Whereas
ER-GATA-1-instigated repression abolished the -1.8-kb HS, the -3.9-kb HS
persisted in the repressed state. Transient transfection analysis provided
evidence that the -3.9-kb region functions distinctly from the -2.8- and -1.8-kb 
regions. We propose that GATA-2 transcription is regulated via the collective
actions of complexes assembled at the -2.8- and -1.8-kb regions, which share
similar properties, and through a qualitatively distinct activity of the -3.9-kb 
complex.

PMID: 15494394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 15;173(8):4967-75.

STAT6-dependent differentiation and production of IL-5 and IL-13 in murine NK2
cells.

Katsumoto T(1), Kimura M, Yamashita M, Hosokawa H, Hashimoto K, Hasegawa A, Omori
M, Miyamoto T, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Japan.

NK cells differentiate into either NK1 or NK2 cells that produce IFN-gamma or
IL-5 and IL-13, respectively. Little is known, however, about the molecular
mechanisms that control NK1 and NK2 cell differentiation. To address these
questions, we established an in vitro mouse NK1/NK2 cell differentiation culture 
system. For NK1/NK2 cell differentiation, initial stimulation with PMA and
ionomycin was required. The in vitro differentiated NK2 cells produced IL-5 and
IL-13, but the levels were 20 times lower than those of Th2 or T cytotoxic (Tc)2 
cells. No detectable IL-4 was produced. Freshly prepared NK cells express
IL-2Rbeta, IL-2RgammaC, and IL-4Ralpha. After stimulation with PMA and ionomycin,
NK cells expressed IL-2Ralpha. NK1 cells displayed higher cytotoxic activity
against Yac-1 target cells. The levels of GATA3 protein in developing NK2 cells
were approximately one-sixth of those in Th2 cells. Both NK1 and NK2 cells
expressed large amounts of repressor of GATA, the levels of which were equivalent
to CD8 Tc1 and Tc2 cells and significantly higher than those in Th2 cells. The
levels of histone hyperacetylation of the IL-4 and IL-13 gene loci in NK2 cells
were very low and equivalent to those in naive CD4 T cells. The production of
IL-5 and IL-13 in NK2 cells was found to be STAT6 dependent. Thus, similar to Th2
cells, NK2 cell development is dependent on STAT6, and the low level expression
of GATA3 and the high level expression of repressor of GATA may influence the
unique type 2 cytokine production profiles of NK2 cells.

PMID: 15470039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Exp Med. 2004 Oct 4;200(7):871-82.

GATA-2 plays two functionally distinct roles during the ontogeny of hematopoietic
stem cells.

Ling KW(1), Ottersbach K, van Hamburg JP, Oziemlak A, Tsai FY, Orkin SH,
Ploemacher R, Hendriks RW, Dzierzak E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Eramus University Medical Center,
3000 DR Rotterdam, Netherlands.

GATA-2 is an essential transcription factor in the hematopoietic system that is
expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitors. Complete deficiency
of GATA-2 in the mouse leads to severe anemia and embryonic lethality. The role
of GATA-2 and dosage effects of this transcription factor in HSC development
within the embryo and adult are largely unexplored. Here we examined the effects 
of GATA-2 gene dosage on the generation and expansion of HSCs in several
hematopoietic sites throughout mouse development. We show that a haploid dose of 
GATA-2 severely reduces production and expansion of HSCs specifically in the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (which autonomously generates the first HSCs),
whereas quantitative reduction of HSCs is minimal or unchanged in yolk sac, fetal
liver, and adult bone marrow. However, HSCs in all these ontogenically distinct
anatomical sites are qualitatively defective in serial or competitive
transplantation assays. Also, cytotoxic drug-induced regeneration studies show a 
clear GATA-2 dose-related proliferation defect in adult bone marrow. Thus, GATA-2
plays at least two functionally distinct roles during ontogeny of HSCs: the
production and expansion of HSCs in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros and the
proliferation of HSCs in the adult bone marrow.

PMCID: PMC2213282
PMID: 15466621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Biol. 2004 Nov 1;275(1):225-34.

Pur alpha and Sp8 as opposing regulators of neural gata2 expression.

Penberthy WT(1), Zhao C, Zhang Y, Jessen JR, Yang Z, Bricaud O, Collazo A, Meng
A, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606, USA.

Gata2 is an essential hematopoietic transcriptional factor that is also expressed
prominently in the nervous system. The early lethality of knockout mice due to
severe anemia has largely precluded studies of gata2 neural regulation and
function. In this report, we describe the identification of zebrafish Pur alpha
and Sp8 orthologs as two factors that function to regulate neuronal expression of
gata2. During embryogenesis, Pur alpha is expressed widely, whereas Sp8 has an
overlapping pattern of expression with gata2 in the nervous system. Knockdown and
ectopic expressions of Pur alpha and Sp8 indicate that these factors function,
respectively, as a repressor and an activator of gata2 gene expression in the
nervous system. With consideration given to the previously established roles for 
these factors, we propose a model for how the transcriptional regulation of
neural gata2 expression may be involved in controlling cellular proliferation in 
the nervous system.

PMID: 15464585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Oct 15;225(1-2):109-18.

FLRG, member of the follistatin family, a new player in hematopoiesis.

Maguer-Satta V(1), Rimokh R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U590, Centre Léon Bérard, 69373 Lyon Cedex 08, France.
maguer@lyon.fnclcc.fr

Several years ago, we cloned and characterized from a B cell leukemia a new
secreted protein which, on the basis of its high degree of structural homology
with follistatin, was defined as a member of the follistatin family and
accordingly named follistatin-related gene (FLRG). However, follistatin and FLRG 
revealed non-overlapping patterns of expression in various tissues thereby
indicating the existence of non-redundant functional roles for these proteins
throughout the organism. As known for a long time, follistatin is a biological
regulator of activin and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) function in various
cellular systems: in particular, it inhibits the effects of activin on
hematopoiesis. We therefore investigated the expression and effects of FLRG
during human hematopoiesis with particular focus on the effect of this soluble
glycoprotein in the regulation of erythropoiesis. For this purpose, we have for
the first time, compared the role of Activin A, BMP2 and BMP4 during
erythropoiesis, in primary human cells. Our results indicate that, BMP2 acts on
early erythroid cells while Activin A acts on a more differentiated population.
We report the induction by Activin A and BMP2 of cell commitment towards
erythropoiesis in the absence of EPO. This induction involves two key events:
increase of EPO-R and the decrease of GATA2 expression. Our results indicate that
despite their high structural homology, follistatin and FLRG do not regulate the 
same signaling targets, therefore highlighting distinct functions and mechanisms 
for these two proteins in the human hematopoietic system. We thus propose a
working model for the regulation of activin or BMP-induced human erythropoiesis
by follistatin/FLRG.

PMID: 15451575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Mar;202(3):787-95.

Hypertrophy and transcriptional regulation induced in myogenic cell line L6-C5 by
an increase of extracellular calcium.

De Arcangelis V(1), Coletti D, Canato M, Molinaro M, Adamo S, Reggiani C, Naro F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Istologia ed Embriologia Medica, Università di Roma La
Sapienza, Italy.

Calcium plays a pivotal role in the establishment of the differentiated phenotype
in myogenic cells but the involved molecular mechanisms are still matter of
debate. Here we studied the effects of exposing L6-C5 myogenic cells to high
extracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]o), which induces an increase of
intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i) without involving Ca2+ release from the
intracellular stores but exclusively due to plasma membrane influx (Naro et al., 
2003). Exposure of L6-C5 cells to [Ca2+]o up to 20 mM for 30 min, before shifting
them into a differentiative medium, induced the appearance of multinucleated,
myosin-positive myotubes, much larger than in control cells with an increased
protein/DNA ratio. These large myotubes showed nuclear accumulation of the
hypertrophy marker GATA-2. The hypertrophic growth of these cells was blocked by 
cyclosporin A (CsA), FK506, or overexpression of a calcineurin-dominant negative 
protein, suggesting the involvement in this process of the Ca2+ responsive
phosphatase calcineurin. Furthermore, transient exposure of L6-C5 cells to high
[Ca2+]o increased the expression of luciferase reporter driven by myoglobin (Mb) 
and beta-MHC promoters but not IIB-MHC and MCK promoters. Luciferase
transcription driven by CK promoter was, instead, enhanced by mobilizing Ca2+
from the intracellular stores. These data indicate that a transient increase of
[Ca2+]i due to plasma-membrane influx is sufficient to induce a hypertrophic
phenotype and an increased expression of slow-fiber genes but not fast-fiber
genes.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Leuk Res. 2004 Nov;28(11):1227-37.

Analysis of the relationship between Scl transcription factor complex protein
expression patterns and the effects of LiCl on ATRA-induced differentiation in
blast cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Rice AM(1), Holtz KM, Karp J, Rollins S, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Exogenous expression of the transcription factor Scl (Tal1) in WEHI-3B D+
myelomonocytic leukemia cells interferes with their capacity to respond to
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induced differentiation; combination of ATRA with 
LiCl, however, circumvents the inhibition of differentiation produced by Scl. To 
gain information on the possible involvement of this transcription factor in the 
non-responsiveness of acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) patients to ATRA, we
compared the endogenous expression levels of Scl and its transcription complex
partners [i.e., Rbtn1 (LMO1), Rbtn2 (LMO2), Ldb1, and GATA family proteins] in
leukemic blast cells from patients with AML and acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), and determined the effects of lithium chloride alone or in combination
with ATRA on the capacity of blast cells to differentiate during short-term ex
vivo culture. Levels of Scl, Rbtn2, GATA1, and Ldb1 expression were comparable in
AML and APL blasts, while the levels of expression of Rbtn1, GATA2, and GATA3
were absent or markedly lower in APL cells. Differentiation markers (cell surface
myeloid antigens CD11b, CD15, CD14, and CD33) were also analyzed in blast cells. 
ATRA produced changes in at least one surface antigen differentiation marker in
89% of patient blasts, while LiCl caused such changes in 72% of the leukemic
cells of patients. The combination of LiCl and ATRA induced the differentiation
of leukemic blasts from 94% of patients. Although the expression of the
transcription factors did not act as individual predictors of responsiveness or
non-responsiveness to the inducers of differentiation, ATRA or ATRA plus LiCl,
the addition of LiCl to ATRA increased the differentiation response over that of 
ATRA alone in a number of leukemic samples. These findings suggest that the
combination of LiCl and ATRA may produce some clinical benefit in the treatment
of the myeloid leukemias.

PMID: 15380350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):617-26. Epub 2004 Sep 16.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived CD34+ cells: efficient production in the
coculture with OP9 stromal cells and analysis of lymphohematopoietic potential.

Vodyanik MA(1), Bork JA, Thomson JA, Slukvin II.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Wisconsin National Primate
Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792-8550, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the potential to serve as an alternative source of
hematopoietic precursors for transplantation and for the study of hematopoietic
cell development. Using coculture of human ES (hES) cells with OP9 bone marrow
stromal cells, we were able to obtain up to 20% of CD34+ cells and isolate up to 
10(7) CD34+ cells with more than 95% purity from a similar number of initially
plated hES cells after 8 to 9 days of culture. The hES cell-derived CD34+ cells
were highly enriched in colony-forming cells, cells expressing
hematopoiesis-associated genes GATA-1, GATA-2, SCL/TAL1, and Flk-1, and retained 
clonogenic potential after in vitro expansion. CD34+ cells displayed the
phenotype of primitive hematopoietic progenitors as defined by co-expression of
CD90, CD117, and CD164, along with a lack of CD38 expression and contained
aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive cells as well as cells with verapamil-sensitive
ability to efflux rhodamine 123. When cultured on MS-5 stromal cells in the
presence of stem cell factor, Flt3-L, interleukin 7 (IL-7), and IL-3, isolated
CD34+ cells differentiated into lymphoid (B and natural killer cells) as well as 
myeloid (macrophages and granulocytes) lineages. These data indicate that CD34+
cells generated through hES/OP9 coculture display several features of definitive 
hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 15374881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Cell. 2004 Jun;17(2):85-92.

Transcription factor expression in cell lines derived from natural killer-cell
and natural killer-like T-cell leukemia-lymphoma.

Matsuo Y(1), Drexler HG, Harashima A, Okochi A, Shimizu N, Orita K.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Cell Center, Hayashibara Biochemical Labs, Okayama 702-8006, Japan.
yomatsuo@hayashibara.co.jp

Although a number of transcription factors (TFs) have been identified that play a
pivotal role in the development of hematopoietic lineages, only little is known
about factors that may influence development and lineage commitment of natural
killer (NK) or NK-like T (NKT)-cells. Obviously to fully appreciate the NK- and
NKT-cell differentiation process, it is important to identify and characterize
the TFs effecting the NK- and NKT-cell lineage. Furthermore, these TFs may play a
role in NK- or NKT-cell leukemias, in which the normal differentiation program is
presumably disturbed. The present study analyzed the expression of the following 
13 TFs: AML1, CEBPA, E2A, ETS1, GATA1, GATA2, GATA3, IKAROS, IRF1, PAX5, PU1,
TBET and TCF1 in 7 malignant NK-cell lines together with 5 malignant NKT-cell
lines, 5 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines including 3
gamma/delta T-cell receptor (TCR) type and 2 alpha/beta TCR type, and 3 B-cell
precursor (BCP) leukemia cell lines. AML1, E2A, ETS1, IKAROS and IRF1 were found 
to be positive for all cell lines tested whereas GATA1 turned out to be
universally negative. CEBPA, PAX5 and PU1 were negative for all cell lines tested
except in the three positive BCP-cell lines. GATA2 was positive for 3/5 T-cell
lines but negative for the other cell lines. GATA3 was positive for 7/7 NK-, 4/5 
NKT-, 5/5 T- and 2/3 BCP-cell lines. TBET was positive for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines and negative for all T- and BCP-cell lines except one BCP-cell line. In
contrast to the expression of TBET, TCF1 was negative for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines, being positive for 4/5 T- and 1/3 BCP-cell lines. Expression analysis of
TFs revealed that NK- and NKT-cell lines showed identical profiles, clearly
distinct from those of the other T-ALL or BCP-ALL leukemia-derived cell lines..

PMID: 15369140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):627-34. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

Hmgb3 deficiency deregulates proliferation and differentiation of common lymphoid
and myeloid progenitors.

Nemeth MJ(1), Cline AP, Anderson SM, Garrett-Beal LJ, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Section, Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-4442, USA

Hmgb3 is an X-linked member of a family of chromatin-binding proteins that is
expressed in primitive hematopoietic cells capable of long-term hematopoietic
repopulation. To examine the role of Hmgb3 in adult hematopoiesis, we generated
Hmgb3-deficient (Hmgb3(-/Y)) mice, which are viable but erythrocythemic.
Hmgb3(-/Y) mice contain normal numbers of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which 
generate fewer than normal numbers of common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and
common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and greater than normal numbers of more mature 
progenitors. Although fewer Hmgb3(-/Y) primitive progenitor cells are in the G2/M
cell cycle phase, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation demonstrated enhanced
proliferation compared with their wild-type counterparts. Hmgb3(-/Y) HSCs have
increased levels of Gata-2 and c-myb mRNA. We propose that Hmgb3 deficiency leads
to a failure of HSCs to expand into normal numbers of CLPs and CMPs. This defect 
is compensated for by the ability of Hmgb3(-/Y) progenitors to expand rapidly and
differentiate into normal numbers of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15358624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Development. 2004 Oct;131(19):4775-86. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

Essential role of Gata transcription factors in sympathetic neuron development.

Tsarovina K(1), Pattyn A, Stubbusch J, Müller F, van der Wees J, Schneider C,
Brunet JF, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Abteilung Neurochemie, Deutschordenstr.
46, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Sympathetic neurons are specified during their development from neural crest
precursors by a network of crossregulatory transcription factors, which includes 
Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a. Here, we have studied the function of Gata2 and 
Gata3 zinc-finger transcription factors in autonomic neuron development. In the
chick, Gata2 but not Gata3 is expressed in developing sympathetic precursor
cells. Gata2 expression starts after Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a expression, 
but before the onset of the noradrenergic marker genes Th and Dbh, and is
maintained throughout development. Gata2 expression is affected in the chick
embryo by Bmp gain- and loss-of-function experiments, and by overexpression of
Phox2b, Phox2a, Hand2 and Mash1. Together with the lack of Gata2/3 expression in 
Phox2b knockout mice, these results characterize Gata2 as member of the
Bmp-induced cluster of transcription factors. Loss-of-function experiments
resulted in a strong reduction in the size of the sympathetic chain and in
decreased Th expression. Ectopic expression of Gata2 in chick neural crest
precursors elicited the generation of neurons with a non-autonomic, Th-negative
phenotype. This implies a function for Gata factors in autonomic neuron
differentiation, which, however, depends on co-regulators present in the
sympathetic lineage. The present data establish Gata2 and Gata3 in the chick and 
mouse, respectively, as essential members of the transcription factor network
controlling sympathetic neuron development.

PMID: 15329349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Blood. 2004 Dec 15;104(13):4300-7. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Oral administration of K-11706 inhibits GATA binding activity, enhances
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 binding activity, and restores indicators in an in
vivo mouse model of anemia of chronic disease.

Nakano Y(1), Imagawa S, Matsumoto K, Stockmann C, Obara N, Suzuki N, Doi T,
Kodama T, Takahashi S, Nagasawa T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575,
Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) gene expression is under the control of hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1), and is negatively regulated by GATA. Interleukin 1beta
(IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), which increase the
binding activity of GATA and inhibit Epo promoter activity, are increased in
patients with anemia of chronic disease (ACD). We previously demonstrated the
ability of K-7174 (a GATA-specific inhibitor), when injected intraperitoneally,
to improve Epo production that had been inhibited by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha
treatment. In the present study, we examined the ability of both K-11706, which
inhibits GATA and enhances HIF-1 binding activity, and K-13144, which has no
effect on GATA or HIF-1 binding activity, to improve Epo production following
inhibition by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha in Hep3B cells in vitro and in an in vivo
mouse assay. Oral administration of K-11706 reversed the decreases in hemoglobin 
and serum Epo concentrations, reticulocyte counts, and numbers of erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-Es) induced by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha. These results
raise the possibility of using orally administered K-11706 for treating patients 
with ACD.

PMID: 15328158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(15):6824-36.

Cross talk between retinoic acid signaling and transcription factor GATA-2.

Tsuzuki S(1), Kitajima K, Nakano T, Glasow A, Zelent A, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research, London 
SW3 6JB, UK.

All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) stimulates differentiation of normal hematopoietic
progenitors and acute myeloid leukemia cells. GATA-2 is a transcription factor
expressed in early progenitor cells and implicated in the control of the fate of 
hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells. We have investigated the
possibility that the GATA and nuclear hormone receptor pathways are functionally 
linked through direct protein-protein interaction. Here we demonstrate that in
human myeloid KG1 cells, RA receptor alpha (RARalpha), the major RAR expressed in
hematopoietic cells, associates with GATA-2. This association is mediated by the 
zinc fingers of GATA-2 and the DNA-binding domain of RARalpha. As a consequence
of this interaction, RARalpha is tethered to the DNA sites that are recognized
and bound by GATA-2, and the transcriptional activity of GATA-2 becomes RA
responsive. The RA responsiveness of GATA-dependent transcription is eliminated
by expression of either a dominant negative form of RARalpha or a GATA-2 mutant
that fails to interact with RARalpha. Overexpression of RXRalpha inhibits
RARalpha binding to the GATA-2-DNA complex, thus resulting in attenuation of the 
effects of RARalpha on GATA-2 activity. In addition, inhibition by RA of
GATA-2-dependent hematopoietic colony formation in an embryonic stem cell model
of hematopoietic differentiation provided biological evidence for functional
cross talk between RA and GATA-2-dependent pathways.

PMCID: PMC444844
PMID: 15254248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Comp Immunol. 2004 Aug;28(10):993-1003.

Transcriptome analysis of hagfish leukocytes: a framework for understanding the
immune system of jawless fishes.

Suzuki T(1), Shin-I T, Kohara Y, Kasahara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science, School of Advanced Sciences, The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai), Shonan Village, Hayama 240-0193,
Japan.

Jawless fishes occupy a critical phylogenetic position in understanding the
origin of the adaptive immune system. Here, we performed large-scale expressed
sequence tag analysis of leukocytes isolated from the inshore hagfish Eptatretus 
burgeri. Although we found many immunity-related genes such as those involved in 
lymphocyte or hematopoietic cell signaling and development as well as cytokine
and cytokine receptor genes, MHC molecules or antigen receptors were not
identified. We characterized two hagfish cDNAs that closely resembled mammalian
proteins with essential roles in adaptive immunity, one encoding a GATA3-like
molecule and another encoding a Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk)-like molecule. The
GATA3-like gene of hagfish was equidistant from GATA3 and GATA2 in jawed
vertebrates. Similarly, the hagfish Btk-like molecule was not Btk itself, but
qualified as a pre-duplicated form of Btk and Bmx in jawed vertebrates. In total,
our work provides circumstantial evidence that adaptive immunity is unique to
jawed vertebrates.

PMID: 15236930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. EMBO J. 2004 Jul 21;23(14):2841-52. Epub 2004 Jun 24.

Globin gene activation during haemopoiesis is driven by protein complexes
nucleated by GATA-1 and GATA-2.

Anguita E(1), Hughes J, Heyworth C, Blobel GA, Wood WG, Higgs DR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

How does an emerging transcriptional programme regulate individual genes as stem 
cells undergo lineage commitment, differentiation and maturation? To answer this,
we have analysed the dynamic protein/DNA interactions across 130 kb of chromatin 
containing the mouse alpha-globin cluster in cells representing all stages of
differentiation from stem cells to mature erythroblasts. The alpha-gene cluster
appears to be inert in pluripotent cells, but priming of expression begins in
multipotent haemopoietic progenitors via GATA-2. In committed erythroid
progenitors, GATA-2 is replaced by GATA-1 and binding is extended to additional
sites including the alpha-globin promoters. Both GATA-1 and GATA-2 nucleate the
binding of various protein complexes including SCL/LMO2/E2A/Ldb-1 and NF-E2.
Changes in protein/DNA binding are accompanied by sequential alterations in
long-range histone acetylation and methylation. The recruitment of polymerase II,
which ultimately leads to a rapid increase in alpha-globin transcription, occurs 
late in maturation. These studies provide detailed evidence for the more general 
hypothesis that commitment and differentiation are primarily driven by the
sequential appearance of key transcriptional factors, which bind chromatin at
specific, high-affinity sites.

PMCID: PMC514941
PMID: 15215894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 May;25(5):281-4.

[Up-regulation of transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 induced by Panax
notoginosides in hematopoietic cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao RL(1), Xu WH, Lin XJ, Chen XH, Wu CQ.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang College of Trditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou
310006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the role of Panax notoginosides (PNS) in up-regulation of
GATA family transcription factors, and explore intracellular signal pathway of
PNS in the proliferation of hematopoietic cells.
METHODS: Human bone marrow cells were incubated with different concentrations of 
PNS for colony-forming assay. Human cell lines HL-60, K562, CHRF-288 and Meg-01
were incubated with PNS (10 mg/L) for 14 days. The cell nuclear proteins were
extracted and analyzed by Western blot with antibodies against GATA-1, GATA-2.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and antibody gel supershift assay was
performed using (32)P labeled GATA consensus oligonucleotide which contains
binding site for GATA transcription factors.
RESULTS: PNS could promote the proliferation of CFU-GM and CFU-E and induce the
expression of GATA-1, GATA-2. The nuclear proteins of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 in
K562, CHRF-288 and Meg-01 cells treated by PNS were increased by (1.5 - 2.8) and 
(2.0 - 3.1)-fold over untreated cells respectively. GATA binding activity
initiated by PNS was apparently elevated to form higher density band of GATA-DNA 
complex. While there was no detectable change in HL-60 cells before and after PNS
treatment. The predominant GATA binding complex was mainly attributable to both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins being in phosphorylated status.
CONCLUSION: PNS can induce the synthesis of transcription factors GATA-1 and
GATA-2 and enhance their DNA binding activity, which could play a role in the
up-regulation of the expression genes related to proliferation and
differentiation in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15182536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Jul;40(3):179-89.

Molecular heterogeneity in AML/MDS patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Lahortiga I(1), Vázquez I, Agirre X, Larrayoz MJ, Vizmanos JL, Gozzetti A,
Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements seem to share similar clinicopathologic
features and a common molecular mechanism, leading to myelodysplasia or acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). The ectopic expression of EVI1 (3q26) has been implicated
in the dysplasia that characterizes this subset of myeloid neoplasias. However,
lack of EVI1 expression has been reported in several cases, and overexpression of
EVI1 was detected in 9% of AML cases without 3q26 abnormalities. We report the
molecular characterization of seven patients with inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26)
or related abnormalities. EVI1 expression was detected in only one case, and thus
ectopic expression of this gene failed to explain all of these cases. GATA2
(3q21) was found to be overexpressed in 5 of the 7 patients. GATA2 is highly
expressed in stem cells, and its expression dramatically decreases when erythroid
and megakaryocytic differentiation proceeds. No mutations in GATA1 were found in 
any patient, excluding loss of function of GATA1 as the cause of GATA2
overexpression. We report finding molecular heterogeneity in patients with
3q21q26 rearrangements in both breakpoints and in the expression pattern of the
genes near these breakpoints. Our data suggest that a unique mechanism is not
likely to be involved in 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15138998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Sep;287(3):L477-83. Epub 2004 Mar 26.

Translational physiology: origin and phenotype of lung side population cells.

Summer R, Kotton DN, Sun X, Fitzsimmons K, Fine A.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Sep;287(3):L475-6.

Side population (SP) cells, a rare cell type identified by their ability to
efflux the vital dye Hoechst 33342, are highly enriched for stem cell activity.
Bone marrow (BM) SP cells uniformly express the pan-hematopoietic marker CD45,
whereas tissue SP cells are heterogeneous in CD45 expression. In previous
studies, we found that CD45 is expressed on 75% of lung SP cells. By performing
whole BM transplantations, we determined that CD45-positive and CD45-negative
lung SP cells are marrow derived. Transplantation of 200 highly purified BM SP
cells indicated that both lung SP cell subtypes are derived from this marrow cell
type. Morphologically, CD45-positive lung and BM SP cells possess similar
features. They are small, round, and contain scant cytoplasm. CD45-negative lung 
SP cells are larger and contain abundant granular cytoplasm. Gene expression
patterns for hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and PU.1 further
differentiated SP marrow and lung subtypes. By immunostaining for alpha-smooth
muscle actin and cytokeratin, we found significant differences in the relative
expression patterns of these markers in lung and marrow SP cell subtypes. In
summary, these findings demonstrate that lung SP cells are derived from the BM
and that CD45-positive and -negative subtypes can be distinguished by
morphological differences and gene expression patterns.

PMID: 15047566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Mar;75(3):529-40.

Functional regulation of GATA-2 by acetylation.

Hayakawa F(1), Towatari M, Ozawa Y, Tomita A, Privalsky ML, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Japan. fhayakawa@ucdavis.edu

The transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells and is functionally implicated in their survival and proliferation. In the 
present study, we show that GATA-2 exists as an acetylated protein in immature
precursor cells, KG1. GATA-2 was acetylated in vitro by p300 and GCN5. We have
identified multiple acetylation sites by p300 on GATA-2, which include sites
outside the zinc finger domain. We confirmed that GATA-2 acetylation occurred in 
transiently transfected 293T cells at sites similar to those induced by p300 in
vitro. We have successfully shown that acetylation of GATA-2 in vitro increased
its DNA-binding activity. In addition, GATA-2 displayed a transcriptional
synergism with p300 that was impaired by mutation of each acetylation site. More 
importantly, each mutation in the acetylation sites of GATA-2 abolished its
growth inhibitory effect on an interleukin-3-dependent progenitor, 32D. We
conclude that acetylation provides multiple control points for the regulation of 
GATA-2 function.

PMID: 15001660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1165-73.

Gata2 specifies serotonergic neurons downstream of sonic hedgehog.

Craven SE(1), Lim KC, Ye W, Engel JD, de Sauvage F, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. craven@gene.com

Distinct classes of serotonergic (5-HT) neurons develop along the ventral midline
of the vertebrate hindbrain. Here, we identify a Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-regulated
cascade of transcription factors that acts to generate a specific subset of 5-HT 
neurons. This transcriptional cascade is sufficient for the induction of rostral 
5-HT neurons within rhombomere 1 (r1), which project to the forebrain, but not
for the induction of caudal 5-HT neurons, which largely terminate in the spinal
cord. Within the rostral hindbrain, the Shh-activated homeodomain proteins Nkx2.2
and Nkx6.1 cooperate to induce the closely related zinc-finger transcription
factors Gata2 and Gata3. Gata2 in turn is necessary and sufficient to activate
the transcription factors Lmx1b and Pet1, and to induce 5-HT neurons within r1.
In contrast to Gata2, Gata3 is not required for the specification of rostral 5-HT
neurons and appears unable to substitute for the loss of Gata2. Our findings
reveal that the identity of closely related 5-HT subclasses occurs through
distinct responses of adjacent rostrocaudal progenitor domains to broad ventral
inducers.

PMID: 14973276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;102(1-4):133-8.

A refined comparative map between porcine chromosome 13 and human chromosome 3.

Van Poucke M(1), Yerle M, Chardon P, Jacobs K, Genêt C, Mattheeuws M, Van Zeveren
A, Peelman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Nutrition, Genetics, Breeding and Ethology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

We report here the localisation of BAIAP1 (13q24), HTR1F (13q45), PTPRG (13q23)
and UBE1C (13q24) by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), and BAIAP1
(Swr2114; 21 cR; LOD = 11.03), GATA2 (Sw2448; 37 cR; LOD = 8.26), IL5RA (Swr2114;
64 cR; LOD = 3.85), LMCD1 (Sw2450; 61 cR; LOD = 4.73), MME (CP; 50 cR; LOD =
7.75), RYK (Swc22; 12 cR; LOD = 18.62) and SGU003 (Sw1876; 6 cR; LOD = 16.99) by 
radiation hybrid (RH) mapping to porcine chromosome 13 (SSC13). The mapping of
these 10 different loci (all mapped to human chromosome 3; HSA3) not only
confirms the extended conservation of synteny between HSA3 and SSC13, but also
defines more precisely the regions with conserved linkage. The syntenic region of
the centromeric part of SSC13 was determined by isolating porcine bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) clones (842D4 and 1031H1) using primers amplifying
porcine microsatellite markers S0219 and S0076 (mapped to this region). Sequence 
comparison of the BAC end sequences with the human genome sequence showed that
the centromeric part of SSC13 is homologous with HSA3p24.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14970692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2004 Feb;25(2):231-8.

Effects of chebulinic acid on differentiation of human leukemia K562 cells.

Yi ZC(1), Wang Z, Li HX, Liu MJ, Wu RC, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

AIM: To study effects of chebulinic acid on erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation in K562 cells.
METHODS: The benzidine staining method was used to evaluate hemoglobin synthesis;
the expression of erythroid specific glycophorin A (GPA) protein and
megakaryocytic surface marker CD61 was determined by flow cytometry using
fluorescence labeled antibodies; erythroid and megakaryocytic mRNA expression was
analyzed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: During erythroid differentiation induced by butyric acid (BA) or hemin, 
chebulinic acid not only inhibited the hemoglobin synthesis of BA- and
hemin-treated K562 cells in concentration-dependent manner with IC50 of 4
micromol/L and 40 micromol/L respectively, but also inhibited another erythroid
differentiation marker acetylcholinesterase at the concentration of 50 micromol/L
in the cells either treated or untreated with each erythroid differentiation
inducers, whereas chebulinic acid 50 micromol/L did not change GPA protein
expression in these cells significantly. When K562 cells were treated with TPA 50
microg/L for 72 h to induce megakaryocytic differentiation, the presence of
chebulinic acid 50 micromol/L slightly provoked the decrease of GPA protein
expression induced by TPA. Chebulinic acid did not change the TPA-induced CD61
expression at the same concentration. Chebulinic acid also reduced the mRNA
levels of erythroid relative genes including gamma-globin, PBGD, NF-E2, and
GATA-1 genes in K562 cells either treated or untreated with BA, whereas
chebulinic acid upregulated the mRNA levels of GATA-2 transcription factor in
these cells.
CONCLUSION: Chebulinic acid had inhibitory effect on erythroid differentiation
likely through changing transcriptional activation of differentiation relative
genes, which suggests that chebulinic acid or other tannins might influence the
efficiency of some anti-tumor drugs-induced differentiation or the hematopoiesis 
processes.

PMID: 14769215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Toxicol Lett. 2004 Mar 1;147(2):109-19.

Inhibitory effect of tellimagrandin I on chemically induced differentiation of
human leukemia K562 cells.

Yi Z(1), Wang Z, Li H, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

Tellimagrandin I is a hydrolysable tannin compound widely present in plants. In
this study, the effect of tellimagrandin I on chemically induced erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation was investigated using K562 cells as
differentiation model. It was found that tellimagrandin I not only inhibited the 
hemoglobin synthesis in butyric acid (BA)- and hemin-induced K562 cells with IC50
of 3 and 40microM, respectively, but also inhibited other erythroid
differentiation marker including acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and glycophorin A
(GPA) in BA-induced K562 cells. Tellimagrandin I also inhibited
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced expression of CD61 protein, a 
megakaryocytic marker. RT-PCR analysis showed that tellimagrandin I decreased the
expression of erythroid genes (gamma-globin and porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD))
and related transcription factors (GATA-1 and NF-E2) in BA-induced K562 cells,
whereas tellimagrandin I induced the overexpresison of GATA-2 transcription
factor that played negative regulation on erythroid differentiation. These
results indicated that tellimagrandin I had inhibitory effects on erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation, which suggested that tannins like tellimagrandin 
I might influence the anti-tumor efficiency of some drugs and the hematopoiesis
processes.

PMID: 14757314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Feb 12;356(2):107-10.

Identification of the mouse neurochondrin promoter region and the responsible
region for cell type specific gene regulation.

Dateki M(1), Mochizuki R, Yanai K, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8572, Japan.

Neurochondrin is a cytoplasmic protein possibly involved in neurite outgrowth and
chondrocyte differentiation. In the present study, we have identified 202 bp of
the mouse neurochondrin minimal promoter sequences encompassing the
transcriptional initiation site, and both of the activating and repressing
regions in the first exon. These two regulatory regions in the first exon had a
cell type dependent effect on the identified minimal promoter. In the regulatory 
region, the duplication of potential binding sites for GATA family
transcriptional factors was observed. Prospective binding sites for sex
determining region Y and c-Ets1 were also found in the minimal promoter region.
These factors could be potential regulators for the mouse neurochondrin gene.

PMID: 14746875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 27;101(4):980-5. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

Coregulator-dependent facilitation of chromatin occupancy by GATA-1.

Pal S(1), Cantor AB, Johnson KD, Moran TB, Boyer ME, Orkin SH, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300
University Avenue, 383 Medical Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Coregulator recruitment by DNA-bound factors results in chromatin modification
and protein-protein interactions, which regulate transcription. However, the
mechanism by which the Friend of GATA (FOG) coregulator mediates GATA
factor-dependent transcription is unknown. We showed previously that GATA-1
replaces GATA-2 at an upstream region of the GATA-2 locus, and that this GATA
switch represses GATA-2. Genetic complementation analysis in FOG-1-null
hematopoietic precursors revealed that FOG-1 is not required for establishment or
maintenance of the active GATA-2 domain, but is critical for the GATA switch.
Analysis of GATA factor binding to additional loci also revealed FOG-1-dependent 
GATA switches. Thus, FOG-1 facilitates chromatin occupancy by GATA-1 at sites
bound by GATA-2. We propose that FOG-1 is a prototype of a new class of
coregulators termed chromatin occupancy facilitators, which confer coregulation
in certain contexts via enhancing trans-acting factor binding to chromatin in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC327128
PMID: 14715908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Drug News Perspect. 2003 Nov;16(9):585-8.

GATA transcription factors and fat cell formation.

Tong Q(1), Tsai J, Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, ARS/Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. ghotamis@hsph.harvard.edu

GATA transcription factors play important roles in a variety of developmental
processes. Recently, we discovered that GATA factors also play a key role in
adipogenesis. Two isoforms, GATA-2 and GATA-3, are specifically expressed in
murine preadipocytes but not mature adipocytes. Continuous expression of GATA
factors in preadipocyte cell lines inhibits terminal differentiation into mature 
adipocytes. In contrast, GATA-3-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells possess a
higher capacity to convert to adipocytes. The inhibitory effect of GATA on
adipogenesis is mediated in part by suppression of promoters of adipogenic
factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, but
additional mechanisms are also likely to be in effect. These findings indicate
that GATA factors function as molecular gatekeepers at the onset of terminal
adipocyte differentiation. Whether GATA factors are also involved in the
commitment of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells to progenitors of the adipogenic
lineage is under investigation.

PMID: 14702139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3320-5. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Essential role of HGF (hepatocyte growth factor) in blood formation in Xenopus.

Koibuchi N(1), Kaneda Y, Taniyama Y, Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Ogihara T,
Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Suita, Japan.

In this study, we investigated the role of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in
blood formation during Xenopus development. First, we examined the gene
expression of HGF and its receptor, c-met, by whole-mount in situ hybridization
during development. Strong signals of HGF as well as c-met were detected early in
the developing ventral mesoderm, which later gives rise to the ventral blood
island. Furthermore, to study the role of HGF, we blocked the HGF signaling
pathway in Xenopus embryos by using truncated c-met lacking the tyrosine kinase
domain. Injection of truncated c-met mRNA resulted in a marked decrease in the
number of circulating blood cells. Similar results were obtained using morpholino
antisense HGF oligonucleotides. Moreover, we also analyzed the expression of
several early primitive blood markers in the blood island of these embryos. RNA
in situ analysis revealed a significant reduction (or absence) of stem cell
leukemia (SCL), alpha-globin, and GATA-1 expression, but not GATA-2 expression.
In contrast, no significant difference was observed in the levels of expression
of early definitive blood markers, SCL, GATA-2, and GATA-3 in the dorsolateral
plate, as analyzed by in situ hybridization. Overall, the present study
demonstrated that HGF is necessary for primitive hematopoiesis by regulating the 
expression of SCL.

PMID: 14701703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 2;313(1):125-8.

Negative regulation of hematopoiesis by the fused in myeloproliferative disorders
gene product.

Inoue H(1), Nobuhisa I, Okita K, Takizawa M, Pébusque MJ, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The t(8;13) translocation, found in a rare and aggressive type of stem cell
myeloproliferative disorder, leads to the generation of a fusion protein between 
the N-terminal gene product of fused in myeloproliferative disorders (FIM)/ZNF198
and the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) kinase domain. The chimeric
protein was reported to have constitutively activated tyrosine kinase activity.
However, little is known about a role of FIM in hematopoietic cell regulation.
Here we show that FIM protein is ubiquitously expressed in mouse embryonic
tissues but much less in hematopoietic cells. We also show that forced expression
of FIM inhibits the emergence of hematopoietic cells in the cultured mouse
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region on embryonic day (E) 11.5, where definitive 
hematopoiesis is first found during embryogenesis. These results suggest that the
expression level of FIM determines the development of hematopoiesis during mouse 
ontogeny.

PMID: 14672707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):564-81.

Xenopus Xlmo4 is a GATA cofactor during ventral mesoderm formation and regulates 
Ldb1 availability at the dorsal mesoderm and the neural plate.

de la Calle-Mustienes E(1), Lu Z, Cortés M, Andersen B, Modolell J,
Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid,
Spain.

We have identified and functionally characterized the Xenopus Xlmo4 gene, which
encodes a member of the LIM-domain-only protein family. Xlmo4 is activated at
gastrula stages in the mesodermal marginal zone probably in response to BMP4
signaling. Soon after, Xlmo4 is downregulated in the dorsal region of the
mesoderm. This repression seems to be mediated by organizer-expressed repressors,
such as Gsc. Xlmo4 downregulation is necessary for the proper formation of this
territory. Increasing Xlmo4 function in this region downregulates Spemman
Organizer genes and suppresses dorsal-anterior structures. By binding to Ldb1,
Xlmo4 may restrict the availability of this cofactor for transcription factors
expressed at the Spemman Organizer. In the ventral mesoderm, Xlmo4 is required to
establish the identity of this territory by acting as a positive cofactor of GATA
factors. In the neural ectoderm, Xlmo4 expression depends on Xiro homeoprotein
activity. In this region, Xlmo4 suppresses differentiation of primary neurons and
interferes with gene expression at the Isthmic Organizer, most likely by
displacing Ldb1 from active transcription factor complexes required for these
processes. Together, our data suggest that Xlmo4 uses distinct mechanisms to
participate in different processes during development.

PMID: 14651938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem J. 2004 Mar 1;378(Pt 2):549-57.

Thyroid-hormone-dependent negative regulation of thyrotropin beta gene by thyroid
hormone receptors: study with a new experimental system using CV1 cells.

Nakano K(1), Matsushita A, Sasaki S, Misawa H, Nishiyama K, Kashiwabara Y,
Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

The molecular mechanism involved in the liganded thyroid hormone receptor
suppression of the TSHbeta (thyroid-stimulating hormone beta, or thyrotropin
beta) gene transcription is undetermined. One of the main reasons is the
limitation of useful cell lines for the experiments. We have developed an assay
system using non-pituitary CV1 cells and studied the negative regulation of the
TSHbeta gene. In CV1 cells, the TSHbeta-CAT (chloramphenicol acetyltransferase)
reporter was stimulated by Pit1 and GATA2 and suppressed by T3
(3,3',5-tri-iodothyronine)-bound thyroid hormone receptor. The suppression was
dependent on the amounts of T3 and the receptor. Unliganded receptor did not
stimulate TSHbeta activity, suggesting that the receptor itself is not an
activator. Analyses using various receptor mutants revealed that the intact
DNA-binding domain is crucial to the TSHbeta gene suppression. Co-activators and 
co-repressors are not necessarily essential, but are required for the full
suppression of the TSHbeta gene. Among the three receptor isoforms, beta2
exhibited the strongest inhibition and its protein level was the most predominant
in a thyrotroph cell line, TalphaT1, in Western blotting. The dominant-negative
effects of various receptor mutants measured on the TSHbeta-CAT reporter were not
simple mirror images of those in the positive regulation under physiological T3
concentration.

PMCID: PMC1223958
PMID: 14611644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Hypertens. 2003 Nov;21(11):2111-24.

Regulation of the major isoform of human endothelin-converting enzyme-1 by a
strong housekeeping promoter modulated by polymorphic microsatellites.

Funke-Kaiser H(1), Thomas A, Bremer J, Kovacevic SD, Scheuch K, Bolbrinker J,
Theis S, Lemmer J, Zimmermann A, Zollmann FS, Herrmann SM, Paul M, Orzechowski
HD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Charité - Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2003 Nov;21(11):2013-4.

BACKGROUND: Human endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE)-1, the key enzyme in
endothelin biosynthesis, shows broad cell and tissue expression within the
cardiovascular system. Expression of ECE-1c, which represents the major ECE-1
isoform, is directed by an alternative promoter, but the mechanisms of ECE-1c
promoter regulation are largely unknown. As ECE-1c transcription is initiated
from several start sites, we hypothesized that the ECE-1c promoter functions as a
housekeeping promoter.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the putative housekeeping function of the ECE-1c
promoter in vascular endothelial cells, which represent a main site of its
expression.
RESULTS: Using promoter reporter assays, gel shift and supershift assays, we have
demonstrated, in human endothelial EA.hy926 cells, functionality of cis-acting
elements for binding of the CAAT-box binding protein NF-YB, GATA-2) E2F-2, and a 
GC-box binding factor, which are spatially associated with transcriptional start 
sites of ECE-1c. In the more upstream promoter region we have identified three
highly polymorphic dinucleotide repeats, 5'-(CA)n, (CG)n and 3'-(CA)n, which
strongly affected promoter function in endothelial EA.hy926 cells (2.7-fold
activation comparing the most active to the least active allele) and, in a
similar manner, in human neuronal KELLY cells. Finally, by in-vitro methylation, 
we were able to achieve strong suppression of the ECE-1c promoter activity in
endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide a molecular explanation for constitutive
expression of ECE-1c mRNA. Modulation by genetic and epigenetic mechanisms as
revealed in our study may account for interindividual variation of the
constitutive endothelin system activity in humans and thus influence individual
predisposition to cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 14597855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;179(2):227-35.

Expression of VGF mRNA in developing neuroendocrine and endocrine tissues.

Snyder SE(1), Peng B, Pintar JE, Salton SR.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029, USA.

Analysis of knockout mice suggests that the neurotropin-inducible secreted
polypeptide VGF (non-acronymic) plays an important role in the regulation of
energy balance. VGF is synthesized by neurons in the central and peripheral
nervous systems (CNS, PNS), as well as in the adult pituitary, adrenal medulla,
endocrine cells of the stomach and pancreatic beta cells. Thus VGF, like
cholecystokinin, leptin, ghrelin and other peptide hormones that have been shown 
to regulate feeding and energy expenditure, is synthesized in both the gut and
the brain. Although detailed developmental studies of VGF localization in the CNS
and PNS have been completed, little is known about the ontogeny of VGF expression
in endocrine and neuroendocrine tIssues. Here, we report that VGF mRNA is
detectable as early as embryonic day 15.5 in the developing rat gastrointestinal 
and esophageal lumen, pancreas, adrenal, and pituitary, and we further
demonstrate that VGF mRNA is synthesized in the gravid rat uterus, together
supporting possible functional roles for this polypeptide outside the nervous
system and in the enteric plexus.

PMID: 14596674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2955-61. Epub 2003 Oct 28.

Hepatic erythropoietin gene regulation by GATA-4.

Dame C(1), Sola MC, Lim KC, Leach KM, Fandrey J, Ma Y, Knöpfle G, Engel JD,
Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Erythropoietin production switches from fetal liver to adult kidney during
development. GATA transcription factors 2 and 3 could be involved in modulating
this switch, because they were shown to negatively regulate erythropoietin gene
transcription through a promoter proximal GATA site. Herein, we analyzed the role
of several GATA factors in the regulation of the erythropoietin gene in human
liver and in hepatoma cells. Although GATA-3 expression in hepatocytes increases 
during human development, erythropoietin mRNA accumulation is unaltered in mutant
mice lacking GATA-3. We found that GATA-2, -3, -4, and -6 are all expressed in
human hepatocytes and that GATA-4 exhibits the most prominent Epo promoter
binding activity in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of GATA-4 expression by RNA
interference leads to a dramatic reduction in Epo gene transcription in Hep3B
cells. Moreover, GATA-4 expression is high and limited to hepatocytes in the
fetal liver, whereas GATA-4 expression in the adult liver is low and restricted
to epithelial cells surrounding the biliary ducts. Thus, GATA-4 is critical for
transcription of the Epo gene in hepatocytes and may contribute to the switch in 
the site of Epo gene expression from the fetal liver to the adult kidney.

PMID: 14583613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5663-79. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Neuronal defects in the hindbrain of Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutants reflect
regulatory interactions among these Hox genes.

Gavalas A(1), Ruhrberg C, Livet J, Henderson CE, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hox genes are instrumental in assigning segmental identity in the developing
hindbrain. Auto-, cross- and para-regulatory interactions help establish and
maintain their expression. To understand to what extent such regulatory
interactions shape neuronal patterning in the hindbrain, we analysed
neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation and motoneuron migration in Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxb2 mutant mice. This comparison revealed that neurogenesis and
differentiation of specific neuronal subpopulations in r4 was impaired in a
similar fashion in all three mutants, but with different degrees of severity. In 
the Hoxb1 mutants, neurons derived from the presumptive r4 territory were
re-specified towards an r2-like identity. Motoneurons derived from that territory
resembled trigeminal motoneurons in both their migration patterns and the
expression of molecular markers. Both migrating motoneurons and the resident
territory underwent changes consistent with a switch from an r4 to r2 identity.
Abnormally migrating motoneurons initially formed ectopic nuclei that were
subsequently cleared. Their survival could be prolonged through the introduction 
of a block in the apoptotic pathway. The Hoxa1 mutant phenotype is consistent
with a partial misspecification of the presumptive r4 territory that results from
partial Hoxb1 activation. The Hoxb2 mutant phenotype is a hypomorph of the Hoxb1 
mutant phenotype, consistent with the overlapping roles of these genes in facial 
motoneuron specification. Therefore, we have delineated the functional
requirements in hindbrain neuronal patterning that follow the establishment of
the genetic regulatory hierarchy between Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2.

PMID: 14522873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47785-91. Epub 2003 Sep 25.

Transcriptional up-regulation of endothelial cell matrix metalloproteinase-2 in
response to extracellular cues involves GATA-2.

Han X(1), Boyd PJ, Colgan S, Madri JA, Haas TL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Sciences, York University, Toronto, Ontario
M3J 1P3, Canada.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) plays a critical role in endothelial cells
during the processes of angiogenesis and vascular remodeling. Endothelial cell
production of MMP-2 is greatly enhanced when cells are cultured within a
three-dimensional type I collagen matrix coinciding with the increased invasive
and migratory phenotype of the cells. To define the transcriptional regulation of
MMP-2 in rat microvascular endothelial cells, we performed promoter-reporter
assays with a series of promoter truncations. Activity of the full promoter was
significantly greater in cells cultured within three-dimensional type I collagen 
compared with cells cultured as a monolayer (two-dimensional) on type I collagen.
Truncation of the region encompassing base pairs -1562 to -1375 (relative to the 
start codon) of the MMP-2 promoter resulted in loss of this differential activity
of the MMP-2 promoter. Analysis of this region indicated two putative GATA-2
binding domains between -1437 and -1387. Southwestern blot analysis and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed the binding of GATA-2 to this
region of the MMP-2 promoter. Overexpression of GATA-2 in COS-7 cells
significantly increased the activity of the full-length MMP-2 promoter-luciferase
construct. Endothelial cells expressed greater levels of GATA-2 protein in
three-dimensional compared with two-dimensional cultures, and activity of the
-1437/-1387 region of the MMP-2 promoter was significantly greater in
three-dimensional cultured endothelial cells. Together, these results indicate
GATA-2 regulation of the MMP-2 promoter in endothelial cells and that the GATA-2 
binding domain is sufficient to drive increased activity of the MMP-2 promoter in
response to an extracellular matrix stimulus.

PMID: 14512418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Blood. 2004 Jan 15;103(2):583-5. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Functional overlap of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in primitive hematopoietic development.

Fujiwara Y(1), Chang AN, Williams AM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Enders 760, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 are required for normal hematopoiesis.
The loss of either leads to embryonic lethality in knockout mice because of the
failure of erythroid maturation and the expansion of progenitors, respectively.
As the expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 overlaps within hematopoietic progenitors,
the extent to which these factors functionally compensate for each other during
embryogenesis is unknown. As shown here, we have analyzed double-knockout embryos
at the yolk sac stage of development and have shown that the combined absence of 
these GATA factors virtually ablates primitive erythroid cell formation. Thus,
the function of GATA-1 and GATA-2 overlaps at the yolk sac stage. Moreover, a
GATA factor, either GATA-1 or GATA-2, is required to initiate blood formation in 
the embryo.

PMID: 14504093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):4999-5008.

Axon fasciculation and differences in midline kinetics between pioneer and
follower axons within commissural fascicles.

Bak M(1), Fraser SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Biological Imaging Center, Beckman Institute, California 
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Early neuronal scaffold development studies suggest that initial neurons and
their axons serve as guides for later neurons and their processes. Although this 
arrangement might aid axon navigation, the specific consequence(s) of such
interactions are unknown in vivo. We follow forebrain commissure formation in
living zebrafish embryos using timelapse fluorescence microscopy to examine
quantitatively commissural axon kinetics at the midline: a place where axon
interactions might be important. Although it is commonly accepted that
commissural axons slow down at the midline, our data show this is only true for
leader axons. Follower axons do not show this behavior. However, when the leading
axon is ablated, follower axons change their midline kinetics and behave as
leaders. Similarly, contralateral leader axons change their midline kinetics when
they grow along the opposite leading axon across the midline. These data suggest 
a simple model where the level of growth cone exposure to midline cues and
presence of other axons as a substrate shape the midline kinetics of commissural 
axons.

PMID: 12952902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45620-8. Epub 2003 Aug 26.

Determinants of GATA-1 binding to DNA: the role of non-finger residues.

Ghirlando R(1), Trainor CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
rodolfog@intra.niddk.nih.gov

Mammalian GATA transcription factors are expressed in various tissues in a
temporally regulated manner. The prototypic member, GATA-1, is required for
normal erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mast cell development. This family of
DNA-binding proteins recognizes a consensus (A/T)GATA(A/G) motif and possesses
homologous DNA binding domains consisting of two zinc fingers. The C-terminal
finger of GATA-1 recognizes the consensus motif with nanomolar affinities,
whereas the N-terminal finger shows a binding preference for a GATC motif, albeit
with much reduced affinity (Kd approximately microm). The N-terminal finger of
GATA-2 also shows a preference for an AGATCT binding site, with an increased
affinity attributed to N- and C-terminal flanking basic residues (Kd
approximately nm). To understand the differences in the binding specificities of 
the N- and C-terminal zinc fingers of GATA-1, we have constructed a series of
swapped domain peptides. We show that the specificity for AGATAA over AGATCT
arises from the C-terminal non-finger basic domain. Thus, the N-terminal finger
binds preferentially to AGATAA once appended to the C-terminal arm of the
C-terminal finger. We further show that this specificity arises from the highly
conserved QTRNRK residues. The converse is, however, untrue in the case of the
C-terminal finger; swapping of QTRNRK with the corresponding LVSKRA does not
switch the DNA binding specificity from AGATAA to AGATCT. These results highlight
the important role of residues adjacent to the CXXCX17CNAC zinc finger motif
(i.e. non-finger residues) in the specific recognition of DNA residues.

PMID: 12941967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Infect Immun. 2003 Sep;71(9):4943-52.

Effect of transcription factor GATA-2 on phagocytic activity of alveolar
macrophages from Pneumocystis carinii-infected hosts.

Lasbury ME(1), Tang X, Durant PJ, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Alveolar macrophages from Pneumocystis carinii-infected hosts are defective in
phagocytosis (W. Chen, J. W. Mills, and A. G. Harmsen, Int. J. Exp. Pathol.
73:709-720, 1992; H. Koziel et al., J. Clin. Investig. 102:1332-1344, 1998).
Experiments were performed to determine whether this defect is specific for P.
carinii organisms. The results showed that these macrophages were unable to
phagocytose both P. carinii organisms and fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-conjugated latex beads, indicating that alveolar macrophages from P.
carinii-infected hosts have a general defect in phagocytosis. To determine
whether this defect correlates with the recently discovered down-regulation of
the GATA-2 transcription factor gene during P. carinii infection, alveolar
macrophages from dexamethasone-suppressed or healthy rats were treated with
anti-GATA-2 oligonucleotides and then assayed for phagocytosis. Aliquots of the
alveolar macrophages were also treated with the sense oligonucleotides as the
control. Cells treated with the antisense oligonucleotides were found to have a
46% reduction in phagocytosis of P. carinii organisms and a 65% reduction in
phagocytosis of FITC-latex beads compared to those treated with the sense
oligonucleotides. To determine whether the defect in phagocytosis in alveolar
macrophages from P. carinii-infected hosts can be corrected by overexpression of 
GATA-2, a plasmid containing the rat GATA-2 gene in the sense orientation driven 
by the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter was introduced into alveolar macrophages
from P. carinii-infected rats. Aliquots of the same cells transfected with a
plasmid containing GATA-2 in the antisense orientation relative to the CMV
promoter served as the control. Alveolar macrophages treated with the sense
GATA-2 expression construct were found to increase their phagocytic activity by
66% in phagocytosis of P. carinii organisms and by 280% in phagocytosis of
FITC-latex beads compared to those that received the antisense GATA-2 construct. 
The results of this study indicate that GATA-2 plays an important role in the
regulation of phagocytosis in alveolar macrophages during P. carinii infection.

PMCID: PMC187340
PMID: 12933836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. EMBO J. 2003 Aug 1;22(15):3887-97.

Myeloid lineage switch of Pax5 mutant but not wild-type B cell progenitors by
C/EBPalpha and GATA factors.

Heavey B(1), Charalambous C, Cobaleda C, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter,Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, 
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

The developmental potential of hematopoietic progenitors is restricted early on
to either the erythromyeloid or lymphoid lineages. The broad developmental
potential of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells is in apparent conflict with such a strict
separation, although these progenitors realize the myeloid and erythroid
potential with lower efficiency compared to the lymphoid cell fates. Here we
demonstrate that ectopic expression of the transcription factors C/EBPalpha,
GATA1, GATA2 and GATA3 strongly promoted in vitro macrophage differentiation and 
myeloid colony formation of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells. GATA2 and GATA3 expression
also resulted in efficient engraftment and myeloid development of Pax5(-/-) pro-B
cells in vivo. The myeloid transdifferentiation of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells was
accompanied by the rapid activation of myeloid genes and concomitant repression
of B-lymphoid genes by C/EBPalpha and GATA factors. These data identify the
Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells as lymphoid progenitors with a latent myeloid potential
that can be efficiently activated by myeloid transcription factors. The same
regulators were unable to induce a myeloid lineage switch in Pax5(+/+) pro-B
cells, indicating that Pax5 dominates over myeloid transcription factors in
B-lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC169053
PMID: 12881423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Aug;10(8):905-13.

Control of erythroid cell production via caspase-mediated cleavage of
transcription factor SCL/Tal-1.

Zeuner A(1), Eramo A, Testa U, Felli N, Pelosi E, Mariani G, Srinivasula SM,
Alnemri ES, Condorelli G, Peschle C, De Maria R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome
00161, Italy.

SCL/Tal-1 is a helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor required for blood
cell development, whose abnormal expression is responsible for induction of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We show here that SCL/Tal-1 is a key target 
of caspases in developing erythroblasts. SCL/Tal-1 degradation occurred rapidly
after caspase activation and preceded the cleavage of the major erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1. Expression of a caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 in
erythroid progenitors was able to prevent amplification of caspase activation,
GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis induced by growth factor
deprivation or death receptor triggering. The potent proerythropoietic activity
of uncleavable SCL/Tal-1 was clearly evident in the absence of erythropoietin, a 
condition that did not allow survival of normal erythroid cells or expansion of
erythroblasts expressing caspase-resistant GATA-1. In the absence of
erythropoietin, cells expressing caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 maintain high levels
of Bcl-X(L), which inhibits amplification of the caspase cascade and mediates
protection from apoptosis. Thus, SCL/TAL-1 is a survival factor for erythroid
cells, whereas caspase-mediated cleavage of SCL/Tal-1 results in amplification of
caspase activation, GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis.

PMID: 12867998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 22;100(15):8811-6. Epub 2003 Jul 11.

GATA-1-dependent transcriptional repression of GATA-2 via disruption of positive 
autoregulation and domain-wide chromatin remodeling.

Grass JA(1), Boyer ME, Pal S, Wu J, Weiss MJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin Medical School, 383 Medical Sciences Center, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Interplay among GATA transcription factors is an important determinant of cell
fate during hematopoiesis. Although GATA-2 regulates hematopoietic stem cell
function, mechanisms controlling GATA-2 expression are undefined. Of particular
interest is the repression of GATA-2, because sustained GATA-2 expression in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells alters hematopoiesis. GATA-2
transcription is derepressed in erythroid precursors lacking GATA-1, but the
underlying mechanisms are unknown. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, 
we show that GATA-1 binds a highly restricted upstream region of the
approximately 70-kb GATA-2 domain, despite >80 GATA sites throughout the domain. 
GATA-2 also binds this region in the absence of GATA-1. Genetic complementation
studies in GATA-1-null cells showed that GATA-1 rapidly displaces GATA-2, which
is coupled to transcriptional repression. GATA-1 also displaces CREB-binding
protein (CBP), despite the fact that GATA-1 binds CBP in other contexts.
Repression correlates with reduced histone acetylation domain-wide, but not
altered methylation of histone H3 at lysine 4. The GATA factor-binding region
exhibited cell-type-specific enhancer activity in transient transfection assays. 
We propose that GATA-1 instigates GATA-2 repression by means of disruption of
positive autoregulation, followed by establishment of a domain-wide repressive
chromatin structure. Such a mechanism is predicted to be critical for the control
of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC166395
PMID: 12857954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Jun;3(3):261-72.

From mesoderm to blood islands: patterns of key molecules during yolk sac
erythropoiesis.

Minko K(1), Bollerot K, Drevon C, Hallais MF, Jaffredo T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49 bis avenue de la Belle Gabrielle, 94736 Cedex, Nogent s/Marne, France.

Several identified genes play key roles in the specification of the blood-forming
system, from commitment of mesoderm to differentiation of hemopoietic and
endothelial cells. We have thoroughly analyzed the expression dynamics of some of
these genes during yolk sac erythropoiesis in the chick embryo. The study
includes transcription factors which are known to participate in multimeric
complexes: GATA-1, -2, SCL/tal-1 and Lmo2 (whose avian orthologue we have
cloned), VEGF-R2, a critical regulator of hemopoietic and endothelial commitment,
and hemoglobin used as a marker of the last step in erythroid differentiation.
Several findings were unexpected. (1) Two distinct patterns were revealed for
GATA-2, first: low expression, ubiquitous in all mesodermal cells, as soon as
cells ingress through the primitive streak; secondly: high, blood island-specific
expression. (2) VEGF-R2 is coexpressed with GATA-2 at the level of the primitive 
streak. (3) SCL and Lmo2 expression is restricted to presumptive hemangioblasts. 
(4) The up-regulation of GATA-2 in newly formed blood islands is shortly followed
by GATA-1 expression. (5) Lmo2 is up-regulated in blood island angioblasts thus
appearing as one of the earliest markers for endothelial cell commitment. VEGF-R2
is down-regulated in hemopoietic cells prior to GATA-2, SCL/tal-1, Lmo2 and
GATA-1 in erythroblasts.

PMID: 12799070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Circ Res. 2003 Jun 13;92(11):1201-8. Epub 2003 May 15.

Modification of GATA-2 transcriptional activity in endothelial cells by the SUMO 
E3 ligase PIASy.

Chun TH(1), Itoh H, Subramanian L, Iñiguez-Lluhí JA, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. taehwa@umich.edu

GATA sequences are required for the optimal expression of endothelial
cell-specific genes, including endothelin-1 (ET-1). We have identified PIASy in a
search for new GATA-2 interacting proteins that can regulate GATA-2-mediated
endothelial gene expression. Notably, among the cell populations comprising
vascular walls, PIASy mRNA is selectively expressed in endothelial cells, and its
expression can be regulated by angiogenic growth factors. We show that GATA-2 is 
covalently modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-1 and -2 and that
PIASy, through its E3 SUMO ligase activity, preferentially enhances the
conjugation of SUMO-2 to GATA-2. Through a functional analysis, we demonstrate
that PIASy potently suppresses the activity of the GATA-2-dependent human ET-1
promoter in endothelial cells. The suppressive effect of PIASy requires the
GATA-binding site in the ET-1 promoter and depends on its interaction with
GATA-2, which requires both N-terminal (amino acids 1-183) and C-terminal (amino 
acids 414-510) sequences in PIASy. We conclude that PIASy enhances the
conjugation of SUMO-2 to GATA-2 and that the interaction of PIASy with GATA-2 can
modulate GATA-mediated ET-1 transcription activity in endothelial cells through a
RING-like domain-independent mechanism.

PMID: 12750312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Arch Toxicol. 2003 May;77(5):267-73. Epub 2003 Mar 7.

Suppression of erythropoietin gene expression by cadmium depends on inhibition of
HIF-1, not stimulation of GATA-2.

Obara N(1), Imagawa S, Nakano Y, Suzuki N, Yamamoto M, Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
305-8575, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Long-term exposure of rats to cadmium (Cd) resulted in a marked suppression of
erythropoietin (Epo) mRNA expression in the kidneys and the development of severe
anemia. A recent report revealed that Cd inhibited hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) binding activity and Epo mRNA expression and protein production. However,
Epo gene expression is also regulated by transcription factor GATA-2, which binds
to the GATA binding site of the Epo promoter. To elucidate the mechanism of
suppression of Epo by Cd, the effect of Cd on GATA-2 function was studied. Epo
promoter/enhancer luciferase constructs, one with the wild-type promoter and
another with a promoter with a mutant GATA site, were transfected into Hep3B
cells. No significant difference in Epo promoter activity in these two types of
cells was observed in the presence of Cd. The binding activity of GATA-2 was not 
affected by Cd. This study showed that Cd inhibited HIF-1 binding activity and
Epo promoter activity, and then suppressed Epo protein production. Inhibition of 
Epo gene expression by Cd depends on suppression of HIF-1 binding activity, not
on alteration of GATA function.

PMID: 12734640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Exp Cell Res. 2003 May 1;285(2):258-67.

5-azacytidine reactivates the erythroid differentiation potential of the
myeloid-restricted murine cell line 32D Ro.

Baiocchi M(1), Di Rico C, Di Pietro R, Di Baldassarre A, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Instituto Superiore Sanità, Rome, Italy.

32D cells grown for 1 year in interleukin-3 (IL-3) and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) generated the 32D Ro cell line which retained
the parental mast cell phenotype but lost ability to generate erythroid cells in 
response to erythropoietin (EPO). In order to clarify the mechanisms underlying
such restriction, we compared 32D and 32D Ro cells for their capacity to express 
erythroid-specific transcription factors (Gata1, Gata2, Scl, Nef2, Eklf, and Id) 
and the capacity of short exposure to 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) to reactivate
erythroid differentiation potential in 32D Ro cells. By Northern analysis, the
two cell lines expressed similar levels of all these genes. However, after being 
treated with 5-AzaC, 32D Ro cells acquired the ability to generate EPO-dependent 
clones (1 clone/10(4) cells) which gave rise to EPO-dependent cell lines. All the
10 EPO-responsive cell lines independently isolated from 5-AzaC-treated 32D Ro
cells had erythroid morphology and expressed high levels of alpha- and
beta-globin. In contrast, none of the IL-3-dependent and granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-dependent clones concurrently isolated, as a control,
showed erythroid properties. Therefore, 5-AzaC treatment reactivates the
potential of the myeloid-restricted 32D Ro cells to generate EPO-responsive
erythroid clones suggesting that gene methylation played an important role in the
G-CSF-mediated restriction/activation of the differentiation potential of these
cells.

PMID: 12706120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Blood. 2003 Aug 1;102(3):896-905. Epub 2003 Apr 10.

Expression and domain-specific function of GATA-2 during differentiation of the
hematopoietic precursor cells in midgestation mouse embryos.

Minegishi N(1), Suzuki N, Yokomizo T, Pan X, Fujimoto T, Takahashi S, Hara T,
Miyajima A, Nishikawa S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Tsukuba, Japan.

The aorta-gonads-mesonephros (AGM) region of the mouse embryo has been assigned
as the origin of definitive hematopoiesis. The transcription factor GATA-2 has
specific but unclarified roles in early hematopoiesis. To elucidate the
expression profile of GATA-2, we prepared transgenic mouse lines containing the
green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene driven by GATA-2 gene regulatory elements.
We also prepared a mouse line in which GFP reporter sequences were inserted into 
the endogenous GATA-2 gene. Both mouse mutants expressed GFP in the early
hematopoietic tissues. The CD45 antigen, a marker of hematopoietic cells, was
expressed in a small fraction of transgene (TG)-derived GFP+ cells. The remaining
TG-GFP+/CD45- cells were adherent to plastic and produced CD45+ hematopoietic
cells abundantly when cultured in vitro. Exogenous expression of GATA-2 in
TG-GFP+/CD45- cells from the AGM region inhibited their differentiation into
CD45+ cells. Loss of GATA-2 function through the disruption of the GATA-2 locus
enhanced the earlier emergence of CD45+ cells in the yolk sac of the 9.5-day
conceptus. These results demonstrated that GATA-2 is expressed in the precursor
of hematopoietic cells and works as a gatekeeper to preserve their immaturity. A 
reduction of GATA-2 expression or activity is required for the differentiation of
precursors to hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 12689939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Genomics. 2003 Mar;81(3):249-59.

Comparative and functional analyses of LYL1 loci establish marsupial sequences as
a model for phylogenetic footprinting.

Chapman MA(1), Charchar FJ, Kinston S, Bird CP, Grafham D, Rogers J, Grützner F, 
Graves JA, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Comparative genomic sequence analysis is a powerful technique for identifying
regulatory regions in genomic DNA. However, its utility largely depends on the
evolutionary distances between the species involved. Here we describe the
screening of a genomic BAC library from the stripe-faced dunnart, Sminthopsis
macroura, formerly known as the narrow-footed marsupial mouse. We isolated a
clone containing the LYL1 locus, completely sequenced the 60.6-kb insert, and
compared it with orthologous human and mouse sequences. Noncoding homology was
substantially reduced in the human/dunnart analysis compared with human/mouse,
yet we could readily identify all promoters and exons. Human/mouse/dunnart
alignments of the LYL1 candidate promoter allowed us to identify putative
transcription factor binding sites, revealing a pattern highly reminiscent of
critical regulatory regions of the LYL1 paralogue, SCL. This newly identified
LYL1 promoter showed strong activity in myeloid progenitor cells and was bound in
vivo by Fli1, Elf1, and Gata2-transcription factors all previously shown to bind 
to the SCL stem cell enhancer. This study represents the first large-scale
comparative analysis involving marsupial genomic sequence and demonstrates that
such comparisons provide a powerful approach to characterizing mammalian
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12659809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2003 Mar;48(3):223-31.

[Analysis of hematopoietic differentiation using ES cell in vitro differentiation
induction system].

[Article in Japanese]

Kitajima K(1), Tanaka M, Nakano T, Era T.

Author information: 
(1)kitajima@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

PMID: 12652742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):140-5.

Regulation of YB-1 gene expression by GATA transcription factors.

Yokoyama H(1), Harigae H, Takahashi S, Takahashi S, Furuyama K, Kaku M, Yamamoto 
M, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor essential for erythroid cell development, and
knockdown of GATA-1 gene results in maturation arrest and transformation of
erythroblasts. To clarify the mechanism that gives rise to this abnormal
phenotype, genes that are aberrantly expressed in the spleen of heterozygous
GATA-1 knockdown mutant mouse (referred to as GATA-1 mutant mouse) were
identified by using cDNA array. One of these genes, YB-1, was found to be highly 
expressed in the spleen of GATA-1 mutant mouse. Reporter and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that the proximal GATA element in 5'-UTR region of
YB-1 gene functions positively in K562 cells. Furthermore, both GATA-1 and
GATA-2, which were transiently expressed in COS-7 cells, bound to this element
and activated the YB-1 promoter through this element. These results suggest that 
YB-1 functions under the regulation of GATA factors in erythroid differentiation 
and aberrant expression of YB-1 gene may result in dyserythropoiesis.

PMID: 12646178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Mar;105(3):271-80. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

Calcineurin is a potent regulator for skeletal muscle regeneration by association
with NFATc1 and GATA-2.

Sakuma K(1), Nishikawa J, Nakao R, Watanabe K, Totsuka T, Nakano H, Sano M,
Yasuhara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 456
Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi-hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Japan. ksakuma@basic.kpu-m.ac.jp

The molecular signaling pathways involved in regeneration after muscle damage
have not been identified. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that
calcineurin, a calcium-regulated phosphatase recently implicated in the signaling
of fiber-type conversion and muscle hypertrophy, is required to induce skeletal
muscle remodeling. The amount of calcineurin and dephosphorylated nuclear factor 
of activated T cells c1 (NFATc1) proteins was markedly increased in the
regenerating muscle of rats. The amount of calcineurin co-precipitating with
NFATc1 and GATA-2, and NFATc1 co-precipitating with GATA-2 gradually increased in
the tibialis anterior muscle after bupivacaine injection. Calcineurin protein was
present in the proliferating satellite cells labeled with BrdU in the damaged
muscle after 4 days. In contrast, calcineurin was not detected in the quiescent
nonactivating satellite cells expressing Myf-5. At 4 days post injection, many
macrophages detected in the damaged and regenerating area did not possess
calcineurin protein. Calcineurin protein was abundant in many myoblasts and
myotubes that expressed MyoD and myogenin at 4 and 6 days post injection. In the 
intact muscle, no immunoreactivity of calcineurin or BrdU was detected in the
cell membrane, cytosol or the extracellular connective tissue. In mice,
intraperitoneal injection of cyclosporin A, a potent inhibitor of calcineurin,
induced extensive inflammation, marked fiber atrophy, the appearance of immature 
myotubes, and calcification in the regenerating muscle compared with
phosphate-buffered saline-administered mice. Thus, calcineurin may have an
important role in muscle regeneration in association with NFATc1 and GATA-2.

PMID: 12557015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 1999 Sep;32(3):243-9.

[Analysis of the binding of GATA factors to the regulatory elements of human
beta-globin gene in hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Zhang SB, Jiang S, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai
200031, China.

HEL cells, a human erythroleukemia cell line, expressing mainly the gamma-globin 
genes, small amount of epsilon-globin gene, but not beta-globin gene. Our
previous studies demonstrated that beta-globin gene could be expressed in HEL
cells induced by hydroxyurea. However, the molecular mechenism is still unknown. 
Here the binding patterns of GATA factors (GATA-1 and GATA-2) to the regulatory
elements of human beta-globin gene were examined with the nuclear extracts from
hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells. Our results showed in EMSA assay
that GATA factors could bind to the core sequence of HS2(-10681 to -10971 bp),
the 3' flanking sequence of HS2 core(-10323 to -10680 bp) and the promoter of
human beta-globin gene(+20 to -112 bp). However, the binding patterns between
hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells were different. Furthermore, by using
Western-blot analysis, our data showed that the amount of GATA-2 was decreased in
hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells. In contrast to GATA-2, the amount of GATA-1 was
increased in hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells. These results showed that the
different members of GATA family might play different roles during the
differentiation of erythrocytes. GATA-1 may stimulate the differentiation of HEL 
cells, while GATA-2 can probably inhibit the differentiation of HEL cells.

PMID: 12548806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Jan 15;282(2):110-20.

Regulation of human erythropoiesis by activin A, BMP2, and BMP4, members of the
TGFbeta family.

Maguer-Satta V(1), Bartholin L, Jeanpierre S, Ffrench M, Martel S, Magaud JP,
Rimokh R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U453, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. maguer@lyon.fnclcc.fr

Activin A, BMP2, and BMP4, members of the TGFbeta family, have been implicated in
the regulation of hematopoiesis. Here we explore and compare, for the first time 
in human primary cells, the role of activin A, BMP2, and BMP4 during
erythropoiesis. Using in vitro erythroid differentiation of CD34(+) primary
cells, we obtained the main stages of early erythropoiesis, characterized at the 
molecular, biochemical, and functional levels. Our results indicate that BMP2
acts on early erythroid cells and activin A on a more differentiated population. 
We report an insight into the mechanism of commitment of erythropoiesis by
activin A and BMP2 involving two key events, increase in EPO-R and decrease in
GATA2 expression. Simultaneous addition of activin A with BMP molecules suggests 
that BMP2 and BMP4 differently affect activin A induction of erythropoiesis.
Follistatin and FLRG proteins downmodulate the effects of activin A and BMP2 on
erythroid maturation.

PMID: 12531697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):6976-84. Epub 2002 Dec 18.

Thrombin stimulation of vascular adhesion molecule-1 in endothelial cells is
mediated by protein kinase C (PKC)-delta-NF-kappa B and PKC-zeta-GATA signaling
pathways.

Minami T(1), Abid MR, Zhang J, King G, Kodama T, Aird WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We recently demonstrated that thrombin induces the expression of vascular
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) in endothelial cells by an NF-kappaB- and
GATA-dependent mechanism. In the present study, we describe the signaling
pathways that mediate this response. Thrombin stimulation of the VCAM-1 gene and 
promoter in human umbilical vein endothelial cells was inhibited by preincubation
with the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor, LY294002, the protein kinase C 
(PKC)-delta inhibitor, rottlerin, a PKC-zeta peptide inhibitor, or by
overexpression of dominant negative (DN)-PKC-zeta. In electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, thrombin-mediated induction of NF-kappaB p65 binding to two
NF-kappaB motifs in the upstream promoter region of VCAM-1 was blocked by
LY294002 and rottlerin, whereas the inducible binding of GATA-2 to a tandem GATA 
motif was inhibited by LY294002 and the PKC-zeta peptide inhibitor. In
co-transfection assays, thrombin stimulation of a minimal promoter containing
multimerized VCAM-1 NF-kappaB sites was inhibited by DN-PKC-delta but not
DN-PKC-zeta. In contrast, thrombin-mediated transactivation of a minimal promoter
containing tandem VCAM-1 GATA motifs was inhibited by DN-PKC-zeta but not
DN-PKC-delta. Finally, thrombin failed to induce VCAM-1 expression in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Taken together, these data suggest that the endothelial
cell-specific effect of thrombin on VCAM-1 expression involves the coordinate
activity of PKC-delta-NF-kappaB and PKC-zeta-GATA signaling pathways.

PMID: 12493764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;112(1):42-9. Epub 2002 Oct 16.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the GATA1 cofactor human FOG1 and
assessment of its binding to GATA1 proteins carrying D218 substitutions.

Freson K(1), Thys C, Wittewrongel C, Vermylen J, Hoylaerts MF, Van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven,
UZ-Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Erythroid and megakaryocytic lineage differentiation and maturation are regulated
via cooperation between transcription factor GATA1 and its essential cofactor
friend-of-GATA1 (FOG1). The interaction between these two murine proteins is well
studied in vitro and depends on the binding of Fog1 to the N-terminal zinc finger
(N-finger) of Gata1. We identified the human FOG1 gene on chromosome 16q24 and
found expression mainly in hematopoietic cells and also in several other tissues.
Sequencing of FOG1 cDNA revealed a 1006 amino-acid protein that contained nine
zinc fingers, highly homologous to murine Fog1 fingers. The amino acid sequence
and the GATA1-binding capacity of the human and murine finger 5 are however
different. Ex vivo binding studies demonstrated that FOG1 interacts with both
GATA1 and GATA2. We and others have described patients with mutations in the
GATA1 N-finger (V205 M, D218G, D218Y, or G208S), who suffer from
macrothrombocytopenia and erythrocyte abnormalities. We now show ex vivo that the
interaction between GATA1 and FOG1 is indeed disturbed in platelets and
erythrocytes of those patients carrying D218 GATA1 mutations. The identification 
of the human FOG1 gene will enable the genetic screening of patients with non
X-linked thrombocytopenia and dyserythropoiesis.

PMID: 12483298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Br J Haematol. 2002 Dec;119(4):1098-105.

Hydroxyurea exerts bi-modal dose-dependent effects on erythropoiesis in human
cultured erythroid cells via distinct pathways.

Wang M(1), Tang DC, Liu W, Chin K, Zhu JG, Fibach E, Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Hydroxyurea (HU) has been shown to increase the proportion of fetal haemoglobin
(HbF) in most sickle cell patients. A low-dosage regimen increased total
haemoglobin (Hb) levels in some thalassaemia intermedia patients by
preferentially increasing beta-globin biosynthesis. To further characterize these
apparent dose-dependent effects of HU, we examined erythroid cells exposed to HU 
(5-100 micro mol/l) in two-phase liquid culture. Low doses (from 5 to 25 micro
mol/l) increased Hb levels by up to 2.7-fold, and a high dose (100 micro mol/l)
increased Hb levels when added at d 3-6 of phase II, with no significant changes 
in response to HU during the late stage of phase II culture (> or = 9 d). HU
exposure during d 0-3 of phase II culture increased the number of erythroid
colonies to a maximum of fivefold at 5 micro mol/l HU. GATA-1 mRNA was
downregulated at a high dose and GATA-2 was dose dependently upregulated over a
lower dosage range. Treatment with 100 micro mol/l HU dramatically upregulated
the death receptor DR-5, caspase 3, as determined by cDNA microarray analysis. In
contrast, 10 micro mol/l HU modestly upregulated mRNA levels of the early growth 
response gene. Our results suggest that HU exerts concentration-dependent effects
on HbF production and erythropoiesis and that these two effects are mediated by
distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 12472594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Immunity. 2002 Nov;17(5):665-76.

Cooperative and antagonistic interplay between PU.1 and GATA-2 in the
specification of myeloid cell fates.

Walsh JC(1), DeKoter RP, Lee HJ, Smith ED, Lancki DW, Gurish MF, Friend DS,
Stevens RL, Anastasi J, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiological Sciences, The University of
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

PU.1 and GATA transcription factors appear to antagonize each other's function in
the development of distinct lineages of the hematopoietic system. In contrast, we
demonstrate that PU.1, like GATA-2, is essential for the generation of mast
cells. PU.1-/- hematopoietic progenitors can be propagated in IL-3 and
differentiate into mast cells or macrophages upon restoration of PU.1 activity.
Using these progenitors and a conditionally activatable PU.1 protein, we show
that PU.1 can negatively regulate expression of the GATA-2 gene. In the absence
of GATA-2, PU.1 promotes macrophage but not mast cell differentiation.
Reexpression of GATA-2 in such progenitors enables the generation of mast cells. 
We propose a developmental model in which cooperative function or antagonistic
crossregulation by PU.1 of GATA-2 promotes distinct myeloid cell fates.

PMID: 12433372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Acta Haematol. 2002;108(4):237-45.

Roles of hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 in the development
of red blood cell lineage.

Ohneda K(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 play key roles in gene regulation
during erythropoiesis. Gene ablation studies in mouse revealed that GATA-2 is
crucial for the maintenance and proliferation of immature hematopoietic
progenitors, whereas GATA-1 is essential for the survival of erythroid
progenitors as well as the terminal differentiation of erythroid cells. Both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 are regulated in a cell-type-specific manner, their expression 
being strictly controlled during the development and differentiation of erythroid
cells. Closer examination revealed a cross-regulatory mechanism by which GATA-1
can control the expression of GATA-2 and vice versa, possibly via essential GATA 
binding sites in their cis-acting elements. In addition, recent studies
identified several human inherited hematopoietic disorders that are caused by
mutations in cis-acting GATA binding motifs or mutations in GATA-1 itself.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12432220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Development. 2002 Dec;129(24):5683-95.

Adult and embryonic blood and endothelium derive from distinct precursor
populations which are differentially programmed by BMP in Xenopus.

Walmsley M(1), Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Blood and blood vessels develop in close association in vertebrate embryos and
loss-of-function mutations suggest common genetic regulation. By the criteria of 
co-expression of blood and endothelial genes, and lineage tracing of progeny, we 
locate two distinct populations of progenitors for blood and endothelial cells in
developing Xenopus embryos. The first population is located immediately posterior
to the cement gland during neurula stages and gives rise to embryonic blood and
vitelline veins in the anterior ventral blood island (aVBI), and to the
endocardium of the heart. The second population resides in the dorsal lateral
plate mesoderm, and contains precursors of adult blood stem cells and the major
vessels. Both populations differentiate into endothelial cells in situ but
migrate to new locations to differentiate into blood, suggesting that their
micro-environments are unsuitable for haematopoietic differentiation. Both
require BMP for their formation, even the Spemann organiser-derived aVBI, but
individual genes are affected differentially. Thus, in the embryonic population, 
expression of the blood genes, SCL and GATA2, depend on BMP signalling while
expression of the endothelial gene, Xfli1, does not. By contrast, Xfli1
expression in the adult, DLP population does require BMP. These results indicate 
that both adult and the anterior component of embryonic blood in Xenopus embryos 
derive from populations of progenitors that also give rise to endothelial cells. 
However, the two populations give rise to distinct regions of the vasculature and
are programmed differentially by BMP.

PMID: 12421708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Br J Haematol. 2002 Nov;119(2):510-5.

Developmental changes in the expression of transcription factors GATA-1, -2 and
-3 during the onset of human medullary haematopoiesis.

Dame C(1), Sola MC, Fandrey J, Rimsza LM, Freitag P, Knöpfle G, Christensen RD,
Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville 32610-0296, USA. 
damec@peds.ufl.edu

Regulation of gene expression during the ontogeny of haematopoiesis in the human 
fetal bone marrow is poorly understood. Studies in mice demonstrated that GATA-1,
-2 and -3 play pivotal roles in haematopoiesis. In this study, we identified
GATA-1-, GATA-2- and GATA-3-expressing cells in bone marrow sections and analysed
the expression of GATA-transcription factors during the development of human
fetal bone marrow haematopoiesis using semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We showed that GATA-1, -2 and
-3 were expressed only in haematopoietic cells in the bone marrow. RT-PCR
analysis demonstrated that (1) GATA-1 expression significantly increased during
gestation; (2) GATA-2 expression peaked at the onset of medullary haematopoiesis,
declined thereafter, and remained at a constant level after 30 weeks post
conception; and (3) GATA-3 expression revealed no changes during development. The
results indicated that the onset of medullary haematopoiesis in humans is
accompanied by high expression of GATA-2, reflecting high proliferation rates of 
early haematopoietic progenitor cells, whereas expression of GATA-1 mirrors
haematopoietic activity.

PMID: 12406094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5093-101.

HrT is required for cardiovascular development in zebrafish.

Szeto DP(1), Griffin KJ, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7530, USA.

The recently identified zebrafish T-box gene hrT is expressed in the developing
heart and in the endothelial cells forming the dorsal aorta. Orthologs of hrT are
expressed in cardiovascular cells from Drosophila to mouse, suggesting that the
function of hrT is evolutionarily conserved. The role of hrT in cardiovascular
development, however, has not thus far been determined in any animal model. Using
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides, we show that zebrafish embryos lacking hrT
function have dysmorphic hearts and an absence of blood circulation. Although the
early events in heart formation were normal in hrT morphant embryos, subsequently
the hearts failed to undergo looping, and late onset defects in chamber
morphology and gene expression were observed. In particular, we found that the
loss of hrT function led to a dramatic upregulation of tbx5, a gene required for 
normal heart morphogenesis. Conversely, we show that overexpression of hrT causes
a significant downregulation of tbx5, indicating that one key role of hrT is to
regulate the levels of tbx5. Secondly, we found that HrT is required to inhibit
the expression of the blood lineage markers gata1 and gata2 in the most posterior
lateral plate mesoderm. Finally, we show that HrT is required for vasculogenesis 
in the trunk, leading to similar vascular defects to those observed in midline
mutants such as floating head. hrT expression in the vascular progenitors depends
upon midline mesoderm, indicating that this expression is one important component
of the response to a midline-derived signal during vascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12397116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Blood. 2002 Nov 15;100(10):3828-31. Epub 2002 Jul 5.

Immortalization of yolk sac-derived precursor cells.

Yu WM(1), Hawley TS, Hawley RG, Qu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis and the Flow Cytometry Facility, Jerome H. Holland
Laboratory for the Biomedical Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, 
USA.

Hematopoiesis initiates in the extraembryonic yolk sac. To isolate various types 
of precursor cells from this blood cell-forming tissue, yolk sac cells were
immortalized by retroviral-mediated expression of the HOX11 homeobox-containing
gene. Among the cell lines derived, some were able to spontaneously generate
adherent stromal-like cells capable of taking up acetylated low-density
lipoprotein, and they could be induced to form tubelike structures when cultured 
on Matrigel. Although these cell lines were negative for hematopoietic cell
surface markers, they gave rise to hematopoietic colonies--containing cells
belonging to the monocytic, megakaryocytic, and definitive erythroid
lineages--when plated in methylcellulose medium supplemented with hematopoietic
growth factors. Low amounts of Flk-1 mRNA could be detected in these cells, and
they showed significant responsiveness to vascular endothelial growth factor,
stem cell factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, and interleukin 6. They also
expressed the transcription factors SCL, GATA2, GATA1, PU.1, and c-myb. These
yolk sac-derived cell lines may represent a transitional stage of early
hematopoietic development.

PMID: 12393673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Blood. 2002 Nov 15;100(10):3512-20. Epub 2002 Jul 12.

GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera regulates cytokine-dependent growth of
hematopoietic cells through accumulation of p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1) proteins.

Ezoe S(1), Matsumura I, Nakata S, Gale K, Ishihara K, Minegishi N, Machii T,
Kitamura T, Yamamoto M, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Molecular Oncology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

GATA-2 is considered to be essential for the development, maintenance, and
function of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, it was also reported that
GATA-2 inhibits the growth of HSCs. To examine the role of GATA-2 in the growth
of hematopoietic cells, we introduced an estradiol-inducible form of GATA-2
(GATA-2/estrogen receptor [ER]) into interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent cell lines,
Ba/F3, 32D, and FDC-P1. Estradiol-induced GATA-2 suppressed c-myc mRNA expression
and inhibited IL-3-dependent growth in these clones. As for this mechanism,
GATA-2 was found to inhibit ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent degradation of
p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1) and to induce their accumulation by repressing the
expression of Skp2 and Cul1, both of which are components of the ubiquitin ligase
for p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1). Overexpression of c-myc restored the expression of
Skp2 and Cul1 mRNA, reduced the amounts of p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1) proteins, and 
canceled GATA-2-induced growth suppression, suggesting that down-regulation of
c-myc expression may be primarily responsible for GATA-2-induced growth
suppression. Next, we transduced retrovirus containing GATA-2/ER into murine bone
marrow mononuclear cells (MNCs) and stem/progenitor (Sca-1(+)Lin(-)) cells.
GATA-2/ER suppressed cytokine-dependent growth of MNCs and Sca-1(+)Lin(-) cells
by about 70%, which was also accompanied by the reduced expression of c-myc,
Skp2, and Cul1 mRNA and the accumulation of p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1) proteins. In 
addition, the amount of GATA-2 protein was found to decline in hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells that were promoted to enter cell cycle by the stimulation
with cytokines. These results suggest that GATA-2 may regulate expression levels 
of p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1), thereby contributing to the quiescence of
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

PMID: 12393444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Oct 31;196(1-2):53-66.

Domains of Pit-1 required for transcriptional synergy with GATA-2 on the TSH beta
gene.

Gordon DF(1), Woodmansee WW, Black JN, Dowding JM, Bendrick-Peart J, Wood WM,
Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Box
B151, 4200 E Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA. david.gordon@uchsc.edu

Previous studies showed that Pit-1 functionally cooperates with GATA-2 to
stimulate transcription of the TSH beta gene. Pit-1 and GATA-2 are uniquely
coexpressed in pituitary thyrotropes and activate transcription by binding to a
composite promoter element. To define the domains of Pit-1 important for
functional cooperativity with GATA-2, we cotransfected a set of Pit-1 deletions
with an mTSH beta-luciferase reporter. Plasmids were titrated to express
equivalent amounts of protein. A mutant containing a deletion of the hinge region
between the POU and homeodomains retained the ability to fully synergize with
GATA-2. In contrast, mutants containing deletions of amino acids 2-80 or 72-125
demonstrated 56 or 34% of the synergy found with the full-length protein,
suggesting that these regions contributed to cooperativity. Mutants with
deletions of the POU-specific or homeodomain further reduced the effect
signifying the requirement for DNA binding. GST interaction studies demonstrated 
that only the homeodomain of Pit-1 interacted with GATA-2. Finally, several
mutations between the Pit-1 and GATA-2 sites on the TSH beta promoter reduced
binding for each factor and greatly reduced ternary complex formation. Thus
multiple domains of Pit-1 are required for full synergy with GATA-2 and sequences
between the two binding sites contribute to co-occupancy with both factors on the
proximal TSH beta promoter.

PMID: 12385825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Oct;16(10):2243-54.

Cloning and characterization of a novel endothelial promoter of the human CYP19
(aromatase P450) gene that is up-regulated in breast cancer tissue.

Sebastian S(1), Takayama K, Shozu M, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Intratumoral expression of aromatase P450 (P450arom) promotes the growth of
breast tumors via increased local estrogen concentration. We cloned a novel
101-bp untranslated first exon (I.7) that comprises the 5'-end of 29-54% of
P450arom transcripts isolated from breast cancer tissues (n = 7). The levels of
P450arom transcripts with exon I.7 were significantly increased in breast tumor
tissues and adipose tissue adjacent to tumors. We identified a promoter
immediately upstream of exon I.7 and mapped this to about 36 kb upstream of ATG
translation start site of the CYP19 (aromatase cytochrome P450) gene. Sequence
analysis of I.7 revealed a TATA-less promoter containing an initiator, two
consensus GATA sites, and cis-regulatory elements found in megakaryocytes and
endothelial type promoters. Luciferase activity directed by the promoter I.7
sequence (-299/+81 bp) was 4-fold greater than a minimum length promoter sequence
(-35/+81 bp) in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1), but only 2-fold
greater in MCF-7 breast malignant epithelial cells. There was no promoter
activity in primary breast adipose fibroblasts. Site-directed mutations
demonstrated that maximal basal promoter activity required two GATA motifs at
-146/-141 bp and -196/-191 bp. Gel shift and deoxyribonuclease I footprinting
assays demonstrated the binding of GATA-2 transcription factor but not GATA-1 to 
the -196/-191-bp region. Overexpression of GATA-2 in HMEC-1 cells increases
promoter I.7 activity by 5-fold. In conclusion, promoter I.7 is a
GATA-2-regulated endothelial promoter of the human CYP19 gene and may increase
estrogen biosynthesis in vascular endothelial cells of breast cancer. The
activity of this promoter may also be important for intracrine and paracrine
effects of estrogen on blood vessels.

PMID: 12351690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. FASEB J. 2002 Nov;16(13):1811-3. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Inhibition of erythropoietin gene expression signaling involves the transcription
factors GATA-2 and NF-kappaB.

La Ferla K(1), Reimann C, Jelkmann W, Hellwig-Bürgel T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

The anemia of chronic inflammatory and malignant diseases is partly due to
impaired synthesis of the hormone erythropoietin (Epo). The proinflammatory
cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-alpha) suppress
in vitro Epo gene expression and Epo protein secretion. However, the molecular
mechanisms of this inhibition are poorly understood. The human Epo promoter and
the 5' flanking region contain several recognition sequences for transcription
factors acting either positively or negatively. Herein, we investigated the roles
of the transcription factors GATA-2 and NF-kappaB in the modulation of Epo gene
expression by IL-1beta and TNF-alpha in the human hepatoma cell line HepG2.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed increased GATA-2 and NF-kappaB DNA
binding in cells treated with IL-1beta or TNF-alpha. Reporter gene assays with a 
sequence from the Epo promoter in front of the firefly luciferase gene showed
that the cytokines reduced Epo reporter gene activity. Functional inactivation of
GATA-2 and NF-kappaB by oligo-decoy techniques prevented the inhibition of Epo
production by IL-1beta and TNF-alpha. In HepG2 cells stably transfected with a
dominant-negative form of IkappaBalpha, the activation of NF-kappaB was
inhibited, while Epo mRNA levels and Epo secretion increased. Thus, both GATA-2
and NF-kappaB seem to be involved in the suppression of Epo gene expression by
IL-1beta and TNF-alpha in vitro and may be responsible for impaired Epo synthesis
in inflammatory diseases in vivo.

PMID: 12223449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):30-43.

GATA proteins identify a novel ventral interneuron subclass in the developing
chick spinal cord.

Karunaratne A(1), Hargrave M, Poh A, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, 4072, Australia. a.karunaratne@salk.edu

Members of the GATA transcription factor gene family have been implicated in a
variety of developmental processes, including that of the vertebrate central
nervous system. However, the role of GATA proteins in spinal cord development
remains unresolved. In this study, we investigated the expression and function of
two GATA proteins, GATA2 and GATA3, in the developing chick spinal cord. We show 
that both proteins are expressed by a distinct subpopulation of ventral
interneurons that share the same dorsoventral position as CHX10-positive V2
interneurons. However, no coexpression is observed between the two GATA proteins 
and CHX10. By in vivo notochord grafting and cyclopamine treatment, we
demonstrate that the spatially restricted pattern of GATA3 expression is
regulated, at least in part, by the signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog. In
addition, we further show that Sonic hedgehog induces GATA3 expression in a
dose-dependent manner. Using in ovo electroporations, we also demonstrate that
GATA2 is upstream of GATA3 in the same epigenetic cascade and that GATA3 is
capable of inducing GATA2 expression in vivo. Furthermore, the ectopically
expressed GATA proteins can repress differentiation of other ventral cell fates, 
but not the development of progenitor populations identified by PAX protein
expression. Taken together, our findings strongly suggest an important role for
GATA2 and GATA3 proteins in the establishment of a distinct ventral interneuron
subpopulation in the developing chick spinal cord.

PMID: 12217316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Exp Hematol. 2002 Aug;30(8):887-95.

GATA transcription in a small rhodamine 123(low)CD34(+) subpopulation of a
peripheral blood-derived CD34(-)CD105(+) mesenchymal cell line.

Conrad C(1), Gottgens B, Kinston S, Ellwart J, Huss R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Based on previous animal experiments that suggest the plasticity of
peripheral blood-derived, CD34(-) stem cell lines, the aim of this study was to
isolate CD34(-) stem cell lines from human peripheral blood cells and obtain
evidence of their multipotency and plasticity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adherent growing cells were isolated from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from a healthy volunteer donor and different cell clones were
established after SV40 large-T-antigen-mediated immortalization. The
immunophenotype of the cell lines was investigated by flow cytometry. One
particular cell clone, V54/2, was stained with rhodamine 123, and the Rh123(low) 
and Rh123(high) subpopulations were sorted for a reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction gene expression survey and distinct differences in morphology and 
biologic behavior.
RESULTS: The peripheral blood-derived and fibroblast-like cell line V54/2
expressed high levels of CD10 and CD105 and showed only a very low level
expression of CD34 (<1.0%) and CD117 (c-kit). Among the entire CD34(-)CD105(+)
cell population that transcribed factors such as Myb, Tie-1, and VEGF, there was 
a small Rh123(low)CD34(+) subpopulation that transcribed significant levels of
several members of the GATA family of transcription factors. The morphology of
the Rh123(low)CD34(+) (also expressing the P-glycoprotein) was different compared
to the Rh123(high)CD34(-) population. Mesenchymal differentiation into glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)(+) glial cells could be shown from the entire
CD34(-)CD105(+) cell population.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings provide evidence that it is possible to isolate
CD34(-)CD105(+) mesenchymal stem cell lines from human peripheral blood cells
that contain a small subpopulation of CD34(+) and GATA-transcribing cells. Those 
cells are potential hematopoietic progenitors and can be recruited from the
CD34(-) stem cell pool. The plasticity of stem cells seems to require essential
molecular tools, such as a panel of transcription factors, to respond to the
environmental demand within a biologic system.

PMID: 12160840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Aug;269(15):3607-18.

Transcriptional regulation of erythropoiesis. Fine tuning of combinatorial
multi-domain elements.

Perry C(1), Soreq H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel.

Haematopoiesis, the differentiation of haematopoietic stem cells and progenitors 
into various lineages, involves complex interactions of transcription factors
that modulate the expression of downstream genes and mediate proliferation and
differentiation signals. Commitment of pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells to
the erythroid lineage induces erythropoiesis, the production of red blood cells. 
This process involves a concerted progression through an erythroid burst forming 
unit (BFU-E), an erythroid colony forming unit (CFU-E), proerythroblast and an
erythroblast. The terminally differentiated erythrocytes, in mammals, lose their 
nucleus yet function several more months. A well-coordinated cohort of
transcription factors regulates the formation, survival, proliferation and
differentiation of multipotent progenitor into the erythroid lineage. Here, we
discuss broad-spectrum factors essential for self-renewal and/or differentiation 
of multipotent cells as well as specific factors required for proper erythroid
development. These factors may operate solely or as part of transcriptional
complexes, and exert activation or repression. Sequence comparisons reveal
evolutionarily conserved modular composition for these factors; X-ray
crystallography demonstrates that they include multidomain elements (e.g. HLH or 
zinc finger motifs), consistent with their complex interactions with other
proteins. Finally, transfections and genomic studies show that the timing of each
factor's expression during the hematopoietic process, the cell lineages affected 
and the existing combination of other factors determine the erythroid cell fate.

PMID: 12153557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Leukemia. 2002 Aug;16(8):1563-5.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 gene expression is related to the severity of dysplasia in
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Fadilah SA, Cheong SK, Roslan H, Rozie-Hanisa M, Yen GK.

PMID: 12145700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Plant Mol Biol. 2002 Sep;50(1):43-57.

Arabidopsis thaliana GATA factors: organisation, expression and DNA-binding
characteristics.

Teakle GR(1), Manfield IW, Graham JF, Gilmartin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds, UK.

Many light-responsive promoters contain GATA motifs and a number of nuclear
proteins have been defined that interact with these elements. Type-IV zinc-finger
proteins have been extensively characterised in animals and fungi and are
referred to as GATA factors by virtue of their affinity for promoter elements
containing this sequence. We previously identified cDNA sequences representing
four Arabidopsis thaliana type-TV zinc-finger proteins. Here we define the
organisation and expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3 and GATA-4 as well as
DNA-binding characteristics of their encoded proteins. Transcripts from all four 
genes can be detected in all tissues examined suggesting that they are not
developmentally regulated at the level of transcription. In vitro binding
experiments with Escherichia coli-derived recombinant proteins were performed
using motifs previously defined as targets for nuclear GATA-binding proteins.
These studies reveal differences in DNA binding specificity of GATA-1 as compared
to the other three proteins. In vivo protein-DNA interactions monitored by yeast 
one-hybrid assays reveal different binding characteristics as compared to those
defined with E. coli-derived recombinant protein. Trans-activation of gene
expression by the four Arabidopsis proteins via some, but not all, DNA elements
tested indicates that the Arabidopsis proteins can form functional interactions
with previously defined promoter elements containing GATA motifs. We conclude
that the Arabidopsis type-IV zinc-finger proteins may represent the previously
defined family of nuclear GATA-binding proteins implicated in light-responsive
transcription.

PMID: 12139008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jul 9;99(14):9237-42. Epub 2002 Jun 20.

GATA-factor dependence of the multitype zinc-finger protein FOG-1 for its
essential role in megakaryopoiesis.

Chang AN(1), Cantor AB, Fujiwara Y, Lodish MB, Droho S, Crispino JD, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The function of GATA transcription factors in diverse developmental contexts
depends in part on physical interaction with cofactors of the Friend of GATA
(FOG) family. However, previous studies indicate that FOG-1 may play a
GATA-1-independent role in early megakaryopoiesis, suggesting that FOG proteins
might act in a GATA factor-independent manner. Here, we have generated mouse
knock-in (KI) mutants harboring a critical valine-to-glycine substitution in the 
amino-terminal zinc fingers of GATA-1 and GATA-2 to ablate FOG interaction. In
contrast to male GATA-1(KI) (GATA-1 is located on the X-chromosome) or
GATA-2(KI/KI) mice, compound GATA-1(KI) GATA-2(KI/KI) mutant mice display
complete megakaryopoietic failure, a phenocopy of FOG-1(-/-) mice. We conclude
that FOG-1 requires an interaction with either GATA-1 or -2 as part of its
essential role in early megakaryopoiesis. On the basis of these and previous
reports, we infer that GATA factor dependence is a critical aspect of FOG protein
function.

PMCID: PMC123124
PMID: 12077323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Seikagaku. 2002 May;74(5):398-402.

[Transcription factors regulating hematopoiesis: researches spanning from
molecule to whole body].

[Article in Japanese]

Minegishi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical Technology and Nursing, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577.

PMID: 12073612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Med Genet. 2002 Jun;39(6):E30.

Mutation analysis in the candidate Möbius syndrome genes PGT and GATA2 on
chromosome 3 and EGR2 on chromosome 10.

Van Der Zwaag B, Verzijl HT, Beltran-Valero De Bernabe D, Schuster VL, Van
Bokhoven H, Kremer H, Van Reen M, Wichers GH, Brunner HG, Padberg GW.

PMCID: PMC1735152
PMID: 12070262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):3060-9.

GATA-2 and GATA-2/ER display opposing activities in the development and
differentiation of blood progenitors.

Kitajima K(1), Masuhara M, Era T, Enver T, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

GATA-2 is a zinc finger transcription factor essential for the development of
hematopoiesis. While GATA-2 is generally considered to play an important role in 
the biology of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, its function within these
compartments is not well understood. Here we have employed both conditional
expression of GATA-2 and conditional activation of a GATA-2/estrogen receptor
(ER) chimera to examine the effect of enforced GATA-2 expression in the
development and differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors from murine
embryonic stem cells. Consistent with the phenotype of GATA-2 null animals,
conditional expression of GATA-2 from a tetracycline-inducible promoter enhanced 
the production of hematopoietic progenitors. Conditional activation of a
GATA-2/ER chimera produced essentially opposite effects to those observed with
conditional GATA-2 expression. GATA-2 and GATA-2/ER differ in their binding
activities and transcriptional interactions from other hematopoietic-associated
transcription factors such as c-Myb and PU.1. While we have exploited these
differences in activity to explore the transcriptional networks underlying
hematopoietic cell fate determination, our results suggest that care should be
taken in interpreting results obtained using only chimeric proteins.

PMCID: PMC126056
PMID: 12065419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):3039-50.

Establishing the transcriptional programme for blood: the SCL stem cell enhancer 
is regulated by a multiprotein complex containing Ets and GATA factors.

Göttgens B(1), Nastos A, Kinston S, Piltz S, Delabesse EC, Stanley M, Sanchez MJ,
Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Stem cells are a central feature of metazoan biology. Haematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) represent the best-characterized example of this phenomenon, but the
molecular mechanisms responsible for their formation remain obscure. The stem
cell leukaemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor with an essential role in specifying HSCs. Here we have addressed the
transcriptional hierarchy responsible for HSC formation by characterizing an SCL 
3' enhancer that targets expression to HSCs and endothelium and their bipotential
precursors, the haemangioblast. We have identified three critical motifs, which
are essential for enhancer function and bind GATA-2, Fli-1 and Elf-1 in vivo. Our
results suggest that these transcription factors are key components of an
enhanceosome responsible for activating SCL transcription and establishing the
transcriptional programme required for HSC formation.

PMCID: PMC126046
PMID: 12065417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Exp Med. 2002 Jun 3;195(11):1379-86.

Essential and instructive roles of GATA factors in eosinophil development.

Hirasawa R(1), Shimizu R, Takahashi S, Osawa M, Takayanagi S, Kato Y, Onodera M, 
Minegishi N, Yamamoto M, Fukao K, Taniguchi H, Nakauchi H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

GATA transcription factors are major regulators of hematopoietic and immune
system. Among GATA factors, GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 play crucial roles in the 
development of erythroid cells, hematopoietic stem, and progenitor cells, and T
helper type 2 (Th2) cells, respectively. A high level of GATA-1 and GATA-2
expression has been observed in eosinophils, but their roles in eosinophil
development remain uncertain both in vitro and in vivo. Here we show that
enforced expression of GATA-1 in human primary myeloid progenitor cells
completely switches myeloid cell fate into eosinophils. Expression of GATA-1
exclusively promotes development and terminal maturation of eosinophils.
Functional domain analyses revealed that the COOH-terminal finger is essential
for this capacity while the other domains are dispensable. Importantly,
GATA-1-deficient mice failed to develop eosinophil progenitors in the fetal
liver. On the other hand, GATA-2 also showed instructive capacity comparable to
GATA-1 in vitro and efficiently compensated for GATA-1 deficiency in terms of
eosinophil development in vivo, indicating that proper accumulation of GATA
factors is critical for eosinophil development. Taken together, our findings
establish essential and instructive roles of GATA factors in eosinophil
development. GATA-1 and GATA-2 could be novel molecular targets for therapeutic
approaches to allergic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2193540
PMID: 12045236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int J Hematol. 2002 May;75(4):376-81.

GATA suppresses erythropoietin gene expression through GATA site in mouse
erythropoietin gene promoter.

Imagawa S(1), Suzuki N, Ohmine K, Obara N, Mukai HY, Ozawa K, Yamamoto M,
Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. simagawa@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

The promoter and enhancer elements of the mouse erythropoietin (mEpo) gene, which
have high homology with those of the human erythropoietin (hEpo) gene, were fused
with luciferase. The construct was transfected into erythropoietin-producing
hepatoma cell line (Hep3B) cells by lipofectin with lacZ as an internal standard.
The wild type (TGATA) showed a 39.5-fold increase in induction by hypoxia. Mouse 
GATA-2 inhibited the hypoxic induction of the wild-type (m3), promoterluciferase 
construct but not the hypoxic induction of the mutant (m4, 5) promoter-luciferase
constructs. N(G)-monomethyl L-arginine (L-NMMA) inhibited the hypoxic induction
of the m3 promoter-luciferase construct, but this inhibition was recovered by
L-arginine. H2O2 also inhibited the hypoxic induction of the m3
promoter-luciferase construct, but this inhibition was recovered by catalase. Gel
shift assays performed on nuclear extracts of 293 cells overexpressing mGATA-1,
-2, and -3 revealed that mGATA-1, -2, and -3 bind to the TGATA element of the
mEpo promoter. These results indicate that mGATA binds to the TGATA site of the
mEpo promoter and negatively regulates mEpo gene expression. Negative regulation 
of mEpo gene by GATA transcriptional factors is discussed.

PMID: 12041667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27144-53. Epub 2002 May 21.

GATA factors are essential for transcription of the survival gene E4bp4 and the
viability response of interleukin-3 in Ba/F3 hematopoietic cells.

Yu YL(1), Chiang YJ, Yen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, No. 128, Sec. 2, Yen-Jiou-Yuan Road, Taipei, 115 Taiwan.

E4bp4, a member of the basic region/leucine zipper transcription factor
superfamily, is up-regulated by the interleukin-3 (IL-3) signaling pathway and
plays an important role in the anti-apoptotic response of IL-3. In this study, we
demonstrated that E4bp4 is regulated by IL-3 mainly at the transcriptional level.
Promoter analysis revealed that a GATA motif downstream of a major transcription 
initiation site is essential for E4bp4 expression in the IL-3-dependent Ba/F3
cell line. Gel shift assays demonstrated that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins
bind to the E4bp4 GATA site in vitro, and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
further confirmed the in vivo binding of GATA-1 to the E4bp4 promoter.
Overexpression of GATA-1 alone transactivates the E4bp4 reporter, whereas
transactivation of the E4bp4 reporter by GATA-2 is dependent on the stimulation
of IL-3. Last, we demonstrated that alteration of GATA-1 binding to the GATA site
by stably overexpressing GATA-1 or a GATA-1 mutant containing only the
DNA-binding domain not only modulates the expression of the E4bp4 gene but also
influences apoptosis induced by IL-3 removal. Taken together, our results suggest
that the GATA factors play an important role in transducing the survival signal
of IL-3, and one of their cellular targets is E4bp4.

PMID: 12023274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23872-81. Epub 2002 Apr 18.

Cooperative interaction of Xvent-2 and GATA-2 in the activation of the ventral
homeobox gene Xvent-1B.

Friedle H(1), Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein Allee 11, Ulm 89081,
Germany.

The Xvent family of homeobox transcription factors is essential for the
establishment of the dorsal-ventral body axis during Xenopus embryogenesis. In
contrast to Xvent-2B and other members of the Xvent-2 subfamily, Xvent-1B is not 
a direct response gene of bone morphogenetic protein-4 signaling. Xvent-1B is
activated by Xvent-2, but CHX experiments revealed the requirement of additional 
factors. In this study, we report on the cooperative effect of Xvent-2 and the
zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 on the promoter of the Xvent-1B gene. We 
show that GATA-2 is a direct target gene of bone morphogenetic protein-4 and that
GATA-2 interacts with Xvent-2 to activate transcription of Xvent-1B. Both
transcription factors bind to distinct elements within the Xvent-1B promoter, and
GATA-2 physically interacts with the C-terminal domain of Xvent-2.
Promoter/reporter studies in Xenopus embryos revealed that full activation of
Xvent-1B requires both Xvent-2 and GATA-2. Moreover, the two factors are
sufficient to direct transcription of Xvent-1B in the presence of CHX at the
ventral side of the embryo. The failure of both factors to activate Xvent-1B on
the dorsal side suggests the existence of a dorsal inhibitor. This inhibitor is
likely a component of the dorsal Wnt signaling pathway because nuclear
translocation of beta-catenin before midblastula transition results in a
suppression of Xvent-1B transcription.

PMID: 11964398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Blood. 2002 May 1;99(9):3404-10.

Interactions of GATA-2 with the promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF)
protein, its homologue FAZF, and the t(11;17)-generated PLZF-retinoic acid
receptor alpha oncoprotein.

Tsuzuki S(1), Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research, Chester
Beatty Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is implicated in the survival and growth of
multipotential progenitors. Here we report that the promyelocytic leukemia zinc
finger (PLZF) protein can interact with GATA-2 and can modify its transactivation
capacity. Fanconi anemia zinc finger (FAZF), a PLZF-homologous protein that has
been variously described as ROG (repressor of GATA), and TZFP (testis zinc finger
protein) also interact with GATA-2. The zinc finger region of GATA-2 is required 
for binding to PLZF and FAZF, but distinct interfaces on the PLZF and FAZF
molecules mediate the interaction, suggesting that GATA-2 activity is controlled 
by these 2 homologous proteins through distinct mechanisms. GATA-2 can also
physically associate with the PLZF-RARalpha fusion protein generated by the
t(11;17) chromosomal translocation associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). Functional experiments showed that this interaction has the capacity to
render GATA-dependent transcription responsive to treatment with a combination of
all-trans retinoic acid and the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA). This combination of drugs has been shown to stimulate the terminal
differentiation of leukemic t(11;17)-associated APL blasts, raising the
possibility that GATA target genes may be involved in the molecular pathogenesis 
of APL.

PMID: 11964310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2001;Suppl:158S-159S.

Effect of the transcription factor GATA-2 on phagocytic activity of alveolar
macrophages from Pneumocystis carinii-infected hosts.

Lasbury ME(1), Tang X, Durant PJ, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

PMID: 11906041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Blood. 2002 Apr 1;99(7):2379-86.

Retinoid signaling regulates primitive (yolk sac) hematopoiesis.

Ghatpande S(1), Ghatpande A, Sher J, Zile MH, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Chanin 501, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

It is known from nutritional studies that vitamin A is an important factor for
normal hematopoiesis, though it has been difficult to define its precise role.
The vitamin A-deficient (VAD) quail embryo provides an effective ligand
"knockout" model for investigating the function of retinoids during development. 
The VAD embryo develops with a significant reduction in erythroid cells, which
has not been noted previously. Activation of the primitive erythroid program and 
early expression of the erythroid marker GATA-1 occurs, though GATA-1 levels
eventually decline, consistent with the erythropoietic and hemoglobin deficits.
However, from its early stages, the GATA-2 gene fails to be expressed normally in
VAD embryos. The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-signaling pathway regulates
GATA-2, and BMP4 expression becomes reduced in the caudal embryonic region of VAD
embryos. Adding BMP4 to cultured VAD-derived explants rescues the production of
erythroid cells, whereas normal embryos cultured in the presence of the BMP
antagonist noggin are defective in primitive hematopoiesis. We find that cell
clusters of primitive blood islands undergo an inappropriate program of apoptosis
in the VAD embryo, which can explain the deficit in differentiated primitive
blood cells. We propose that vitamin A-derived retinoids are required for normal 
yolk sac hematopoiesis and that an embryonic retinoid-BMP-GATA-2 signaling
pathway controls progenitor cell survival relevant to primitive hematopoiesis.

PMID: 11895770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Apr;282(4):F741-51.

Retinoid receptor-specific agonists alleviate experimental glomerulonephritis.

Lehrke I(1), Schaier M, Schade K, Morath C, Waldherr R, Ritz E, Wagner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Retinoids are potent antiproliferative and anti-inflammatory compounds. We
previously demonstrated that the natural pan-agonists all-trans retinoic acid
(RA) and 13-cis RA efficiently preserve renal structure and function in rat
mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis. We examine effects of synthetic
retinoid receptor-specific agonists 1) to identify common and receptor
subtype-specific pathways in this model and 2) to characterize effects of
retinoids on the renal endothelin (ET) system. Vehicle-injected control rats were
compared with rats treated with daily subcutaneous injections of agonists
specific for retinoid A (Ro-137410) and retinoid X (Ro-257386) receptors and the 
complex anti-activator protein-1 active retinoid BMS-453 7 days after induction
of anti-Thy1.1 nephritis (n = 7-9/group). The different retinoids lowered
glomerular ET-1 and ET type A and B receptor gene expression in control and
nephritic rats with comparable efficacy. Reduction of glomerular c-Fos and GATA-2
mRNA expression levels suggests downregulation of transcription factors required 
for ET expression. The different retinoids were similar in their action on the
glomerular capillary occlusion score, number of total glomerular cells, and
glomerular infiltrating macrophage count. They differed in their ability to
normalize blood pressure (Ro-257386 > BMS-453 > arotinoid), albuminuria (BMS-453 
> Ro-257386 > arotinoid), and creatinine clearance (arotinoid > BMS-453 >
Ro-257386). No signs of toxicity were observed. We conclude that all retinoid
agonists with different subtype specificity are highly efficient in reducing
renal damage and proliferation of mesangial cells. Retinoid X and A
receptor-specific pathways are apparently involved in the antiproliferative,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-ET action. Further studies are indicated to define
the potential use of retinoid agonists in inflammatory renal disease.

PMID: 11880336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Blood. 2002 Mar 15;99(6):2037-44.

Gene expression profiling identifies significant differences between the
molecular phenotypes of bone marrow-derived and circulating human CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells.

Steidl U(1), Kronenwett R, Rohr UP, Fenk R, Kliszewski S, Maercker C, Neubert P, 
Aivado M, Koch J, Modlich O, Bojar H, Gattermann N, Haas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology, University of
Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. usteidl@usteidl.de

CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells are used clinically to support cytotoxic therapy, 
and recent studies raised hope that they could even serve as a cellular source
for nonhematopoietic tissue engineering. Here, we examined in 18 volunteers the
gene expressions of 1185 genes in highly enriched bone marrow CD34+ (BM-CD34+) or
granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor-mobilized peripheral blood CD34+ (PB-CD34+)
cells by means of cDNA array technology to identify molecular causes underlying
the functional differences between circulating and sedentary hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells. In total, 65 genes were significantly differentially
expressed. Greater cell cycle and DNA synthesis activity of BM-CD34+ than
PB-CD34+ cells were reflected by the 2- to 5-fold higher expression of 9 genes
involved in cell cycle progression, 11 genes regulating DNA synthesis, and cell
cycle-initiating transcription factor E2F-1. Conversely, 9 other transcription
factors, including the differentiation blocking GATA2 and N-myc, were expressed 2
to 3 times higher in PB-CD34+ cells than in BM-CD34+ cells. Expression of 5
apoptosis driving genes was also 2 to 3 times greater in PB-CD34+ cells,
reflecting a higher apoptotic activity. In summary, our study provides a gene
expression profile of primary human CD34+ hematopoietic cells of the blood and
marrow. Our data molecularly confirm and explain the finding that CD34+ cells
residing in the bone marrow cycle more rapidly, whereas circulating CD34+ cells
consist of a higher number of quiescent stem and progenitor cells. Moreover, our 
data provide novel molecular insight into stem cell physiology.

PMID: 11877277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Jan;22(1):27-9.

[GATA-2 gene expression in leukemia patients and its significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Dong L, Liu G, Lin Y, Zhang J, Jia S, Lu S, Pian H, Yao B, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100039,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate GATA-2 gene expression in leukemia patients and its
clinical significance.
METHODS: GATA-2 gene transcripts were detected by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and bcr/abl or PML/RAR alpha transcripts were
detected in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and acute promyelocytic 
leukemia (APL), respectively.
RESULTS: The GATA-2 transcripts were revealed in 93% of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), in 70% of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and 83% of CML patients, but
not in normal bone marrow and peripheral blood cells. GATA-2 expression in
remission patients was similar to newly diagnosed or relapsed patients. In
post-transplantation patients, GATA-2 expression was significantly decreased. In 
these cases GATA-2 transcripts could be detected with bcr/abl fusion gene
disappeared in 2 of 12 CML, whereas neither GATA-2 nor PML/RARalpha transcripts
could be detected in APL.
CONCLUSION: GATA-2 transcripts was highly expressed in leukemia patients and had 
no change in remission but significantly decreased in post-transplantation
patients. Detection of GATA-2 expression would give information about the
residual leukemia stem cells.

PMID: 11877047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Kidney Int. 2002 Feb;61(2):396-404.

L-arginine rescues decreased erythropoietin gene expression by stimulating GATA-2
with L-NMMA.

Imagawa S(1), Tarumoto T, Suzuki N, Mukai HY, Hasegawa Y, Higuchi M, Neichi T,
Ozawa K, Yamamoto M, Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. simagawa@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: NG-monomethyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA) decreases the expression of nitric 
oxide (NO) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and increases the expression
of GATA-2 mRNA and levels of GATA-2 binding activity, thereby inhibiting
erythropoietin (Epo) promoter activity and causing a decrease in the expression
of Epo protein. In the present study, we examined the effect of L-arginine on Epo
gene expression in Hep3B cells and BDF1 mice.
METHODS: Hep3B cells were incubated with and without different concentrations of 
L-NMMA and/or l-arginine. Anemic mice were injected with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) or L-NAME and L-arginine.
RESULTS: Incubation with L-NMMA under hypoxic conditions inhibited Epo
expression, but this inhibition was recovered by the addition of L-arginine.
Hypoxia induced the secretions of NO and cGMP, but the addition of L-NMMA
inhibited these inductions, though these inhibitions of NO and cGMP by L-NMMA
were recovered by the addition of L-arginine. Hep3B cells transfected with the
Epo promoter/enhancer-luciferase gene had Epo promoter activity. This activity
was inhibited by L-NMMA, but it could be recovered by the addition of L-arginine.
L-NMMA induced the binding activity of GATA-2 under hypoxic conditions. This
binding activity was inhibited by the addition of L-arginine. The addition of
cGMP inhibited L-NMMA-induced GATA-2 binding activity in a dose-dependent manner.
The results of an in vivo mouse assay revealed that L-NAME inhibited the
expression of Epo, but this inhibition of Epo expression by L-NAME was rescued by
pretreatment with L-arginine.
CONCLUSION: L-arginine rescues decreased erythropoietin gene expression by
stimulating GATA-2 with NG-monomethyl-L-arginine.

PMID: 11849379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cell Biol. 2002 Feb 18;156(4):751-60. Epub 2002 Feb 11.

Different modes of hypertrophy in skeletal muscle fibers.

Paul AC(1), Rosenthal N.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Biology Program, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 00016
Monterotondo-Scalo, Rome, Italy.

Skeletal muscles display a remarkable diversity in their arrangement of fibers
into fascicles and in their patterns of innervation, depending on functional
requirements and species differences. Most human muscle fascicles, despite their 
great length, consist of fibers that extend continuously from one tendon to the
other with a single nerve endplate band. Other mammalian muscles have multiple
endplate bands and fibers that do not insert into both tendons but terminate
intrafascicularly. We investigated whether these alternate structural features
may dictate different modes of cell hypertrophy in two mouse gracilis muscles, in
response to expression of a muscle-specific insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1
transgene (mIGF-1) or to chronic exercise. Both hypertrophic stimuli
independently activated GATA-2 expression and increased muscle cross-sectional
area in both muscle types, with additive effects in exercising myosin light
chain/mIGF transgenic mice, but without increasing fiber number. In singly
innervated gracilis posterior muscle, hypertrophy was characterized by a greater 
average diameter of individual fibers, and centralized nuclei. In contrast,
hypertrophic gracilis anterior muscle, which is multiply innervated, contained
longer muscle fibers, with no increase in average diameter, or in centralized
nuclei. Different modes of muscle hypertrophy in domestic and laboratory animals 
have important implications for building appropriate models of human
neuromuscular disease.

PMCID: PMC2174086
PMID: 11839766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Development. 2002 Jan;129(2):329-37.

Pitx2 is required at multiple stages of pituitary organogenesis: pituitary
primordium formation and cell specification.

Suh H(1), Gage PJ, Drouin J, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0638, USA.

Analysis of an allelic series in mice revealed that the Pitx2 homeobox gene is
required at multiple stages of pituitary development. It is necessary for
initiating expansion of Rathke's pouch and maintaining expression of the
fetal-specific transcription factors Hesx1 and Prop1. At later stages Pitx2 is
necessary for specification and expansion of the gonadotropes and Pit1 lineage
within the ventral and caudomedial anterior pituitary. Mechanistically, this is
due to the dependence of several critical lineage-specific transcription factors,
Pit1, Gata2, Egr1 and Sf1, on a threshold level of PITX2. The related Pitx1 gene 
has a role in hormone gene transcription, and it is important late in ontogeny
for the final expansion of the differentiated cell types. Pitx1 and Pitx2 have
overlapping functions in the expansion of Rathke's pouch, revealing the
sensitivity of pituitary organogenesis to the dosage of the PITX family. The
model developed for PITX gene function in pituitary development provides a better
understanding of the etiology of Rieger syndrome and may extend to other
PITX-sensitive developmental processes.

PMID: 11807026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mech Dev. 2002 Feb;111(1-2):159-62.

Sexually dimorphic expression of Gata-2 during mouse gonad development.

Siggers P(1), Smith L, Greenfield A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell, OX11 0RD, Didcot, UK.

We report that Gata-2 is expressed in a sexually dimorphic fashion during mouse
gonadogenesis. Gata-2 transcripts accumulate rapidly in the fetal ovary from 11.5
days post coitum (dpc) onwards, but are not detected in the fetal testis
throughout the period studied (10.5-15.5 dpc). Ovarian expression of Gata-2
ceases by 15.5 dpc. Examination of ovaries from embryos homozygous for the
extreme allele of c-kit(W(e)) (Nature, 335, 88; Cell, 55, 185) demonstrates that 
ovarian Gata-2 expression is dependent upon the presence of germ cells.
Comparative in situ hybridisation using the germ cell marker Oct4 (EMBO J., 8,
2543) indicates that Gata-2 transcripts are restricted to the germ cell lineage
at 13.5 dpc.

PMID: 11804789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mod Pathol. 2002 Jan;15(1):11-7.

Expression of GATA-2 in human pituitary adenomas.

Umeoka K(1), Sanno N, Osamura RY, Teramoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-2 contains two copies of a highly conserved zinc finger
domain and plays unique roles at an early stage of hematopoietic differentiation.
In the mouse pituitary gland, Pit-1-GATA-2 protein-protein interaction has been
shown to lead to gene-specific actions to obtain cell-specific roles. In this
study, we investigated the expression of GATA-2 and Pit-1 in human pituitary
adenomas using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunohistochemical techniques. By immunohistochemical analysis, GATA-2 was
detected in all of the gonadotropin-subunit (Gn-su)-positive adenomas (n = 8) and
in four of five thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-secreting adenomas, but its
incidence was low in the other types of adenomas. Pit-1 protein was detected in 4
of 5 TSH-secreting adenomas and in 10 of 10 growth hormone (GH)-secreting
adenomas. By RT-PCR analysis, GATA-2 was detected in all Gn-su-positive adenomas 
and TSH-secreting adenomas, and Pit-1 was detected in all TSH-secreting adenomas 
and GH-secreting adenomas. These results suggested that GATA-2 contributes to the
functional expression and the differentiation of Gn-su-positive adenomas and the 
TSH-secreting adenomas and that the interaction between GATA-2 and Pit-1 can lead
to gene-specific action and differentiation of TSH-secreting adenomas. It is
further speculated that GATA-2 and transcriptional interaction with Pit-1 play
roles in the functional differentiation of specific pituitary adenomas.

PMID: 11796836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cell Res. 2001 Dec;11(4):301-10.

Function of GATA transcription factors in hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells.

Zhang SB(1), He QY, Zhao H, Gui CY, Jiang C, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

HEL cells, a human erythroleukemia cell line, mainly express the fetal (gamma)
globin gene and trace amount of the embryonic (epsilon) globin gene, but not
adult (beta) globin gene. Here we show that hydroxyurea (HU) can induce HEL cells
to express adult (beta) globin gene and lead these cells to terminal
differentiation. Results showed in Gel mobility shift assays that GATA factors
could specifically bind to the regulatory elements of human beta-globin gene,
including the proximal regulatory element (the beta-promoter) and the distal
regulatory elements (the DNase I hypersensitive sites in the LCR, HS2-HS4 core
sequences). However, the DNA binding patterns of GATA factors were quite
different between HU-induced and uninduced HEL cells. Western-blot analysis of
nuclear extracts from both the uninduced and HU-induced HEL cells revealed that
the level of GATA-2 transcription factor decreased, whereas the level of GATA-1
transcription factor increased following the time of hydroxyurea induction.
Furthermore, using RT-PCR analysis the expression of human beta-globin gene in
HU-induced HEL cells could be blocked again when HEL cells were incubated in the 
presence of antisense oligonucleotides for hGATA-1, suggesting that the
upregulation of hGATA-1 transcription factor might be critical for the expression
of human beta-globin gene in HU-induced HEL cells.

PMID: 11787775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 1;238(1):64-78.

Hemangioblast commitment in the avian allantois: cellular and molecular aspects.

Caprioli A(1), Minko K, Drevon C, Eichmann A, Dieterlen-Lièvre F, Jaffredo T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49 bis av. de la Belle Gabrielle, Nogent s/Marne Cedex, 94736, France.

We recently identified the allantois as a site producing hemopoietic and
endothelial cells capable of colonizing the bone marrow of an engrafted host.
Here, we report a detailed investigation of some early cytological and molecular 
processes occurring in the allantoic bud, which are probably involved in the
production of angioblasts and hemopoietic cells. We show that the allantois
undergoes a program characterized by the prominent expression of several
"hemangioblastic" genes in the mesoderm accompanied by other gene patterns in the
associated endoderm. VEGF-R2, at least from stage HH17 onward, is expressed and
is shortly followed by transcription factors GATA-2, SCL/tal-1, and GATA-1. Blood
island-like structures differentiate that contain both CD45(+) cells and cells
accumulating hemoglobin; these structures look exactly like blood islands in the 
yolk sac. This hemopoietic process takes place before the establishment of a
vascular network connecting the allantois to the embryo. As far as the endoderm
is concerned, GATA-3 mRNA is found in the region where allantois will
differentiate before the posterior instestinal portal becomes anatomically
distinct. Shortly before the bud grows out, GATA-2 was expressed in the endoderm 
and, at the same time, the hemangioblastic program became initiated in the
mesoderm. GATA-3 is detected at least until E8 and GATA-2 until E3 the latest
stage examined for this factor. Using in vitro cultures, we show that allantoic
buds, dissected out before the establishment of circulation between the bud and
the rest of the embryo, produced erythrocytes of the definitive lineage.
Moreover, using heterospecific grafts between chick and quail embryos, we
demonstrate that the allantoic vascular network develops from intrinsic
progenitors. Taken together, these results extend our earlier findings about the 
commitment of mesoderm to the endothelial and hemopoietic lineages in the
allantois. The detection of a prominent GATA-3 expression restricted to the
endoderm of the preallantoic region and allantoic bud, followed by that of
GATA-2, is an interesting and novel information, in the context of organ
formation and endoderm specification in the emergence of hemopoietic cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11783994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;495:15-24.

Molecular characterization of gut T cell precursors in euthymic and athymic mice.

Lambolez F(1), Rocha B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.345, Institut Necker, 156 rue de Vaugirard, 75730 Paris, France.

PMID: 11774559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3585-92. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Defects of the heart, eye, and megakaryocytes in peroxisome proliferator
activator receptor-binding protein (PBP) null embryos implicate GATA family of
transcription factors.

Crawford SE(1), Qi C, Misra P, Stellmach V, Rao MS, Engel JD, Zhu Y, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP) is an
important coactivator for PPARgamma and other nuclear receptors. It has been
identified as an integral component of a multiprotein thyroid hormone
receptor-associated protein/vitamin D(3) receptor-interacting
protein/activator-recruited cofactor complexes required for transcriptional
activity. Here, we show that PBP is critical for the development of placenta and 
for the normal embryonic development of the heart, eye, vascular, and
hematopoietic systems. The primary functional cause of embryonic lethality at
embryonic day11.5 observed with PBP null mutation was cardiac failure because of 
noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium and resultant ventricular dilatation.
There was a paucity of retinal pigment, defective lens formation, excessive
systemic angiogenesis, a deficiency in the number of megakaryocytes, and an
arrest in erythrocytic differentiation. Some of these defects involve PPARgamma
and retinoid-sensitive sites, whereas others have not been recognized in the
PPAR-signaling pathway. Phenotypic changes in four organ systems observed in PBP 
null mice overlapped with those in mice deficient in members of GATA, a family of
transcription factors known to regulate differentiation of megakaryocytes,
erythrocytes, and adipocytes. We demonstrate that PBP interacts with all five
GATA factors analyzed, GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, GATA-4, and GATA-6, and show that 
the binding of GATA-1, GATA-4, and GATA-6 to PBP is not dependent on the nuclear 
receptor recognition sequence motif LXXLL (where L is leucine and X is any amino 
acid) in PBP. Coexpression of PBP with GATA-3 markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity of GATA-3 in nonhematopoietic cells. These observations identify the
GATA family of transcription factors as a new interacting partner of PBP and
demonstrate that PBP is essential for normal development of vital organ systems.

PMID: 11724781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1999 Jun;20(6):292-5.

[The intracellular signaling pathway initiated by ginsenosides in hematopoietic
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao R(1), Wu C, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang College of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Hangzhou 310006.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate that ginsenosides (GS) promotes proliferation of
hematopoietic cells by virtue of the intracellular signaling pathway.
METHODS: Three human megakaryocytic cell lines and Northern blot analysis,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), antibody gel supershift assay and
UV-radiation cross-linking were used.
RESULTS: After treatment with GS, GATA-2 mRNA levels in CHRH-288, Meg-01 and MO7e
cells were increased by 1.84-, 2.43- and 1.52-fold, respectively, while GATA-1
mRNA levels remained as low as pretreatment. GATA binding activities were
elevated in all the three GS treated cell lines. The GATA binding complex
appeared as a band with an approximate molecular weight of 50,000 corresponding
to the size of GATA-2 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The intracellular signaling pathway initiated by GS was involved in 
transcription factor GATA-2. GATA-2 might play the key role in the GS induced
upregulation of megakaryopoiesis.

PMID: 11721385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Blood. 2001 Dec 1;98(12):3283-9.

Notch1 inhibits differentiation of hematopoietic cells by sustaining GATA-2
expression.

Kumano K(1), Chiba S, Shimizu K, Yamagata T, Hosoya N, Saito T, Takahashi T,
Hamada Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Notch signaling is involved in cell fate decisions in many systems including
hematopoiesis. It has been shown that expression of an activated form of Notch1
(aNotch1) in 32D mouse myeloid progenitor cells inhibits the granulocytic
differentiation induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Results
of the current study show that aNotch1, when expressed in F5-5 mouse
erythroleukemia cells, also inhibits erythroid differentiation. Comparison of the
expression levels of several transcription factors after stimulation for myeloid 
and erythroid differentiation, in the presence or absence of aNotch1, revealed
that aNotch1 did not change its regulation pattern with any of the transcription 
factors examined, except for GATA-2, despite its inhibitory effect on
differentiation. GATA-2 was down-regulated when the parental 32D and F5-5 were
induced to differentiate into granulocytic and erythroid lineages, respectively. 
In these induction procedures, however, the level of GATA-2 expression was
sustained when aNotch1 was expressed. To ascertain whether maintenance of GATA-2 
is required for the Notch-induced inhibition of differentiation, the
dominant-negative form of GATA-3 (DN-GATA), which acted also against GATA-2, or
transcription factor PU.1, which was recently shown to be the repressor of
GATA-2, was introduced into aNotch1-expressing 32D (32D/aNotch1) cells that do
not express GATA family proteins other than GATA2. Both DN-GATA and PU.1 reversed
the phenotype of 32D/aNotch1 inducing its differentiation when G-CSF was added.
Furthermore, enforced expression of HES-1, which is involved in Notch signaling, 
delayed differentiation of 32D, and again this phenotype was neutralized by
DN-GATA. These results indicate that GATA-2 activity is necessary for the Notch
signaling in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 11719365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47632-41. Epub 2001 Oct 5.

Thrombin stimulation of the vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 promoter in
endothelial cells is mediated by tandem nuclear factor-kappa B and GATA motifs.

Minami T(1), Aird WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The goal of this study was to delineate the transcriptional mechanisms underlying
thrombin-mediated induction of vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). Treatment
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells with thrombin resulted in a 3.3-fold
increase in VCAM-1 promoter activity. The upstream promoter region of VCAM-1
contains a thrombin response element, two nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)
motifs, and a tandem GATA motif. In transient transfection assays, mutation of
the thrombin response element had no effect on thrombin induction. In contrast,
mutation of either NF-kappaB site resulted in a complete loss of induction,
whereas a mutation of the two GATA motifs resulted in a significant reduction in 
thrombin stimulation. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, nuclear extracts 
from thrombin-treated endothelial cells displayed markedly increased binding to
the tandem NF-kappaB and GATA motifs. The NF-kappaB complex was supershifted with
anti-p65 antibodies, but not with antibodies to RelB, c-Rel, p50, or p52. The
GATA complex was supershifted with antibodies to GATA-2, but not GATA-3 or
GATA-6. A construct containing tandem copies of the VCAM-1 GATA motifs linked to 
a minimal thymidine kinase promoter was induced 2.4-fold by thrombin. Taken
together, these results suggest that thrombin stimulation of VCAM-1 in
endothelial cells is mediated by the coordinate action of NF-kappaB and GATA
transcription factors.

PMID: 11590177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Blood. 2001 Oct 1;98(7):2116-23.

Histone deacetylase 3 associates with and represses the transcription factor
GATA-2.

Ozawa Y(1), Towatari M, Tsuzuki S, Hayakawa F, Maeda T, Miyata Y, Tanimoto M,
Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a critical role in the survival
and proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. This study examined the
interaction of GATA-2 with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to define the involvement
of HDACs in the regulation of GATA-2 function. GATA-2 directly associates with
HDAC3 but not with HDAC1. Consistent with this, HDAC3 suppressed the
transcriptional potential of GATA-2, whereas HDAC1 did not affect
GATA-2-dependent transcription. Results further demonstrated that GATA-2 and
HDAC3 colocalized in the nucleus. These results identify GATA-2 as a nuclear
target for HDAC3-mediated repression. Furthermore, GATA-2 also directly
associated with HDAC5 but not with other class II HDACs examined, that is, HDAC4 
and HDAC6. This is the first demonstration that a tissue-specific transcription
factor directly and selectively interacts with HDAC3 and HDAC5 among HDAC family 
members.

PMID: 11567998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 11;98(19):10716-21. Epub 2001 Sep 4.

Hematopoietic colony-forming cells derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Kaufman DS(1), Hanson ET, Lewis RL, Auerbach R, Thomson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Human embryonic stem (ES) cells are undifferentiated, pluripotent cells that can 
be maintained indefinitely in culture. Here we demonstrate that human ES cells
differentiate to hematopoietic precursor cells when cocultured with the murine
bone marrow cell line S17 or the yolk sac endothelial cell line C166. This
hematopoietic differentiation requires fetal bovine serum, but no other exogenous
cytokines. ES cell-derived hematopoietic precursor cells express the cell surface
antigen CD34 and the hematopoietic transcription factors TAL-1, LMO-2, and
GATA-2. When cultured on semisolid media with hematopoietic growth factors, these
hematopoietic precursor cells form characteristic myeloid, erythroid, and
megakaryocyte colonies. Selection for CD34(+) cells derived from human ES cells
enriches for hematopoietic colony-forming cells, similar to CD34 selection of
primary hematopoietic tissue (bone marrow, umbilical cord blood). More terminally
differentiated hematopoietic cells derived from human ES cells under these
conditions also express normal surface antigens: glycophorin A on erythroid
cells, CD15 on myeloid cells, and CD41 on megakaryocytes. The in vitro
differentiation of human ES cells provides an opportunity to better understand
human hematopoiesis and could lead to a novel source of cells for transfusion and
transplantation therapies.

PMCID: PMC58532
PMID: 11535826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 22;499(3):199-204.

Genes modulated by histone acetylation as new effectors of butyrate activity.

Della Ragione F(1), Criniti V, Della Pietra V, Borriello A, Oliva A, Indaco S,
Yamamoto T, Zappia V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics F. Cedrangolo, Medical School,
Second University of Naples, Italy. dellarag@cds.unina.it

A wealth of evidence correlates the chemopreventive activity of a fiber-rich diet
with the production of butyrate. In order to identify the genes transcriptionally
modulated by the molecule, we analyzed the expression profile of butyrate-treated
colon cancer cells by means of cDNA expression arrays. Moreover, the effect of
trichostatin A, a specific histone deacetylase inhibitor, was studied. A
superimposable group of 23 genes out of 588 investigated is modulated by both
butyrate and trichostatin A. Among them, a major target was tob-1, a gene
involved in the control of cell cycle. tob-1 is also up-regulated by butyrate in 
a neuroblastoma-derived cell line, and its overexpression in the colon cells
caused growth arrest. Our findings represent an extensive analysis of genes
modulated by butyrate and identify completely new effectors of its biological
activities.

PMID: 11423116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2001 Mar;37(3):185-92.

Differential expression of sympathoadrenal lineage-determining genes and
phenotypic markers in cultured primary neural crest cells.

Bilodeau ML(1), Boulineau T, Greulich JD, Hullinger RL, Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907-1246, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) promotes the development of primary neural
crest cells grown in tissue culture to the sympathoadrenal (SA) lineage.
Independent studies have characterized the expression patterns of SA-lineage
genes in developing chicken embryo; however, studies using cultured primary
neural crest cells have characterized only the expression patterns of the
catecholaminergic markers, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and catecholamines (CAs). To
further explore the molecular mechanisms that control SA-cell development using
the in vitro model system, it is crucial to define the expression patterns of
both the catecholaminergic markers and the genes regulating SA-lineage
determination. Accordingly, we defined, in the absence and presence of BMP-2, the
temporal expression patterns of TH and CA, the SA lineage-determining genes
ASH-1, Phox2a, and Phox2b, the GATA-2 gene, and the pan-neuronal SCG10 gene.
Comparison of these data with the reported temporal and spatial patterns of
expression in vivo demonstrate that the inductive steps of SA-lineage
determination, including the specification of neurotransmitter identity and
neuronal fate, are recapitulated in the neural-crest culture system.

PMID: 11370813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Br J Haematol. 2001 Apr;113(1):52-7.

Decreased expression of transcription factor GATA-2 in haematopoietic stem cells 
in patients with aplastic anaemia.

Fujimaki S(1), Harigae H, Sugawara T, Takasawa N, Sasaki T, Kaku M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Aplastic anaemia is characterized by reduced haematopoiesis resulting in
pancytopenia. It has been speculated that there is an injury in haematopoietic
stem cells in the bone marrow; however, the precise nature of the injury has not 
been elucidated. In this study, the levels of expression of mRNAs for three
transcription factors, GATA-2, SCL and AML1, which function in the early stages
of haematopoiesis, were examined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in
patients with aplastic anaemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and
normal subjects. Among these factors, expression of GATA-2 mRNA in purified
CD34-positive cells was markedly decreased in aplastic anaemia compared with that
in ITP and in normal subjects. The expression levels of SCL and AML1 mRNA in
CD34-positive cells in aplastic anaemia were not different from those in normal
subjects. When the expression of GATA-2 protein in CD34-positive cells was
examined by immunocytochemical analysis, the percentage of GATA-2-positive cells 
in aplastic anaemia was lower than that in normal subjects. These findings
strongly suggest that there is an aberrant expression of transcription factors in
stem cells in aplastic anaemia, which may be responsible for the development of
the disease.

PMID: 11328281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2000 Dec;192(4):259-73.

Expression of transcription factors during megakaryocytic differentiation of
CD34+ cells from human cord blood induced by thrombopoietin.

Terui K(1), Takahashi Y, Kitazawa J, Toki T, Yokoyama M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Although normal megakaryocytic development has been shown to require the presence
of functional GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors in vivo, the roles of other 
members of the GATA binding factors and NF-E2 family during megakaryocytic
differentiation are unclear. the present study, the expression of GATA family
members, GATA-1 and GATA-2, a GATA-binding factor, EVI-1, the large subunit of
NF-E2 factor, p45 and the related factors, Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3, BACH1, BACH2, and
the small subunit of NF-E2, MAFK and MAFG has been examined in human
megakaryocytic and erythroid cells by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. CD34+ cells isolated from human cord blood were induced to unilineage
megakaryocytic or erythroid differentiation in liquid suspension culture in the
presense of thrombopoietin or erythropoietin, respectively. Each lineage was
identified by monoclonal antibody against GPIIb/IIIa or glycophorin A. In
megakaryocytic culture, p45, Nrf1, Nrf2, BACH1, MAFK and MAFG mRNAs were induced 
similarly to erythroid culture. Nrf3 mRNA was barely detected in both cultures.
BACH2 was induced only in megakaryocytic culture, although the level of
expression was low. Furthermore, the profiles of transcription factors involved
in hematopoiesis, EVI-1 and Ets-1 mRNAs were induced only in megakaryocytic
culture. Megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation pathways are closely
related to each other, and these two lineage cells share a number of
lineage-specific transcription factors. However, the results showed that the
profile of the expression of these transcription factors in megakaryocytic cells 
is distinct from that of erythroid lineage. The dynamic changes in the levels of 
different transcription factors that occur during primary megakaryocytic
differentiation suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the
progression to specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 11286316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):12645-53. Epub 2001 Jan 22.

Molecular regulation of the endothelin-1 gene by hypoxia. Contributions of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1, activator protein-1, GATA-2, AND p300/CBP.

Yamashita K(1), Discher DJ, Hu J, Bishopric NH, Webster KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Medical
Center, Miami, Florida 33149, USA.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a peptide hormone with potent vasoconstrictor properties
which is synthesized and secreted predominantly by vascular endothelial cells.
Its production is regulated by numerous stimuli including ischemia and hypoxia,
and the enhanced levels that occur during myocardial ischemia may contribute to
the progression of heart failure. We reported previously a preliminary
characterization of a hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) binding site in the
human ET-1 promoter which contributed to the activation of ET-1 expression in
endothelial cells. We report here that the HIF-1 binding site alone is not
sufficient for the response to hypoxia but requires an additional 50 base pairs
of flanking sequence that includes binding sites for the factors activator
protein-1 (AP-1), GATA-2, and CAAT-binding factor (NF-1). Mutation of any one of 
these sites or the HIF-1 site eliminated induction by hypoxia. Mutations of the
AP-1 and GATA-2 sites, but not the HIF-1 site, were complemented by
overexpressing AP-1, GATA-2, HIF-1alpha, or the activator protein p300/CBP,
restoring the response to hypoxia. Binding studies in vitro confirmed physical
associations among GATA-2, AP-1, and HIF-1 factors. Overexpression or depletion
of p300/CBP modulated the level of ET-1 promoter expression as well as the
endogenous ET-1 transcript but did not change the fold induction by hypoxia in
either case. Regulation of the ET-1 promoter by hypoxia in non-endothelial cells 
required overexpression of GATA-2 and HIF-1alpha. The results support essential
roles for AP-1, GATA-2, and NF-1 in stabilizing the binding of HIF-1 and
promoting recruitment of p300/CBP to the ET-1 hypoxia response complex.

PMID: 11278891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:13-20.

PU.1, a shared transcriptional regulator of lymphoid and myeloid cell fates.

Singh H(1), DeKoter RP, Walsh JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

PMID: 11232277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Thromb Res. 2001 Feb 1;101(3):203-11.

Role of GATA motifs in tissue factor pathway inhibitor gene expression in
malignant cells.

Bajaj MS(1), Tyson DR, Steer SA, Kuppuswamy MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110-0250, USA. bajajms@slu.edu

Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is the primary physiologic inhibitor of
tissue factor-induced clotting. The TFPI gene contains three GATA motifs in the
region flanking its transcription initiation sites. GATA motifs present in
promoters of other genes bind GATA-2 transcription factor and thereby regulate
their transcriptional expression. Both TFPI and GATA-2 transcription factor are
synthesized by a variety of normal as well as malignant cells including
hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 and bladder carcinoma ECV304. Here, we studied
whether the three GATA motifs flanking the transcription initiation sites
regulate TFPI gene expression in HepG2 and ECV304 cells by binding to the GATA-2 
transcription factor. Synthetic oligonucleotides containing GATA sequences from
the TFPI regulatory region formed DNA-protein complexes with HepG2 and ECV304
nuclear extracts in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Using a 740-bp
fragment (-496/+244) from TFPI regulatory region, the effect of base
substitutions at each of the three GATA motifs was studied in a luciferase
reporter gene system. TFPI promoter activity in HepG2 cells was increased 3-fold 
with mutation in one of the three GATA motifs and in ECV304 cells was essentially
unchanged with mutations in all three GATA motifs. Thus, GATA motifs appear to
serve a tissue-specific regulatory role in TFPI gene expression in malignant
cells.

PMID: 11228343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nat Genet. 2001 Feb;27(2):195-200.

Localized Igf-1 transgene expression sustains hypertrophy and regeneration in
senescent skeletal muscle.

Musarò A(1), McCullagh K, Paul A, Houghton L, Dobrowolny G, Molinaro M, Barton
ER, Sweeney HL, Rosenthal N.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital-East,
Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

Aging skeletal muscles suffer a steady decline in mass and functional
performance, and compromised muscle integrity as fibrotic invasions replace
contractile tissue, accompanied by a characteristic loss in the fastest, most
powerful muscle fibers. The same programmed deficits in muscle structure and
function are found in numerous neurodegenerative syndromes and disease-related
cachexia. We have generated a model of persistent, functional myocyte hypertrophy
using a tissue-restricted transgene encoding a locally acting isoform of
insulin-like growth factor-1 that is expressed in skeletal muscle (mIgf-1).
Transgenic embryos developed normally, and postnatal increases in muscle mass and
strength were not accompanied by the additional pathological changes seen in
other Igf-1 transgenic models. Expression of GATA-2, a transcription factor
normally undetected in skeletal muscle, marked hypertrophic myocytes that escaped
age-related muscle atrophy and retained the proliferative response to muscle
injury characteristic of younger animals. The preservation of muscle architecture
and age-independent regenerative capacity through localized mIgf-1 transgene
expression suggests clinical strategies for the treatment of age or
disease-related muscle frailty.

PMID: 11175789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Cell Physiol. 2001 Feb;186(2):260-7.

Stimulation of GATA-2 as a mechanism of hydrogen peroxide suppression in
hypoxia-induced erythropoietin gene expression.

Tabata M(1), Tarumoto T, Ohmine K, Furukawa Y, Hatake K, Ozawa K, Hasegawa Y,
Mukai H, Yamamoto M, Imagawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Minamikawachi-Machi, Tochigi, 
Japan.

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) has previously been shown to inhibit the DNA binding
activity of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), the accumulation of HIF-1alpha
protein and erythropoietin (Epo) gene expression. Epo gene expression has been
previously shown to be down-regulated through a GATA binding site at its promoter
region. In this study, the effect of H2O2 on Epo gene expression under hypoxic
conditions through a GATA transcription factor was investigated. Hypoxic
induction was found to be inhibited upon the addition of H2O2, and this effect
could be reversed through the addition of catalase. Hypoxic induction was found
to be suppressed by co-transfection with a human GATA-2 cDNA expression plasmid. 
Transfection of Hep3B cells with a reporter gene bearing a mutation at the
promoter GATA binding site was found to be only mildly affected by the addition
of H2O2. Electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays (EMSAs), using the Epo
promoter GATA site as a probe and the GATA-2 protein extracted from Hep3B cells, 
showed that addition of H2O2 enhanced the binding of GATA-2 while addition of
catalase inhibited this binding. From these results, we conclude that H2O2
increases the binding activity of GATA-2 in a specific manner, thereby
suppressing the activity of the Epo promoter and thus inhibiting Epo gene
expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11169463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Gene. 2000 Dec 31;261(2):277-87.

Levels of GATA-1/GATA-2 transcription factors modulate expression of embryonic
and fetal hemoglobins.

Ikonomi P(1), Noguchi CT, Miller W, Kassahun H, Hardison R, Schechter AN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room
9N-307, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1822, MD, Bethesda 20892-1822, USA.

GATA transcription factors bind the consensus sequence WGATAR, present in the
flanking regions of most erythroid specific genes. GATA-1 and GATA-2, coexpressed
in erythroid cells, are important for expression of erythroid genes. To elucidate
the role of specific GATA transcription factors on globin gene expression, we
examined the human alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters for all GATA sites.
Conserved GATA sites were found in each of the hypersensitive sites in both
beta-and alpha clusters and in proximal regulatory regions of the zeta-, epsilon-
and gamma-globin but not the alpha, delta or beta-globin genes. We then tested
the effect of increasing levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2 on the expression of
endogenous globin genes in human erythroid cells. Increasing GATA-1 levels in
K562 cells decreased the levels of epsilon-globin mRNA but had no effect on the
levels of expression of gamma, zeta or alpha-globin genes. Increasing GATA-2
levels increased epsilon-globin and gamma-globin transcripts. Increasing levels
of GATA-1 also caused a decrease in the expression of endogenous GATA-2, while
increased levels of GATA-2 had no effect on GATA-1 mRNA. Our results indicate a
differential role of GATA-1 and -2 transcription factors on globin transcripts
and suggest a correlation between the conservation of GATA sites in the
regulatory regions and the ability of endogenous globin genes to respond to GATA 
transcription factors. They also suggest that quantitative changes in the levels 
of GATA-1 or GATA-2 can result in alterations of globin target gene expression
and may participate in the ontogenic control of the globin genes.

PMID: 11167015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Development. 2001 Feb;128(3):377-86.

Hedgehog signaling is required for pituitary gland development.

Treier M(1), O'Connell S, Gleiberman A, Price J, Szeto DP, Burgess R, Chuang PT, 
McMahon AP, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School and Department of Medicine, UCSD,
CMMW, Room 345, La Jolla, CA 92093-0648, USA.

Pituitary gland development serves as an excellent model system in which to study
the emergence of distinct cell types from a common primordium in mammalian
organogenesis. We have investigated the role of the morphogen Sonic hedgehog
(SHH) in outgrowth and differentiation of the pituitary gland using loss- and
gain-of-function studies in transgenic mice. Shh is expressed throughout the
ventral diencephalon and the oral ectoderm, but its expression is subsequently
absent from the nascent Rathke's pouch as soon as it becomes morphologically
visible, creating a Shh boundary within the oral epithelium. We used oral
ectoderm/Rathke's pouch-specific 5' regulatory sequences (Pitx1(HS)) from the
bicoid related pituitary homeobox gene (Pitx1) to target overexpression of the
Hedgehog inhibitor Hip (Huntingtin interacting protein) to block Hedgehog
signaling, finding that SHH is required for proliferation of the pituitary gland.
In addition, we provide evidence that Hedgehog signaling, acting at the Shh
boundary within the oral ectoderm, may exert a role in differentiation of ventral
cell types (gonadotropes and thyrotropes) by inducing Bmp2 expression in Rathke's
pouch, which subsequently regulates expression of ventral transcription factors, 
particularly Gata2. Furthermore, our data suggest that Hedgehog signaling,
together with FGF8/10 signaling, synergizes to regulate expression of the LIM
homeobox gene Lhx3, which has been proved to be essential for initial pituitary
gland formation. Thus, SHH appears to exert effects on both proliferation and
cell-type determination in pituitary gland development.

PMID: 11152636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Exp Hematol. 2000 Dec;28(12):1423-31.

Overexpression of GATA-2 inhibits erythroid and promotes megakaryocyte
differentiation.

Ikonomi P(1), Rivera CE, Riordan M, Washington G, Schechter AN, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1822, USA.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 transcription factors are required for effective hematopoiesis.
These regulatory proteins present overlapping yet distinct patterns of expression
in hematopoietic cells. Absence of GATA-2 leads to defective hematopoiesis and an
embryonic lethal phenotype. Disruption of GATA-1 results in a compensatory
increase in GATA-2 in early erythroid cells and incomplete erythropoiesis with
embryos dying at 11.5 days. We examine the specific role of GATA-2 later in
hematopoiesis, during erythroid differentiation. Stable K562 cell lines
expressing various levels of GATA-2 were generated using a GATA-2 expression
plasmid. Overexpression of GATA-2 transcripts was determined by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Cytospin smears, growth curve analysis, PCR, and
flow cytometry were used to examine the effects of increased levels of GATA-2 in 
altering cell phenotype and activation of megakaryocytic markers. Human
progenitor erythroid cells also were transfected with a GATA-2 expression vector.
Growth curve analysis, benzidine staining, and high-performance liquid
chromatographic analysis were used to study the effects of GATA-2 on erythroid
maturation and proliferation.K562/GATA-2 cell lines expressing high levels of
GATA-2 mRNA showed a marked decrease in proliferation and a shift in phenotype
toward the megakaryocyte lineage. Ploidy analyses showed that these cell lines
developed a multinuclear phenotype, including tetraploids and octaploids. PCR
analysis showed activation of megakaryocyte-specific genes including
thrombopoietin receptor (c-mpl). Surface expression of platelet glycoprotein
receptors Ib/IX (CD42b/CD42a) and IIb/IIIa (CD41/CD61) also was demonstrated by
flow cytometry. In primary human adult erythroid cultures transfected with a
GATA-2 expression vector, production of total hemoglobin and cell proliferation
decreased in a dose-dependent manner.GATA-2 plays an important role in deciding
cell lineage throughout hematopoiesis, and increased expression of GATA-2
determines megakaryocytic differentiation. Downregulation of GATA-2 is required
for erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 11146164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2000 Dec;26(6):587-97.

GATA and NF-Y participate in transcriptional regulation of FcgammaRIIA in
megakaryocytic cells.

Cassel DL(1), Subudhi SK, Surrey S, McKenzie SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Human FcgammaRIIA, expressed on platelets, neutrophils, and macrophages, plays a 
major role in platelet activation and immune clearance. Clinical observations
indicate that regulation of expression of this receptor is an important factor
influencing the course of immune thrombocytopenia. We used both transient
transfection with FcgammaRIIA promoter constructs and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) to study the regulation of FcgammaRIIA transcription. In HEL 
(erythromegakaryocytic) cells, the 200 bp immediately 5' of the ATG start codon
accounted for the majority of the activity of a 3.6-kb promoter fragment.
Putative GATA (-161) and NF-Y (-119) sites are present. EMSA analyses demonstrate
specific binding of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 to labeled oligonucleotides containing
the putative GATA site with HEL but not U937 (myelomonocytic) nuclear extracts.
Antibodies to NF-Y supershift the specific -119 NF-Y complex with HEL, U937,
Jurkat (T-lymphocytic), and HeLa (nonhematopoietic) nuclear extracts. Comparison 
of the activity of GATA and NF-Y mutant constructs in HEL and U937 demonstrates
that while either GATA or NF-Y mutation results in a large decrease in the
promoter activity (2.2- and 2.3-fold, respectively) in HEL cells, neither
mutation is effective in reducing activity in U937 cells. This is the first
example of a promoter active in the megakaryocyte lineage in which NF-Y
cooperates additively with GATA factors to regulate transcription. Identification
of other factors that must be operational for FcgammaRIIA transcription in
myelomonocytic cells which lack GATA factors will bolster our ongoing efforts to 
dissect the function of these Fc receptors in megakaryocytic and myelomonocytic
cells in vivo.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11112392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):5395-402. Epub 2000 Nov 29.

Transforming growth factor-beta 1-mediated inhibition of the flk-1/KDR gene is
mediated by a 5'-untranslated region palindromic GATA site.

Minami T(1), Rosenberg RD, Aird WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The angiogenic effects of vascular endothelial growth factor are mediated
predominantly by the FLK-1/KDR receptor. An understanding of the transcriptional 
control mechanisms underlying flk-1/KDR expression should provide insight into
the molecular basis of angiogenesis. In this study, we show that transforming
growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) down-regulates expression of the endogenous
flk-1/KDR gene in endothelial cells. In transient transfection assays, this
effect was mapped to a palindromic GATA site in the 5'-untranslated region. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the palindromic GATA site was shown to
bind to two molecules of GATA protein. Moreover, DNA-GATA interactions were
inhibited by TGF-beta(1). Finally, in cotransfection assays, transactivation of
the flk-1/KDR promoter by GATA-1 or GATA-2 was attenuated in TGF-beta(1)-treated 
cells. Taken together, these results suggest that the TGF-beta-1-mediated
inhibition of the flk-1/KDR gene is mediated by a 5'-untranslated region
palindromic GATA site.

PMID: 11098056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Nov 11;278(1):134-9.

Genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and the complete 22 kb DNA
sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1, a placenta-specific transcription factor gene.

Yamada K(1), Ogawa H, Tamiya G, Ikeno M, Morita M, Asakawa S, Shimizu N, Okazaki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, School 
of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. kyamada@fujita-hu.ac.jp

The genomic sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1 gene, a mammalian homologue of
Drosophila melanogaster GCM, was determined. Drosophila GCM is a neural
transcription factor that regulates glial cell fate. The mammalian homolog
however, is a placenta-specific transcription factor that is necessary for
placental development. The 22 kb DNA sequence spanning the GCMa gene contains six
exons and five introns, encoding a 2.8 kb cDNA. Overall genomic organization is
similar for the human and mouse. Several potential binding sites for
transcription factors like GATA, Oct-1, and bHLH proteins were found in the
5'-flanking region of the human gene. A DNA motif for GCM protein binding exists 
in the 5'-flanking region that is highly homologous with that of the mouse gene. 
The location of this gene was mapped to chromosome 6 using fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11071865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2000;55:1-13; discussion 13-4.

Multistep signaling and transcriptional requirements for pituitary organogenesis 
in vivo.

Rosenfeld MG(1), Briata P, Dasen J, Gleiberman AS, Kioussi C, Lin C, O'Connell
SM, Ryan A, Szeto DP, Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, School
and Department of Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

During development of the mammalian pituitary gland, specific hormone-producing
cell types, critical in maintaining homeostasis, emerge in a spatially and
temporally specific fashion from an ectodermal primordium. We have investigated
the molecular basis of generating diverse cell phenotypes from a common
precursor, providing in vivo and in vitro evidence that development of these cell
types involves at least four sequential phases of signaling events and the action
of a gradient at an ectodermal boundary. In the first phase, we hypothesize that 
this notochord induces invagination of Rathke's pouch from the oral ectoderm.
This is followed by appearance of an ectodermal boundary, formed with exclusion
of Shh from the nascent pouch. Next, signals from the ventral
diencephalon--expressing BMP4, Wnt5a, FGF10, and FGF8--in concert with Shh
represent critical in vivo signals for pituitary determination. Subsequently, a
dorsal-ventral BMP2 signal gradient emanates from a ventral pituitary organizing 
center, forming at the boundary to oral ectoderm region from which Shh expression
is selectively excluded. In concert with a dorsal FGF8 signal, this creates
opposing gradients that generate overlapping patterns of specific transcription
factors that underlie cell lineage specification events. The mechanisms by which 
these transient gradients of signaling molecules lead to the appearance of four
ventral pituitary cell types appear to involve the reciprocal interactions of two
transcription factors, Pit-1 and GATA-2, which are epistatic to the remainder of 
the cell type-specific transcription programs and serve as a molecular memory of 
the transient signaling events. Unexpectedly, this program includes a
DNA-binding-independent function of Pit-1, suppressing the ventral
GATA-2-dependent gonadotrope program by inhibiting GATA-2 binding to gonadotrope-
but not thyrotrope-specific genes. This indicates that both DNA-binding-dependent
and-independent actions of abundant determining factors contribute to generate
distinct cell phenotypes. In the fourth phase, temporally specific loss of the
BMP2 signal is required to allow terminal differentiation. The consequence of
these sequential organ and cellular determination events is that each of the
pituitary cell types--gonadotropes, thyrotropes, somatotropes, lactotropes,
corticotropes, and melanotropes appears to be determined, in a ventral to dorsal 
gradient, respectively, apparently based on a combinatorial code of transcription
factors induced by the gradient of specific signaling molecules.

PMID: 11036930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Exp Hematol. 2000 Oct;28(10):1174-80.

Immunophenotypic and functional characterization of CD33(+)CD34(+) cells in human
cord blood of preterm neonates.

Jin CH(1), Takada H, Nomura A, Takahata Y, Nakayama H, Kajiwara M, Nakano H, Hara
T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize CD33(+)CD34(+) cells, a major population in human cord
blood (CB) CD34(+) cells of preterm neonates.
MATERIALS: The proportion of CD33(+) cells was analyzed on CB CD34(+) cells from 
preterm and full-term neonates. CD33(+)CD34(+) cells were purified by cell
sorting and analyzed on their clonogenic activity, proliferative activity in
short-time liquid suspension culture, and GATA-2 mRNA expression by RT-PCR and
Southern blot.
RESULTS: The absolute numbers and proportion of CD34(+) cells in mononuclear
cells inversely correlated with gestational age. CD33 was expressed on a majority
of CB CD34(+) cells of preterm neonates but on only a minor population of them in
full-term neonates. In addition, CD33 was dominantly expressed on CD38(-)CD34(+) 
cells or CD117(low)CD34(+) cells in CB of preterm neonates. CD33(+)CD34(+) cells 
of preterm cord blood had high proliferative and reproducible potentials compared
with CD33(-)CD34(+) cells. CD33(+)CD34(+) cells as well as CD33(-)CD34(+) cells
from preterm CB highly expressed GATA-2, in contrast to those from BM.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that CD33(+)CD34(+) cells, which are a major
population in CB CD34(+) cells of preterm neonates, do not simply represent
relatively mature myeloid lineage hematopoietic progenitor cells as those in
adult BM CD34(+) cells, and may contain hematopoietic stem cells or primitive
progenitor cells as in fetal liver.

PMID: 11027836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Science. 2000 Oct 6;290(5489):134-8.

Function of GATA transcription factors in preadipocyte-adipocyte transition.

Tong Q(1), Dalgin G, Xu H, Ting CN, Leiden JM, Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of
Public Health, 665 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Genes that control the early stages of adipogenesis remain largely unknown. Here,
we show that murine GATA-2 and GATA-3 are specifically expressed in white
adipocyte precursors and that their down-regulation sets the stage for terminal
differentiation. Constitutive GATA-2 and GATA-3 expression suppressed adipocyte
differentiation and trapped cells at the preadipocyte stage. This effect is
mediated, at least in part, through the direct suppression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma. GATA-3-deficient embryonic stem cells
exhibit an enhanced capacity to differentiate into adipocytes, and defective
GATA-2 and GATA-3 expression is associated with obesity. Thus, GATA-2 and GATA-3 
regulate adipocyte differentiation through molecular control of the
preadipocyte-adipocyte transition.

PMID: 11021798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 29;275(52):40967-73.

Analysis of the human lumican gene promoter.

Grover J(1), Liu CY, Kao WW, Roughley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children and Department of Surgery,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A6, Canada.

The human lumican gene was shown to possess one major transcription start site,
resulting in exon 1 of the gene giving rise to the first 74 base pairs (bp) of
the 5'-untranslated region. About 1.6 kilobase pairs of upstream promoter
sequence were sequenced and analyzed to identify elements responsible for gene
expression. No typical TATAA sequence was identified in the vacinity of the
transcription start site, but an atypical TATCA sequence residing 41 bp upstream 
was shown to be necessary for transcription, although it was incapable of
supporting transcription by itself. A GC box residing 74 bp upstream of the
transcription start site also was essential for the initiation of transcription. 
Sp3 was identified as the transcriptional activator binding to the GC box. No
additional elements that significantly modulated transcription were noted in the 
promoter sequence analyzed, when using human adult chondrocytes as the cell
source for transfection in reporter assays. In contrast, reporter assays carried 
out in human fetal lung fibroblasts, where lumican expression is deplete,
revealed the presence of a repressor element located between 384 and 598 bp
upstream of the transcription start site. A GATA-binding site located between bp 
-386 and -391 was identified as being necessary for repression of transcription. 
The mouse lumican promoter does not possess an equivalent site, and this may
explain why the lumican gene is expressed in fetal murine cartilage but not in
fetal human cartilage.

PMID: 11016924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Sep 25;167(1-2):43-53.

A role for GATA transcription factors in the androgen regulation of the
prostate-specific antigen gene enhancer.

Perez-Stable CM(1), Pozas A, Roos BA.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center and Research Service,
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL 33125, USA. cpsma@msn.com

The transgenic mouse line Ggamma/T-15 containing the fetal globin promoter linked
to SV40 T antigen unexpectedly results in androgen-independent prostate
carcinomas. Given the key role of GATA-1 transcription factor in fetal globin
gene promoter activity, we investigated whether specific GATA family members are 
expressed in the prostate and whether they can regulate prostate-specific genes. 
We found that GATA-2 and -3 are the predominant GATA family members expressed in 
human and mouse prostate and that GATA mRNA levels are not regulated by androgen.
We identified six GATA sites flanking an androgen-response element located in the
far-upstream enhancer of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene. These GATA
sites are targets for GATA factors and are essential for optimal androgen
induction of transfected PSA enhancer/promoter plasmids in LNCaP, a PSA and
androgen receptor expressing human prostate cancer cell line. Our results suggest
that prostatic GATA-2 and -3 are involved in the androgen regulation of the PSA
gene.

PMID: 11000519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Blood. 2000 Sep 1;96(5):1716-22.

N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine inhibits erythropoietin gene expression by stimulating
GATA-2.

Tarumoto T(1), Imagawa S, Ohmine K, Nagai T, Higuchi M, Imai N, Suzuki N,
Yamamoto M, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Minamikawachi-machi,
Tochigi-ken, Japan.

N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA) has been reported to be elevated in uremic
patients. Based on the hypothesis that the pathogenesis of the anemia of renal
disease might be due to the perturbation of transcription factors of the
erythropoietin (Epo) gene by L-NMMA, the present study was designed to
investigate the effect of L-NMMA on Epo gene expression through the GATA
transcription factor. L-NMMA caused decreased levels of NO, cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP), and Epo protein in Hep3B cells. L-NAME (analogue of L-NMMA)
also inhibited Epo production in anemic mice. Transfection of the Epo
promoter-luciferase gene into Hep3B cells revealed that L-NMMA inhibited the Epo 
promoter activity. However, L-NMMA did not inhibit the Epo promoter activity when
mutated Epo promoter (GATA to TATA) was transfected, and L-NMMA did not affect
the enhancer activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated the
stimulation of GATA binding activity by L-NMMA. However, L-NMMA had no effect on 
the binding activity of hepatic nuclear factor-4, COUP-TF1, hypoxia-inducing
factor-1, or NF-kappaB. Furthermore, cGMP inhibited the L-NMMA-induced GATA
binding activity. L-NMMA also increased GATA-2 messenger RNA expression. These
results demonstrate that L-NMMA suppresses Epo gene expression by up-regulation
of the GATA transcription factor and support the hypothesis that L-NMMA is one of
the candidate substances that underlie the pathogenesis of renal anemia. (Blood. 
2000;96:1716-1722)

PMID: 10961869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6276-86.

Potentiation of GATA-2 activity through interactions with the promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML) and the t(15;17)-generated PML-retinoic acid receptor
alpha oncoprotein.

Tsuzuki S(1), Towatari M, Saito H, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research, London 
SW3 6JB, United Kingdom.

The hematopoietically expressed GATA family of transcription factors function as 
key regulators of blood cell fate. Among these, GATA-2 is implicated in the
survival and growth of multipotential progenitors. Here we report that the
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) can complex with GATA-2 and potentiate its
transactivation capacity. The binding is mediated through interaction of the zinc
finger region of GATA-2 and the B-box domain of PML. The B-box region of PML is
retained in the PML-RARalpha (retinoic acid receptor alpha) fusion protein
generated by the t(15;17) translocation characteristic of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). Consistent with this, we provide evidence that GATA-2 can
physically associate with PML-RARalpha. Functional experiments further
demonstrated that this interaction has the capacity to render GATA-dependent
transcription inducible by retinoic acid, raising the possibility that GATA
target genes may be involved in the molecular pathogenesis of APL.

PMCID: PMC86102
PMID: 10938104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3829-38.

GATA2 is required for the generation of V2 interneurons.

Zhou Y(1), Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, USA.

During embryogenesis, transcription factor GATA2 is expressed in a variety of
distinct cell types, and earlier experiments showed that GATA2 is a vital
regulator of both hematopoiesis and urogenital development. Despite the fact that
GATA2 is expressed early and abundantly in the nervous system, there has been no 
demonstration of its direct participation in neurogenesis. We show here that
GATA2 is expressed in the ventral spinal cord exclusively in newly generated V2
interneurons, suggesting that GATA2 might be required for the generation of this 
discrete neuronal population. Proof for this hypothesis was provided by showing
that the number of cells expressing V2 neuronal markers was drastically
diminished in gata2 null mutant embryos. The tissue-specific enhancer that
directs gata2 transcription specifically in V2 neurons was localized to a 190 bp 
intragenic element lying within gata2 intron 5, and this element is both
necessary and sufficient to confer GATA2 spinal cord expression. The
identification of a V2-specific enhancer should allow fundamental new insight
into the genetic hierarchy of regulatory events that govern neurogenesis in a
well-defined cell lineage.

PMID: 10934027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Blood. 2000 Aug 1;96(3):910-6.

GATA factor transgenes under GATA-1 locus control rescue germline GATA-1 mutant
deficiencies.

Takahashi S(1), Shimizu R, Suwabe N, Kuroha T, Yoh K, Ohta J, Nishimura S, Lim
KC, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

GATA-1 germline mutation in mice results in embryonic lethality due to defective 
erythroid cell maturation, and thus other hematopoietic GATA factors do not
compensate for the loss of GATA-1. To determine whether the obligate presence of 
GATA-1 in erythroid cells is due to its distinct biochemical properties or
spatiotemporal patterning, we attempted to rescue GATA-1 mutant mice with
hematopoietic GATA factor complementary DNAs (cDNAs) placed under the
transcriptional control of the GATA-1 gene. We found that transgenic expression
of a GATA-1 cDNA fully abrogated the GATA-1-deficient phenotype. Surprisingly,
GATA-2 and GATA-3 factors expressed from the same regulatory cassette also
rescued the embryonic lethal phenotype of the GATA-1 mutation. However, adult
mice rescued with the latter transgenes developed anemia, while GATA-1 transgenic
mice did not. These results demonstrate that the transcriptional control
dictating proper GATA-1 accumulation is the most critical determinant of GATA-1
activity during erythropoiesis. The results also show that there are biochemical 
distinctions among the hematopoietic GATA proteins and that during adult
hematopoiesis the hematopoietic GATA factors are not functionally equivalent.

PMID: 10910904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Exp Hematol. 2000 Jul;28(7):833-40.

Sequential requirements for SCL/tal-1, GATA-2, macrophage colony-stimulating
factor, and osteoclast differentiation factor/osteoprotegerin ligand in
osteoclast development.

Yamane T(1), Kunisada T, Yamazaki H, Nakano T, Orkin SH, Hayashi SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori
University, Yonago, Japan. yamanet@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Osteoclasts are of hematopoietic origin. The mechanism by which
hematopoietic stem cells are specified to the osteoclast lineage is unclear. To
understand the process of generation and differentiation of this lineage of
cells, we performed in vitro studies on the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the potential of mutant embryonic stem cell
lines harboring targeted deletions of the GATA-1, FOG, SCL/tal-1, or GATA-2 genes
to differentiate into osteoclasts and determined when these molecules function in
osteoclast development.
RESULTS: The lack of GATA-1 or FOG did not affect osteoclastogenesis. In
contrast, SCL/tal-1-null embryonic stem cells generated no osteoclasts. In the
case of the loss of GATA-2, a small number of osteoclasts were generated.
GATA-2-null osteoclasts were morphologically normal and the terminal maturation
was not disturbed, but a defect was observed in the generation of osteoclast
progenitors. Experiments using specific inhibitors that block the signaling
through macrophage colony-stimulating factor and osteoclast differentiation
factor/osteoprotegerin ligand suggested that GATA-2 seems to act earlier in
osteoclastogenesis than these cytokines. Interestingly, macrophage colony-forming
units were not severely reduced by the loss of GATA-2 compared to osteoclast
progenitors.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that osteocalsts need SCL/tal-1 at an early
point in development, and that GATA-2 is required for generation of osteoclast
progenitors but not for the later stages when macrophage colony-stimulating
factor and osteoclast differentiation factor/ osteoprotegerin ligand are needed. 
We also demonstrated that osteoclast progenitors behave as a different population
than macrophage colony-forming units.

PMID: 10907645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biol Reprod. 2000 Aug;63(2):570-4.

GATA-2 restricts prolactin-like protein A expression to secondary trophoblast
giant cells in the mouse.

Ma GT(1), Linzer DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

An analysis of the pattern of expression of the mouse placental hormone
prolactin-like protein A (PLP-A) has revealed that this hormone is expressed
exclusively in secondary trophoblast giant cells but not in primary giant cells. 
Thus, PLP-A serves as a marker for a subset of giant cells. Recent results have
indicated that PLP-A binds to and inhibits the activity of natural killer cells, 
and thus, the localized expression of PLP-A may be important for regulating the
activity of this class of T lymphocytes in a restricted region of the
implantation site. Previous studies indicated that the transcription factor
GATA-2 is required for the trophoblast giant cell-specific expression of two
other hormones in the prolactin family, placental lactogen I and proliferin. In
the absence of GATA-2, PLP-A continues to be expressed, but in this mutant
background, PLP-A mRNA is detected in both primary and secondary giant cells.
Thus, GATA-2 contributes both to positive and negative regulation of trophoblast 
giant cell-specific gene expression, and this factor apparently plays an
important role in generating or maintaining the distinct functions of secondary, 
compared with primary, trophoblast giant cells.

PMID: 10906066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Infect Immun. 2000 Aug;68(8):4720-4.

Down-regulation of GATA-2 transcription during Pneumocystis carinii infection.

Tang X(1), Lasbury ME, Davidson DD, Bartlett MS, Smith JW, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Differences in gene expression between Pneumocystis carinii-infected and
noninfected rats were examined. Total RNA was isolated from homogenized rat lungs
and then subjected to differential display with combinations of oligo(dT) and
various arbitrary PCR primers. Approximately 50 differentially expressed bands
were observed. Several of these DNA bands were isolated, reamplified, and cloned.
The cloned DNA fragments were used as probes to perform Northern hybridization on
RNA from P. carinii-infected and noninfected rat lungs. One clone was found to
react with a 3-kb mRNA from noninfected but not from P. carinii-infected rat
lung, suggesting that the gene represented by this clone was down-regulated
during P. carinii infection. The nucleotide sequence of this clone was determined
and found to be 97% homologous to the mouse GATA-2 transcription factor. In situ 
hybridization using RNA probes derived from this clone revealed that alveolar
macrophages, resident lung monocytes, and bronchial epithelial cells express the 
GATA-2 gene in the lung.

PMCID: PMC98420
PMID: 10899878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. EMBO J. 2000 Jul 17;19(14):3683-93.

RNA-dependent cytoplasmic anchoring of a transcription factor subunit during
Xenopus development.

Brzostowski J(1), Robinson C, Orford R, Elgar S, Scarlett G, Peterkin T, Malartre
M, Kneale G, Wormington M, Guille M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Gilmer Hall, Charlottesville,
VA 22903-2477, USA.

The CCAAT box transcription factor (CBTF) is a multimeric transcription factor
that activates expression of the haematopoietic regulatory factor, GATA-2. The
122 kDa subunit of this complex, CBTF(122), is cytoplasmic in fertilized Xenopus 
eggs and subsequently translocates to the nucleus prior to activation of zygotic 
GATA-2 transcription at gastrulation. Here we present data suggesting both a role
for CBTF(122) prior to its nuclear translocation and the mechanism that retains
it in the cytoplasm before the midblastula transition (MBT). CBTF(122) and its
variant CBTF(98) are associated with translationally quiescent mRNP complexes. We
show that CBTF(122) RNA binding activity is both necessary and sufficient for its
cytoplasmic retention during early development. The introduction of an additional
nuclear localization signal to CBTF(122) is insufficient to overcome this
retention, suggesting that RNA binding acts as a cytoplasmic anchor for
CBTF(122). Destruction of endogenous RNA by microinjection of RNase promotes
premature nuclear translocation of CBTF(122). Thus, the nuclear translocation of 
CBTF(122) at the MBT is likely to be coupled to the degradation of maternal mRNA 
that occurs at that stage.

PMCID: PMC313978
PMID: 10899122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Circ Res. 2000 Jul 7;87(1):19-25.

Estrogens and glucocorticoids inhibit endothelial vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 expression by different transcriptional mechanisms.

Simoncini T(1), Maffei S, Basta G, Barsacchi G, Genazzani AR, Liao JK, De
Caterina R.

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Superiore di Studi e di Perfezionamento "S. Anna", Pisa, Italy.

The antiatherogenic effect of estrogen is mediated, in part, by inhibitory
effects on endothelial vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) expression. To 
determine the mechanism by which estrogen regulates VCAM-1 expression, we
compared the effect of 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) and of the glucocorticoid
dexamethasone (Dex) on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced VCAM-1 expression in
human endothelial cells. E(2) decreased LPS-induced VCAM-1 mRNA and protein
expression to a greater extent than Dex. Dex, but not E(2), stabilized VCAM-1
mRNA. This correlated with inhibition of monocytoid U937 cell adhesion to
endothelial cells. Transfection of endothelial cells with a functional VCAM-1
promoter construct showed that E(2) inhibited LPS-induced VCAM-1 gene
transcription more potently than did Dex. However, using a truncated construct
containing only the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-responsive elements but
lacking the consensus sequences for activator protein-1 (AP-1) and GATA, E(2) and
Dex had similar inhibitory effects. Consistently, gel-shift assays showed that
E(2) and Dex comparably inhibit LPS-induced activation of NF-kappaB, whereas E(2)
inhibited LPS-induced activation of AP-1 and GATA to a greater extent than Dex.
E(2) inhibition of NF-kappaB after LPS treatment was associated with decreased
inhibitor kappaB (IkappaB) kinase activity and with a stabilization of the
NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha. These results indicate that E(2) decreases
VCAM-1 gene expression through the inhibition of NF-kappaB, AP-1, and GATA and
suggest novel mechanisms for the antiatherogenic effect of estrogen on the
vascular wall.

PMID: 10884367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 24;273(1):239-45.

Transcription factor GATA-2 gene is located near 3q21 breakpoints in myeloid
leukemia.

Wieser R(1), Volz A, Vinatzer U, Gardiner K, Jäger U, Mitterbauer M, Ziegler A,
Fonatsch C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biologie der Universität Wien, Währingerstrasse 10, 
Vienna, A-1090, Austria.

Rearrangements affecting chromosome band 3q21 are observed in a subgroup of
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
However, little is known about the molecular consequences of such aberrations. We
therefore established a PAC contig in the 3q21 breakpoint region and identified
potential protein coding sequences by exon trapping. One of the exons isolated
was from the human GATA-2 gene, which we showed to be transcribed from telomere
to centromere. The majority of 3q21 breakpoints are located telomeric to the
transcribed portion of this gene in a region that in mice appears to be necessary
for proper promoter function. Results of GATA-2 expression analyses in leukemic
cell lines as well as primary patient samples are compatible with the hypothesis 
that 3q21 aberrations contribute to leukemogenesis through deregulation of the
hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-2.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. FEBS Lett. 2000 May 12;473(2):169-72.

Genomic structure and promoter analysis of putative mouse acetyl-CoA transporter 
gene.

Bora RS(1), Ichikawa S, Kanamori A, Hirabayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cellular Glycobiology and Sphingolipid Expression, Frontier
Research Program, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

The acetyl-CoA transporter gene (Acatn) encodes a hydrophobic, multitransmembrane
protein that is involved in the process of O-acetylation of sialic acid residues 
on gangliosides. O-Acetylated gangliosides have been found to play important
roles in tissue development and organization during early embryonic stages. We
have cloned the gene for mouse acetyl-CoA transporter. The gene spans
approximately 20 kb and is composed of seven exons and six introns. A single
transcription initiation site, 371 bp upstream of the ATG start codon, was
identified. The promoter region was found to lack a TATA box. However, several
potential transcription factor binding motifs such as AP1, AP2, C/EBPalpha,
C/EBPbeta, HSF, GATA2 and MZF1 were identified in the promoter region.

PMID: 10812068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12701-11.

Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II is stimulated by Wnt and Frizzled
homologs and promotes ventral cell fates in Xenopus.

Kühl M(1), Sheldahl LC, Malbon CC, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology and Center for
Developmental Biology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

Wnt ligands working through Frizzled receptors have a differential ability to
stimulate release of intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) and activation of protein
kinase C (PKC). Since targets of this Ca(2+) release could play a role in Wnt
signaling, we first tested the hypothesis that Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II (CamKII) is activated by some Wnt and Frizzled homologs. We
report that Wnt and Frizzled homologs that activate Ca(2+) release and PKC also
activate CamKII activity in Xenopus embryos, while Wnt and Frizzled homologs that
activate beta-catenin function do not. This activation occurs within 10 min after
receptor activation in a pertussis toxin-sensitive manner, concomitant with
autophosphorylation of endogenous CamKII. Based on data that Wnt-5A and Wnt-11
are present maternally in Xenopus eggs, and activate CamKII, we then tested the
hypothesis that CamKII participates in axis formation in the early embryo.
Measurements of endogenous CamKII activity from dorsal and ventral regions of
embryos revealed elevated activity on the prospective ventral side, which was
suppressed by a dominant negative Xwnt-11. If this spatial bias in CamKII
activity were involved in promoting ventral cell fate one might predict that
elevating CamKII activity on the dorsal side would inhibit dorsal cell fates,
while reducing CamKII activity on the ventral side would promote dorsal cell
fates. Results obtained by expression of CamKII mutants were consistent with this
prediction, revealing that CamKII contributes to a ventral cell fate.

PMID: 10777564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2031-40.

FOG acts as a repressor of red blood cell development in Xenopus.

Deconinck AE(1), Mead PE, Tevosian SG, Crispino JD, Katz SG, Zon LI, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Members of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors have critical
roles in a variety of cell types. GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 are required for
proliferation and differentiation of several hematopoietic lineages, whereas
GATA-4, GATA-5 and GATA-6 activate cardiac and endoderm gene expression programs.
Two GATA cofactors have recently been identified. Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1)
interacts with GATA-1 and is expressed principally in hematopoietic lineages,
whereas FOG-2 is expressed predominantly in heart and brain. Although gene
targeting experiments are consistent with an essential role for FOG-1 as an
activator of GATA-1 function, reporter assays in transfected cells indicate that 
FOG-1 and FOG-2 can act as repressors. We have cloned a Xenopus laevis homologue 
of FOG that is structurally most similar to FOG-1, but is expressed predominantly
in heart and brain, as well as the ventral blood island and adult spleen. Ectopic
expression and explant assays demonstrate that FOG proteins can act as repressors
in vivo, in part through interaction with the transcriptional co-repressor,
C-terminal Binding Protein (CtBP). FOG may regulate the differentiation of red
blood cells by modulating expression and activity of GATA-1 and GATA-2. We
propose that the FOG proteins participate in the switch from progenitor
proliferation to red blood cell maturation and differentiation.

PMID: 10769228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biol Chem. 2000 Feb;381(2):107-12.

Trichostatin A modulates expression of p21waf1/cip1, Bcl-xL, ID1, ID2, ID3,
CRAB2, GATA-2, hsp86 and TFIID/TAFII31 mRNA in human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Eickhoff B(1), Rüller S, Laue T, Köhler G, Stahl C, Schlaak M, van der Bosch J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Division of Experimental Immunopharmacology, Germany.

Lung adenocarcinoma cells treated for 16 h with trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of histone deacetylases, and untreated cells were analyzed with respect
to differential gene expression. Complex hybridization of cDNA arrays revealed
repression of Bcl-xL, CRAB2 and TFIID/TAFII31 as well as induction of
p21waf1/cip1, GATA-2, hsp86, ID1, ID2 and ID3 mRNA expression, which could be
verified by Northern blotting. ID2 induction was further confirmed by Taqman
realtime quantitative RT-PCR. The described alterations of gene expression due to
TSA renders the lung adenocarcinoma cells susceptible to induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 10746741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 31;275(13):9425-32.

Eosinophil-specific regulation of gp91(phox) gene expression by transcription
factors GATA-1 and GATA-2.

Yang D(1), Suzuki S, Hao LJ, Fujii Y, Yamauchi A, Yamamoto M, Nakamura M,
Kumatori A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host-defense Biochemistry, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

The glycoprotein gp91(phox) is an essential component of the phagocyte NADPH
oxidase and is expressed in eosinophils, neutrophils, monocytes, and
B-lymphocytes. We previously suggested an eosinophil-specific mechanism of
gp91(phox) gene expression. To elucidate the mechanism, we performed functional
assays on deletion mutants of the gp91(phox) promoter in various types of
gp91(phox)-expressing cells. A 10-base pair (bp) region from bp -105 to -96 of
the promoter activated transcription of the gene in eosinophilic cells, but not
in neutrophilic, monocytic, or B-lymphocytic cells. A 2-bp mutation introduced
into the GATA site spanning bp -101 to -96 (-98GATA site) of the fragment
abolished its activity. Gel shift assays using a GATA competitor and specific
antibodies demonstrated that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 specifically bound to the
-98GATA site with similar affinities. Individual transfection of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 into Jurkat cells, which have neither endogenous GATA-1 nor GATA-2,
activated the -105/+12 construct in a -98GATA site-dependent manner. Combined
transfection of GATA-1 and GATA-2 activated the promoter less than transfection
of GATA-1 alone. These results suggest that GATA-1 is an activator and that
GATA-2 is a relative competitive inhibitor of GATA-1 in the expression of the
gp91(phox) gene in human eosinophils.

PMID: 10734088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biochem. 2000 Jan;127(1):105-12.

Identification of human GATA-2 gene distal IS exon and its expression in
hematopoietic stem cell fractions.

Pan X(1), Minegishi N, Harigae H, Yamagiwa H, Minegishi M, Akine Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research 
Alliance (TARA) and Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Biochem (Tokyo). 2007 May;141(5):767.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is essential for the proper function of hematopoietic
stem cells and progenitors. Two first exons/promoters have been found in the
mouse GATA-2 gene, and a distal IS promoter shows activity specific to
hematopoietic progenitors and neural tissues. To ascertain whether the
two-promoter system is also utilized in the human GATA-2 gene, we isolated and
analyzed a P1 phage clone containing this gene. The nucleotide sequence of the
human GATA-2 gene 5' flanking region was determined over 10 kbp, and a human IS
exon was identified in the locus through sequence comparison analysis with that
of the mouse GATA-2 IS exon. RNA blotting and reverse-transcribed PCR analyses
identified a transcript that starts from the IS exon in human leukemia-derived
cell lines. The IS-originated transcript was also identified in CD34-positive
bone marrow and cord blood mononuclear cells, which are recognized as clinically 
important hematopoietic stem cell-enriched fractions. Phylogenic comparison of
the human and mouse GATA-2 gene sequences revealed several regions in the locus
that exhibit high sequence similarity. These results demonstrate that the GATA-2 
gene regulatory machinery is conserved among vertebrates. The fact that the human
IS promoter is active in the hematopoietic stem cell/progenitor fraction may be
an important clue for the design of a vector system that can specifically express
various genes in hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors.

PMID: 10731672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):8183-9.

Molecular basis of cell-specific endothelial nitric-oxide synthase expression in 
airway epithelium.

German Z(1), Chambliss KL, Pace MC, Arnet UA, Lowenstein CJ, Shaul PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role in airway function, and endothelial NO 
synthase (eNOS) is expressed in airway epithelium. To determine the basis of
cell-specific eNOS expression in airway epithelium, studies were performed in
NCI-H441 human bronchiolar epithelial cells transfected with the human eNOS
promoter fused to luciferase. Transfection with 1624 base pairs of sequence 5' to
the initiation ATG (position -1624) yielded a 19-fold increase in promoter
activity versus vector alone. No activity was found in lung fibroblasts, which do
not express eNOS. 5' deletions from -1624 to -279 had modest effects on promoter 
activity in H441 cells. Further deletion to -248 reduced activity by 65%, and
activity was lost with deletion to -79. Point mutations revealed that the GATA
binding motif at -254 is mandatory for promoter activity and that the positive
regulatory element between -248 and -79 is the Sp1 binding motif at -125.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays yielded two complexes with the GATA site
and three with the Sp1 site. Immunodepletion with antiserum to GATA-2 prevented
formation of the slowest migrating GATA complex, and antiserum to Sp1
supershifted the slowest migrating Sp1 complex. An electrophoretic mobility shift
assay with H441 versus fibroblast nuclei revealed that the slowest migrating GATA
complex is unique to airway epithelium. Thus, cell-specific eNOS expression in
airway epithelium is dependent on the interaction of GATA-2 with the core eNOS
promoter, and the proximal Sp1 binding site is also an important positive
regulatory element.

PMID: 10713142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):237-52.

Insights into early vasculogenesis revealed by expression of the ETS-domain
transcription factor Fli-1 in wild-type and mutant zebrafish embryos.

Brown LA(1), Rodaway AR, Schilling TF, Jowett T, Ingham PW, Patient RK, Sharrocks
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College
London, 26-29 Drury Lane, London, UK.

Fli-1 is an ETS-domain transcription factor whose locus is disrupted in Ewing's
Sarcoma and F-MuLV induced erythroleukaemia. To gain a better understanding of
its normal function, we have isolated the zebrafish homologue. Similarities with 
other vertebrates, in the amino acid sequence and DNA binding properties of Fli-1
from zebrafish, suggest that its function has been conserved during vertebrate
evolution. The initial expression of zebrafish fli-1 in the posterior lateral
mesoderm overlaps with that of gata2 in a potential haemangioblast population
which likely contains precursors of blood and endothelium. Subsequently, fli-1
and gata2 expression patterns diverge, with separate fli-1 and gata2 expression
domains arising in the developing vasculature and in sites of blood formation
respectively. Elsewhere in the embryo, fli-1 is expressed in sites of
vasculogenesis. The expression of fli-1 was investigated in a number of zebrafish
mutants, which affect the circulatory system. In cloche, endothelium is absent
and blood is drastically reduced. In contrast to the blood and endothelial
markers that have been studied previously, fli-1 expression was initiated
normally in cloche embryos, indicating that induction of fli-1 is one of the
earliest indicators of haemangioblast formation. Furthermore, although fli-1
expression in the trunk was not maintained, the normal expression pattern in the 
anterior half of the embryo was retained. These anterior cells did not, however, 
condense to form blood vessels. These data indicate that cloche has previously
unsuspected roles at multiple stages in the formation of the vasculature.
Analysis of fli-1 expression in midline patterning mutants floating head and
squint, confirms a requirement for the notochord in the formation of the
dorsal-aorta. The formation of endothelium in one-eyed pinhead, cyclops and
squint embryos indicates a novel role for the endoderm in the formation of the
axial vein. The phenotype of sonic-you mutants implies a likely role for Sonic
Hedgehog in mediating these processes.

PMID: 10640707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Development. 1999 Dec;126(23):5523-31.

The transcription factor GATA3 is a downstream effector of Hoxb1 specification in
rhombomere 4.

Pata I(1), Studer M, van Doorninck JH, Briscoe J, Kuuse S, Engel JD, Grosveld F, 
Karis A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, 51010 Tartu,
Estonia.

In this paper, we show that the transcription factor GATA3 is dynamically
expressed during hindbrain development. Function of GATA3 in ventral rhombomere
(r) 4 is dependent on functional GATA2, which in turn is under the control of
Hoxb1. In particular, the absence of Hoxb1 results in the loss of GATA2
expression in r4 and the absence of GATA2 results in the loss of GATA3
expression. The lack of GATA3 expression in r4 inhibits the projection of
contralateral vestibuloacoustic efferent neurons and the migration of facial
branchiomotor neurons similar to Hoxb1-deficient mice. Ubiquitous expression of
Hoxb1 in the hindbrain induces ectopic expression of GATA2 and GATA3 in ventral
r2 and r3. These findings demonstrate that GATA2 and GATA3 lie downstream of
Hoxb1 and provide the first example of Hox pathway transcription factors within a
defined population of vertebrate motor neurons.

PMID: 10556076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nature. 1999 Sep 30;401(6752):489-93.

Negative regulation of erythropoiesis by caspase-mediated cleavage of GATA-1.

De Maria R(1), Zeuner A, Eramo A, Domenichelli C, Bonci D, Grignani F,
Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, Testa U, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19107-5541, USA. rdemaria@lac.jci.tju.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Sep 30;401(6752):433, 435-6.

The production of red blood cells follows the sequential formation of
proerythroblasts and basophilic, polychromatophilic and orthochromatic
erythroblasts, and is promoted by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) in response to
tissue hypoxia. However, little is known about the negative regulation of this
process. Death receptors are a family of surface molecules that trigger caspase
activation and apoptosis in a variety of cell types. Here we show that immature
erythroid cells express several death receptors whose ligands are produced by
mature erythroblasts. Exposure of erythroid progenitors to mature erythroblasts
or death-receptor ligands resulted in caspase-mediated degradation of the
transcription factor GATA-1, which is associated with impaired erythroblast
development. Expression of a caspase-resistant GATA-1 mutant, but not of the
wild-type gene, completely restored erythroid expansion and differentiation
following the triggering of death receptors, indicating that there is regulatory 
feedback between mature and immature erythroblasts through caspase-mediated
cleavage of GATA-1. Similarly, erythropoiesis blockade following Epo deprivation 
was largely prevented by the expression of caspase-inhibitory proteins or
caspase-resistant GATA-1 in erythroid progenitors. Caspase-mediated cleavage of
GATA-1 may therefore represent an important negative control mechanism in
erythropoiesis.

PMID: 10519553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mech Dev. 1999 Sep;87(1-2):213-6.

Gata2 and Gata3: novel markers for early embryonic polarity and for non-neural
ectoderm in the chick embryo.

Sheng G(1), Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, 701 West 168th
Street #1602, New York, New York 10032, USA.

We have investigated in detail the expression patterns of two Gata genes, cGata2 
and cGata3, during early chick development. In addition to confirming previously 
described expression of these two genes in developing brain, kidney and blood
islands, this study reveals several important novel expression domains during
very early stages of development. cGata2 is expressed in the area opaca in
pre-primitive streak stages, forming a gradient along the A-P axis (strongest
anteriorly). Both genes are expressed strongly in the entire non-neural ectoderm 
from stage 4+, and neither is expressed in prospective neural plate at any stage.
Unlike other previously described non-neural markers, neither gene is expressed
in the dorsal neural tube. We also describe dynamic expression of cGata2 and
cGata3 during eye, ear and gut development.

PMID: 10495290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1999 Sep;115(3):463-73.

Isolation and characterization of the goldfish thyrotropin beta subunit gene
including the 5'-flanking region.

Sohn YC(1), Yoshiura Y, Suetake H, Kobayashi M, Aida K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8657, Japan.

The complete gene encoding the beta subunit of thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating
hormone, TSH) was isolated from a goldfish genomic library. The goldfish TSHbeta 
subunit gene, which is approximately 2.0 kilobase pairs (kb) in length, consisted
of three exons and two introns. The first intron was much longer (0.89 kb) than
the second intron (0.3 kb) as are TSHbeta genes in mammalian species. On the
basis of the location of the first intron, the goldfish TSHbeta gene belongs to
the mammalian TSHbeta/FSHbeta gene group, which is distinct from the LHbeta
group. Inspection of the 5'-flanking and exon 1 regions of the goldfish TSHbeta
gene (1.2 kb) revealed the presence of several putative cis-acting elements,
including the negative triiodothyronine (T(3))-responsive element (nTRE), Pit-1
element, and GATA-2 element. Comparison of the goldfish sequence with mammalian
TSHbeta promoter sequences showed an identical region, nTRE, in the first
exon-intron junction region. An in vitro study using dispersed goldfish pituitary
cells showed that T(3) treatment (20 ng/ml) suppressed the TSHbeta mRNA level in 
the cells. These data indicate that (1) the basic structure of TSHbeta genes is
highly conserved in vertebrates and that (2) T(3) acts directly on the pituitary 
and inhibits TSHbeta gene expression in goldfish, probably via the nTRE in the
TSHbeta gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10480998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Mech Dev. 1999 Jun;84(1-2):173-6.

Expression of GATA-2 in the developing avian rhombencephalon.

Bell E(1), Lumsden A, Graham A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Kings College London, UK.

Here we describe the expression pattern of GATA-2 in the developing chick
hindbrain. We found that during the early period of neurogenesis this gene
specifically labels a particular neuronal subtype, the contralateral
vestibular-acoustic neurons of rhombomere 4, and that expression of this gene in 
these cells is transient. We also found that GATA-2 labels a broader territory of
the ventral neural tube at later stages. As well as this hindbrain expression, we
also describe expression of GATA-2 in the otic vesicle, oculomotor nucleus, third
nerve and metanephros.

PMID: 10473136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 1999 Aug 5;400(6744):581-5.

IGF-1 induces skeletal myocyte hypertrophy through calcineurin in association
with GATA-2 and NF-ATc1.

Musarò A(1), McCullagh KJ, Naya FJ, Olson EN, Rosenthal N.

Collaborators: Rosenthal N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital-East,
Charlestown 02129, USA.

Localized synthesis of insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) has been broadly
implicated in skeletal muscle growth, hypertrophy and regeneration. Virally
delivered IGF-1 genes induce local skeletal muscle hypertrophy and attenuate
age-related skeletal muscle atrophy, restoring and improving muscle mass and
strength in mice. Here we show that the molecular pathways underlying the
hypertrophic action of IGF-1 in skeletal muscle are similar to those responsible 
for cardiac hypertrophy. Transfected IGF-1 gene expression in postmitotic
skeletal myocytes activates calcineurin-mediated calcium signalling by inducing
calcineurin transcripts and nuclear localization of calcineurin protein.
Expression of activated calcineurin mimics the effects of IGF-1, whereas
expression of a dominant-negative calcineurin mutant or addition of cyclosporin, 
a calcineurin inhibitor, represses myocyte differentiation and hypertrophy.
Either IGF-1 or activated calcineurin induces expression of the transcription
factor GATA-2, which accumulates in a subset of myocyte nuclei, where it
associates with calcineurin and a specific dephosphorylated isoform of the
transcription factor NF-ATc1. Thus, IGF-1 induces calcineurin-mediated signalling
and activation of GATA-2, a marker of skeletal muscle hypertrophy, which
cooperates with selected NF-ATc isoforms to activate gene expression programs.

PMID: 10448862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Dev Growth Differ. 1999 Feb;41(1):51-8.

Self-renewal and differentiation of a basic fibroblast growth factor-dependent
multipotent hematopoietic cell line derived from embryonic stem cells.

Anzai H(1), Nagayoshi M, Obata M, Ikawa Y, Atsumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Retroviral Regulation, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

Despite the accumulation of informat on on the origin of hematopoietic stem
cells, it is still unclear how these cells are generated in ontogeny. Isolation
of cell lines equivalent to early embryonic hematopoietic progenitor cells can be
helpful. A multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell line, A-6, was isolated from
H-1 embryonic stem (ES) cells. The self-renewal of A-6 cells was supported by
basic-fibroblast growth factor (b-FGF) and their differentiation into definitive 
erythroid cells, granulocytes and macrophages was induced after co-culture with
ST-2 stromal cells. A-6 cells were positive for the surface markers of
hematopoietic stem cell, c-kit, CD31, CD34, Flt3/Flk2, PgP-1, and HSA, but were
negative for that of the differentiated cells. Reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analysis showed that A-6 cells produced mRNA from SCL/tal-1 and
GATA-2 genes. Among various cytokines examined, on y stem cell factor (SCF) and
Flt3/Flk2 ligand (FL) supported the proliferation of A-6 cells instead of b-FGF. 
The FL, as well as b-FGF, supported the self-renewal of A-6 cells, whereas SCF
induced differentiation into myeloid cells. A-6 cells will be useful for the
characterization of hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from ES cells and
provide a model system to realize the control mechanisms between self-renewal and
different ation of hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 10445502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Cell Physiol. 1999 Sep;180(3):390-401.

Increased expression of the distal, but not of the proximal, Gata1 transcripts
during differentiation of primary erythroid cells.

Vannucchi AM(1), Linari S, Lin CS, Koury MJ, Bondurant MC, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Florence and Azienda Ospedale Careggi,
Italy.

Gata1 is expressed from either one of two alternative promoters, the erythroid
(proximal to the AUG) and the testis (distal to the AUG) promoter, both used by
hemopoietic cells. To clarify the role of the distal and proximal Gata1
transcripts in erythroid differentiation, we determined by specific reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reactions their relative levels of expression
during the differentiation of erythroid precursors purified from the spleen of
mice treated with phenylhydrazine (PHZ) or infected with the anemia-inducing
strain of the Friend virus (FVA cells). PHZ cells are erythroid precursors that
progress in vivo to erythroblasts in 3 days. Both PHZ and FVA cells synchronously
proliferate and differentiate in vitro in the presence of erythropoietin (EPO).
The levels of total and of distal, but not of proximal, Gata1 transcripts
increased by five- to eightfold during in vivo and in vitro differentiation of
FVA and PHZ cells. The increase in expression was temporally associated with an
increase in the expression of Eklf, Scl, and Nfe2, three genes required for
erythroid differentiation, and preceded by 24 h the repression of Gata2 and Myb
expression. The day 1 PHZ cells that survived 18 h in the absence of EPO do not
express globin genes and express detectable levels of distal but not of proximal 
Gata1 transcripts. These cells activate the expression of the globin genes within
2 h when exposed to EPO. Therefore, during erythroid differentiation of primary
cells, increased expression of distal Gata1 transcripts underlies the increase in
the expression of total Gata1 associated with the establishment of the erythroid 
differentiation program.

PMID: 10430179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Genes Dev. 1999 Jul 15;13(14):1847-60.

A GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera functions as a ligand-dependent negative
regulator of self-renewal.

Heyworth C(1), Gale K, Dexter M, May G, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign (CRC) Section of Hematopoietic Cell and Gene
Therapeutics, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital National 
Health Service Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells and is functionally implicated in their survival and proliferation. We have
used estrogen and tamoxifen-inducible forms of GATA-2 to modulate the levels of
GATA-2 in the IL-3-dependent multipotential hematopoietic progenitor cell model
FDCP mix. Ligand-dependent induction of exogenous GATA-2 activity did not rescue 
cells deprived of IL-3 from apoptosis. However, induction of GATA-2 activity in
cells cultured in IL-3 blocked factor-dependent self-renewal but not
factor-dependent survival: Cells undergo cell cycle arrest and cease
proliferating but do not apoptose. This was accompanied by differentiation down
the monocytic and granulocytic pathways. Differentiation occurred in the presence
of IL-3 and did not require addition of exogenous differentiation growth factors 
such as G-CSF or GM-CSF normally required to induce granulomonocytic
differentiation of FDCP-mix cells. Conversely, EPO-dependent erythroid
differentiation was inhibited by GATA-2 activation. These biological effects were
obtained with levels of exogenous GATA-2 representing less than twofold increases
over endogenous GATA-2 levels and were not observed in cells overexpressing
GATA-1/ER. Similar effects on proliferation and differentiation were also
observed in primary progenitor cells, freshly isolated from murine bone marrow
and transduced with a GATA-2/ER-containing retrovirus. Taken together, these data
suggest that threshold activities of GATA-2 in hematopoietic progenitor cells are
a critical determinant in influencing self-renewal versus differentiation
outcomes.

PMCID: PMC316885
PMID: 10421636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jul 20;96(15):8705-10.

Negative cross-talk between hematopoietic regulators: GATA proteins repress PU.1.

Zhang P(1), Behre G, Pan J, Iwama A, Wara-Aswapati N, Radomska HS, Auron PE,
Tenen DG, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The process through which multipotential hematopoietic cells commit to distinct
lineages involves the induction of specific transcription factors. PU.1 (also
known as Spi-1) and GATA-1 are transcription factors essential for the
development of myeloid and erythroid lineages, respectively. Overexpression of
PU.1 and GATA-1 can block differentiation in lineages in which they normally are 
down-regulated, indicating that not only positive but negative regulation of
these factors plays a role in normal hematopoietic lineage development. Here we
demonstrate that a region of the PU.1 Ets domain (the winged helix-turn-helix
wing) interacts with the conserved carboxyl-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 and that GATA proteins inhibit PU.1 transactivation of critical myeloid
target genes. We demonstrate further that GATA inhibits binding of PU.1 to c-Jun,
a critical coactivator of PU.1 transactivation of myeloid promoters. Finally,
PU.1 protein can inhibit both GATA-1 and GATA-2 transactivation function. Our
results suggest that interactions between PU.1 and GATA proteins play a critical 
role in the decision of stem cells to commit to erythroid vs. myeloid lineages.

PMCID: PMC17580
PMID: 10411939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Genet. 1999;25(1):49-63.

Gene trap screening using negative selection: identification of two tandem,
differentially expressed loci with potential hematopoietic function.

Cannon JP(1), Colicos SM, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A fusion gene between Escherichia coli lacZ and herpes simplex virus thymidine
kinase (HSV-tk) was constructed and used in a gene trap screen for hematopoietic 
loci in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. This gene, galtek, allowed both
convenient histochemical detection of expression as well as ablation of
expressing cells under 1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodouracil 
(FIAU) selection. Individual ES cell clones bearing gene trap insertions were
differentiated in the presence of FIAU and scored for erythropoietic activity at 
day 9 of differentiation. Screening of a total of 235 independent gene trap lines
identified one clone, F3, which consistently demonstrated FIAU-sensitive
erythropoiesis during in vitro differentiation. Cloning of endogenous transcribed
sequences from the F3 insertion site identified two distinct transcription units,
F3-1 and F3-2, encoding mRNAs of approximately 1.3 kb and 3.35 kb, respectively. 
The transcripts were unrelated and did not exhibit similarity to known sequences.
Both loci demonstrated similar relative levels of expression in the heart,
testis, kidney, and lung as assessed by Northern blot hybridization. Whole-mount 
in situ hybridization detected F3-2 expression at multiple sites in embryonic day
(E) 10.5 embryos, including the genital ridges, the aortic endothelium, and
endothelium-associated cell clusters within the aortic lumen. Expression of F3-2 
in the aortic endothelium and endothelium-associated clusters overlapped that of 
gata-2, a gene required for hematopoietic development. The FIAU sensitivity of
hematopoiesis in F3 embryoid bodies may result from expression of galtek during
the formation of early hematopoietic cells, directed by regulatory signals from
one or both of these endogenous loci.

PMID: 10402672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Science. 1999 Jun 25;284(5423):2168-71.

Homeotic transformation of rhombomere identity after localized Hoxb1
misexpression.

Bell E(1), Wingate RJ, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Segmentation of the hindbrain and branchial region is a conserved feature of head
development, involving the nested expression of Hox genes. Although it is
presumed that vertebrate Hox genes function as segment identifiers, responsible
for mediating registration between elements of diverse embryonic origin, this
assumption has remained untested. To assess this, retroviral misexpression was
combined with orthotopic grafting in chick embryos to generate a mismatch in Hox 
coding between a specific rhombomere and its corresponding branchial arch.
Rhombomere-restricted misexpression of a single gene, Hoxb1, resulted in the
homeotic transformation of the rhombomere, revealed by reorganization of motor
axon projections.

PMID: 10381880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Dev Dyn. 1999 Jun;215(2):139-47.

Detailed characterization of the human aorta-gonad-mesonephros region reveals
morphological polarity resembling a hematopoietic stromal layer.

Marshall CJ(1), Moore RL, Thorogood P, Brickell PM, Kinnon C, Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, England.
C.Marshall@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The definitive long-term repopulating human hematopoietic stem cell, which seeds 
the adult blood system, was previously thought to derive from the extra-embryonic
yolk sac. However, there is now considerable evidence that in both avian and
murine systems, yolk sac hematopoietic cells are largely a transient, embryonic
population and the definitive stem cell, in fact, derives from a distinct region 
within the embryonic mesoderm, the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region. In the human
embryo, an analogous region has been found to contain a cluster of cells distinct
from, but closely associated with, the ventral endothelium of the dorsal aorta,
the appearance of which is restricted both spatially and temporally. We have used
antibodies recognising hematopoietic regulatory factors to further characterise
this region in the human embryo. These studies indicate that all factors
examined, including vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor FLK-1,
Flt-3 ligand and its receptor STK-1, and stem cell leukemia transcription factor,
are expressed by both hematopoietic cells in the cluster and endothelial cells.
However, there is some discontinuity in cells directly underlying the cluster.
Furthermore, we have identified a morphologically distinct region of
densely-packed, rounded cells in the mesenchyme directly beneath the ventral wall
of the dorsal aorta, and running along its entire length. In the preumbilical AGM
region, directly underlying the hematopoietic cluster, but not at more rostral
and caudal levels, this region of mesenchyme expresses tenascin-C, an
extracellular matrix glycoprotein known to facilitate cell-cell interactions and 
migration. This region of cells may therefore provide the microenvironmental
support for the intraembryonic development of definitive hematopoietic stem
cells, a process in which tenascin-C may play a pivotal role.

PMID: 10373018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999 Apr 30;872:57-66; discussion 66-70.

Further characterization of CD34-low/negative mouse hematopoietic stem cells.

Nakauchi H(1), Takano H, Ema H, Osawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Ibaraki, Japan.
nakauchi@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

We have previously reported that in adult mouse bone marrow, CD34low/- c-kit+
Sca-1+ lineage markers negative (Lin-) (CD34-KSL) cells represent hematopoietic
stem cells with long-term marrow repopulating ability whereas CD34+ c-kit+ Sca-1+
Lin- (CD34+KSL) cells are progenitors with short-term reconstitution capacity. To
further characterize cells in those two populations, relative expression of
various genes were examined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). In CD34-KSL cells, none of the genes studied was found to be expressed 
with the exception of GATA-2, IL-1R alpha, IL-2R gamma, AIC-2B, c-kit, EPO-R, and
c-mpl. In contrast, expression of GATA-1 and all cytokine receptor genes examined
except IL-2R beta, IL-7R alpha and IL-9R alpha were found in CD34+KSL. The
difference between these two populations was also shown in single cell culture
analysis of these cells. When cells were clone-sorted and cultured in the
presence of SCF, IL-3 and EPO, CD34-KSL cells required much more time to undergo 
the first cell division than CD34+KSL cells. Dormancy and random fashion of cell 
division by CD34-KSL cells were also evident by the analysis of the second cell
division, which was found to be delayed and unsynchronous compared with CD34+KSL 
cells. Clonal culture analysis showed that CD34-KSL cells were more potent in
proliferation and multilineage differentiation capacities than CD34+KSL cells. In
a paired-daughter cell experiment, 75% of CD34-KSL and 50% of CD34+KSL
paired-daughter-derived colonies were nonidentical with wide variety of lineage
combinations. Taken together, these data support our previous notion that
CD34-KSL cells are at higher rank in hematopoietic hierarchy than CD34+KSL cells.
In addition, our results using highly enriched stem cell population directly
obtained from mouse bone marrow support the proposed stochastic nature of lineage
commitment.

PMID: 10372111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cell. 1999 May 28;97(5):587-98.

Reciprocal interactions of Pit1 and GATA2 mediate signaling gradient-induced
determination of pituitary cell types.

Dasen JS(1), O'Connell SM, Flynn SE, Treier M, Gleiberman AS, Szeto DP, Hooshmand
F, Aggarwal AK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

The mechanisms by which transient gradients of signaling molecules lead to
emergence of specific cell types remain a central question in mammalian
organogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that the appearance of four ventral pituitary
cell types is mediated via the reciprocal interactions of two transcription
factors, Pit1 and GATA2, which are epistatic to the remainder of the cell
type-specific transcription programs and serve as the molecular memory of the
transient signaling events. Unexpectedly, this program includes a DNA
binding-independent function of Pit1, suppressing the ventral GATA2-dependent
gonadotrope program by inhibiting GATA2 binding to gonadotrope- but not
thyrotrope-specific genes, indicating that both DNA binding-dependent and
-independent actions of abundant determining factors contribute to generate
distinct cell phenotypes.

PMID: 10367888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Blood. 1999 Jun 15;93(12):4196-207.

The mouse GATA-2 gene is expressed in the para-aortic splanchnopleura and
aorta-gonads and mesonephros region.

Minegishi N(1), Ohta J, Yamagiwa H, Suzuki N, Kawauchi S, Zhou Y, Takahashi S,
Hayashi N, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

We previously reported that the mouse GATA-2 gene is regulated by two alternative
promoters (Minegishi et al, J Biol Chem, 273:3625, 1998). Although the more
proximal IG (general) promoter is active in almost all GATA-2-expressing cells,
the distal IS (specific) promoter activity was selectively detected in
hematopoietic tissues but not in other mesodermal tissues. We report here in vivo
analysis of the GATA-2 locus and its regulatory characteristics in hematopoietic 
tissues of transgenic mice. Transgenes containing 6 or 7 kbp of sequence flanking
the 5' end of the IS first exon direct expression of beta-galactosidase or green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter genes specifically to the para-aortic
splanchnopleura, aorta-gonads, and mesonephros (AGM) region, and in the neural
tissues. In situ hybridization analysis showed that reporter gene expression
specifically recapitulates the endogenous expression profile of GATA-2 in these
tissues. The flk-1, CD34, c-kit, and CD45 antigens were identified in the
GFP-positive cells from the AGM region and fetal liver, indicating that GATA-2 is
expressed in immature hematopoietic cells. Deletion of 3.5 kbp from the 5' end of
the 6.0 kbp IS promoter construct, including one of the DNase I hypersensitive
sites, completely abolished hematopoietic expression. These experiments describe 
an early developmental GATA-2 hematopoietic enhancer located between 6.0 and 2.5 
kbp 5' to the IS exon.

PMID: 10361117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Biol. 1999 Jun 15;210(2):305-21.

Expression and genetic interaction of transcription factors GATA-2 and GATA-3
during development of the mouse central nervous system.

Nardelli J(1), Thiesson D, Fujiwara Y, Tsai FY, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Cytosquelette et Développement, CNRS URA 2115, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, 105
Boulevard de l'Hôpital, Paris Cedex, 75 634, France. nardelli@idf.ext.jussieu.fr

Here we examine the expression of transcription factors GATA-2 and GATA-3 during 
early stages of embryonic development in the central nervous system (CNS) of the 
mouse. GATA-2 is expressed as early as 9 dpc in the hindbrain, in ventral
rhombomere 4, and transiently in ventral rhombomere 2 (r2). From 9.5 to 11.5 dpc,
activation of the gene spreads to many sites of early neuronal differentiation,
such as the olfactory bulbs, the pretectum, and the oculomotor nucleus in the
midbrain, a thin stripe of cells lining the floor plate from the mesencephalon to
the cervical spinal cord and a ventral column of cells spanning the neural tube
from rostral hindbrain and including motor neuron as well as ventral interneuron 
precursors. GATA-3 is expressed in a pattern very similar to that of GATA-2.
Distinguishing features are the lack of expression in r2 at 9 dpc and a slight
delay in its activation. In addition, GATA-2 is activated in both the ventricular
and the subventricular zones of the neural tube, whereas GATA-3 is restricted
mainly to the subventricular zone. Expression analyses performed on GATA-2 -/-
mouse embryos between E9.5 and 10.5 dpc established that: (i) the expression of
GATA-3 in the developing CNS of the mouse embryo is dependent on the presence of 
GATA-2 and (ii) loss of GATA-2 leads to severe defects in neurogenesis, which
strongly suggests that GATA-2 is involved, as in hematopoiesis, in the
maintenance of the pool of ventral neuronal progenitors.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10357893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Carcinog. 1999 May;25(1):64-72.

Involvement of mutations in the DPC4 promoter in endometrial carcinoma
development.

Zhou Y(1), Kato H, Shan D, Minami R, Kitazawa S, Matsuda T, Arima T, Barrett JC, 
Wake N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Physiology and Endocrinology, Medical Institute of 
Bioregulation, Kyushu Univeristy, Beppu, Oita, Japan.

To define the target of chromosome 18q loss of heterozygosity, which is prevalent
in endometrial carcinomas, we made a deletion map from 64 tumors. Loss of
heterozygosity on 18q was found in 20 tumors. Among these, 14 tumors carried
deletions at the 18q21.1 region, where the DPC4 gene is located. DPC4
transcription was disturbed in all six of the tumors with deletions at 18q21.1
examined, which sharply contrasted with the positive transcription in 12 tumors
that retained heterozygosity at the 18q21.1 region. However, in the 14 tumors
with the 18q21.1 deletions, the remaining allele had the wild-type sequence of
the DPC4 coding region instead of somatic mutations in the DPC4 coding region. We
found a one- and two-base substitutions in the DPC4 promoter in two of the six
tumors that showed disturbed DPC4 transcription. Chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assays clearly demonstrated that the mutant promoters had the
potential to suppress or silence DPC4 transcription, implicating the DPC4 gene in
endometrial carcinoma.

PMID: 10331746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3355-68.

Unicellular-unilineage erythropoietic cultures: molecular analysis of regulatory 
gene expression at sibling cell level.

Ziegler BL(1), Müller R, Valtieri M, Lamping CP, Thomas CA, Gabbianelli M,
Giesert C, Bühring HJ, Kanz L, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
benedikt.ziegler@uni-tuebingen.de

In vitro studies on hematopoietic control mechanisms have been hampered by the
heterogeneity of the analyzed cell populations, ie, lack of lineage specificity
and developmental stage homogeneity of progenitor/precursor cells growing in
culture. We developed unicellular culture systems for unilineage differentiation 
of purified hematopoietic progenitor cells followed by daughter cell analysis at 
cellular and molecular level. In the culture system reported here, (1) the growth
factor (GF) stimulus induces cord blood (CB) progenitor cells to proliferate and 
differentiate/mature exclusively along the erythroid lineage; (2) this
erythropoietic wave is characterized by less than 4% apoptotic cells; (3)
asymmetric divisions are virtually absent, ie, nonresponsive hematopoietic
progenitors with no erythropoietic potential are forced into apoptosis; (4) the
system is cell division controlled (cdc), ie, the number of divisions performed
by each cell is monitored. Single-cell reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis was applied to this culture system to investigate gene
expression of diverse receptors, markers of differentiation, and transcription
factors (EKLF, GATA-1, GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, PU.1, and SCL/Tal1) at discrete stages 
of erythropoietic development. Freshly isolated CD34(+) cells expressed CD34,
c-kit, PU.1, and GATA-2 but did not express CD36, erythropoietin receptor (EpoR),
SCL/Tal1, EKLF, NF-E2, GATA-1, or glyocophorin A (GPA). In early to intermediate 
stages of erythroid differentiation we monitored the induction of CD36, Tal1,
EKLF, NF-E2, and GATA-1 that preceeded expression of EpoR. In late stages of
erythroid maturation, GPA was upregulated, whereas CD34, c-kit, PU.1, and GATA-2 
were barely or not detected. In addition, competitive single-cell RT-PCR was used
to assay CD34 mRNA transcripts in sibling CD34(+)CD38(-) cells differentiating in
unilineage erythroid cultures: this analysis allowed us to semiquantitate the
gradual downmodulation of CD34 mRNA from progenitor cells through their
differentiating erythroid progeny. It is concluded that this novel culture
system, coupled with single-cell RT-PCR analysis, may eliminate the ambiguities
intrinsic to molecular studies on heterogeneous populations of hematopoietic
progenitors/precursors growing in culture, particularly in the initial stages of 
development.

PMID: 10233888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 15;208(2):352-61.

Opposite effects of FGF and BMP-4 on embryonic blood formation: roles of PV.1 and
GATA-2.

Xu RH(1), Ault KT, Kim J, Park MJ, Hwang YS, Peng Y, Sredni D, Kung Hf.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland, 
21702, USA.

In adult vertebrates, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) synergizes with many
hematopoietic cytokines to stimulate the proliferation of hematopoietic
progenitors. In vertebrate development, the FGF signaling pathway is important in
the formation of some derivatives of ventroposterior mesoderm. However, the
function of FGF in the specification of the embryonic erythropoietic lineage has 
remained unclear. Here we address the role of FGF in the specification of the
erythropoietic lineage in the Xenopus embryo. We report that ventral injection of
embryonic FGF (eFGF) mRNA at as little as 10 pg at the four-cell stage suppresses
ventral blood island (VBI) formation, whereas expression of the dominant negative
form of the FGF receptor in the lateral mesoderm, where physiologically no blood 
tissue is formed, results in a dramatic expansion of the VBI. Similar results
were observed in isolated ventral marginal zones and animal caps. Bone
morphogenetic protein-4 (BMP-4) is known to induce erythropoiesis in the Xenopus 
embryo. Therefore, we examined how the BMP-4 and FGF signaling pathways might
interact in the decision of ventral mesoderm to form blood. We observed that eFGF
inhibits BMP-4-induced erythropoiesis by differentially regulating expression of 
the BMP-4 downstream effectors GATA-2 and PV.1. GATA-2, which stimulates
erythropoiesis, is suppressed by FGF. PV.1, which we demonstrate to inhibit blood
development, is enhanced by FGF. Additionally, PV.1 and GATA-2 negatively
regulate transcription of each other. Thus, BMP-4 induces two transcription
factors which have opposing effects on blood development. The FGF and BMP-4
signaling pathways interact to regulate the specification of the erythropoietic
lineage.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10191050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Blood. 1999 Feb 15;93(4):1168-77.

Expression of alpha4-integrin defines the earliest precursor of hematopoietic
cell lineage diverged from endothelial cells.

Ogawa M(1), Kizumoto M, Nishikawa S, Fujimoto T, Kodama H, Nishikawa SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. mogawa@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Embryonic stem cells can differentiate in vitro into hematopoietic cells through 
two intermediate stages; the first being FLK1(+) E-cadherin- proximal lateral
mesoderm and the second being CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ endothelial cells. To further 
dissect the CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ cells, we have examined distribution of
alpha4-integrin on this cell population, because alpha4-integrin is the molecule 
expressed on hematopoietic stem cells. During culture of FLK1(+) E-cadherin-
cells, CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ alpha4-integrin- cells differentiate first, followed 
by alpha4-integrin+ cells appearing in both CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ and CD45(-)
VE-cadherin- cell populations. In the CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ cell population,
alpha4-integrin+ subset but not alpha4-integrin- subset had the potential to
differentiate to hematopoietic lineage cells, whereas endothelial cell
progenitors were present in both subsets. The CD45(-) VE-cadherin-
alpha4-integrin+ cells also showed hematopoietic potential. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses showed that differential
expression of the Gata2 and Myb genes correlated with the potential of the
alpha4-integrin+ cells to give rise to hematopoietic cell differentiation.
Hematopoietic CD45(-) VE-cadherin+ alpha4-integrin+ cells were also present in
the yolk sac and embryonic body proper of 9.5 day postcoitum mouse embryos. Our
results suggest that the expression of alpha4-integrin is a marker of the
earliest precursor of hematopoietic cell lineage that was diverged from
endothelial progenitors.

PMID: 9949159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Blood. 1999 Jan 15;93(2):488-99.

Enforced expression of the GATA-2 transcription factor blocks normal
hematopoiesis.

Persons DA(1), Allay JA, Allay ER, Ashmun RA, Orlic D, Jane SM, Cunningham JM,
Nienhuis AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Department of Hematology/Oncology, St
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 is highly expressed in immature
hematopoietic cells and declines with blood cell maturation. To investigate its
role in normal adult hematopoiesis, a bicistronic retroviral vector encoding
GATA-2 and the green fluorescent protein (GFP) was used to maintain the high
levels of GATA-2 that are normally present in primitive hematopoietic cells.
Coexpression of the GFP marker facilitated identification and quantitation of
vector-expressing cells. Bone marrow cells transduced with the GATA-2 vector
expressed GFP as judged by flow cytometry and GATA-2 as assessed by immunoblot
analysis. A 50% to 80% reduction in hematopoietic progenitor-derived colony
formation was observed with GATA-2/GFP-transduced marrow, compared with marrow
transduced with a GFP-containing vector lacking the GATA-2 cDNA. Culture of
purified populations of GATA-2/GFP-expressing and nonexpressing cells confirmed a
specific ablation of the colony-forming ability of GATA-2/GFP-expressing
progenitor cells. Similarly, loss of spleen colony-forming ability was observed
for GATA-2/GFP-expressing bone marrow cells. Despite enforced GATA-2 expression, 
marrow cells remained viable and were negative in assays to evaluate apoptosis.
Although efficient transduction of primitive Sca-1(+) Lin- cells was observed
with the GATA-2/GFP vector, GATA-2/GFP-expressing stem cells failed to
substantially contribute to the multilineage hematopoietic reconstitution of
transplanted mice. Additionally, mice transplanted with purified,
GATA-2/GFP-expressing cells showed post-transplant cytopenias and decreased
numbers of total and gene-modified bone marrow Sca-1(+) Lin- cells. Although
Sca-1(+) Lin- bone marrow cells expressing the GATA-2/GFP vector were detected
after transplantation, no appreciable expansion in their numbers occurred. In
contrast, control GFP-expressing Sca-1(+) Lin- cells expanded at least 40-fold
after transplantation. Thus, enforced expression of GATA-2 in pluripotent
hematopoietic cells blocked both their amplification and differentiation. There
appears to be a critical dose-dependent effect of GATA-2 on blood cell
differentiation in that downregulation of GATA-2 expression is necessary for stem
cells to contribute to hematopoiesis in vivo.

PMID: 9885210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Dec 15;26(24):5684-91.

Conserved elements containing NF-E2 and tandem GATA binding sites are required
for erythroid-specific chromatin structure reorganization within the human
beta-globin locus control region.

Pomerantz O(1), Goodwin AJ, Joyce T, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Pharmacology/Toxicology, Dartmouth
Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Proper expression of the genes of the human beta-globin gene locus requires the
associated locus control region (LCR). Structurally, the LCR is defined by the
presence of four domains of erythroid-specific chromatin structure. These
domains, which have been characterized as DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs),
comprise the active elements of the LCR. The major focus of this research is to
define the cis -acting elements which are required for the formation of these
domains of unique chromatin structure. Our previous investigations on the
formation of LCR HS4 demonstrated that NF-E2 and tandem, inverted GATA binding
sites are required for the formation of the native HS. Similarly arranged NF-E2
and tandem GATA sites are present within the core regions of the other human LCR 
HSs and are evolutionarily conserved. Using site-directed mutagenesis of human
HSs 2 and 3 we have tested the hypothesis that these NF-E2 and GATA sites are
common requirements for the formation of all LCR HSs. We find that mutation of
these elements, and particularly the GATA elements, results in a decrease or
complete loss of DNase I hypersensitivity. These data imply the presence of
common structural elements within the core of each LCR HS which are required for 
erythroid-specific chromatin structure reorganization.

PMCID: PMC148032
PMID: 9838000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32910-9.

Alternate promoters and developmental modulation of expression of the chicken
GATA-2 gene in hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Nony P(1), Hannon R, Gould H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0540, USA.

We have isolated and characterized the chicken GATA-2 (cGATA-2) gene. We show
that, as in the case of some other members of the GATA gene family, the gene is
expressed from alternative first exons. One of the resulting mRNAs represents
only a minor form of the GATA-2 mRNA in the cells and tissues we analyzed; the
other is ubiquitously expressed. We have defined the minimal promoter that
controls expression of this most abundant mRNA and that is necessary for full
activity in hematopoietic progenitor cells. The activity of this promoter in
transient assays is consistent with developmental differences of expression
levels in these cells. We identify within the promoter a previously unrecognized 
extended CCAAT motif essential for its activity. The organization of the cGATA-2 
gene, with alternative first exons and a CCAAT box in the proximal promoter, is
similar to that recently described for mouse GATA-2, and the proximal promoter
also resembles the only promoter so far described in Xenopus. Nonetheless, the
roles of the promoters in development and tissue-specific expression are quite
different in these organisms, most strikingly in the mouse, which assigns
developmental roles to its proximal and distal promoters that are quite different
from those in the chicken. We suggest that although the overall organization may 
remain the same, the role assigned to each promoter varies among organisms. We
identify distant upstream regulatory elements in the cGATA-2 gene that modulate
expression from the proximal promoter and that may be responsible for this
variation.

PMID: 9830041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 16;17(22):6689-700.

Rescue of the embryonic lethal hematopoietic defect reveals a critical role for
GATA-2 in urogenital development.

Zhou Y(1), Lim KC, Onodera K, Takahashi S, Ohta J, Minegishi N, Tsai FY, Orkin
SH, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, USA.

Mutations resulting in embryonic or early postnatal lethality could mask the
activities of any gene in unrelated and temporally distinct developmental
pathways. Targeted inactivation of the transcription factor GATA-2 gene leads to 
mid-gestational death as a consequence of hematopoietic failure. We show here
that a 250 kbp GATA-2 yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) is expressed strongly in 
both the primitive and definitive hematopoietic compartments, while two smaller
YACs are not. This largest YAC also rescues hematopoiesis in vitro and in vivo,
thereby localizing the hematopoietic regulatory cis element(s) to between 100 and
150 kbp 5' to the GATA-2 structural gene. Introducing the YAC transgene into the 
GATA-2(-/-) genetic background allows the embryos to complete gestation; however,
newborn rescued pups quickly succumb to lethal hydroureternephrosis, and display 
a complex array of genitourinary abnormalities. These findings reveal that GATA-2
plays equally vital roles in urogenital and hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC1171014
PMID: 9822612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cancer Res. 1998 Nov 1;58(21):4817-22.

ET-1 expression and growth inhibition of prostate cancer cells: a retinoid target
with novel specificity.

Hsu JY(1), Pfahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego, California 92121, USA.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is not only a potent vasoconstrictor but also serves as an
important growth stimulator in various cancers, including breast, cervical,
pancreatic, and prostate cancer. This suggests that blockage of ET-1 production
may suppress tumor growth and possibly metastasis. We observed that certain
synthetic retinoids, and all-trans-retinoic acid can repress LNCaP prostate
cancer cell growth in vitro. In addition, these retinoid compounds counteracted
exogenous ET-1-induced growth stimulation. Retinoid-dependent growth retardation 
of LNCaP cells coincided with suppression of ET-1 gene expression to a level
undetectable by reverse transcription-PCR. Contrarily, the androgen-insensitive
DU145 cells were refractory to retinoid treatment. To investigate the underlying 
mechanisms of the cell-specific response to retinoids, we transfected ET-1
promoter constructs containing wild-type or mutated AP-1 or GATA-2 site into
prostate cancer cells. Distinct regulations of ET-1 promoter activity were found;
in LNCaP cells, both binding sites are essential for optimal promoter activation,
whereas in DU145 cells, additional promoter sequences and/or transcriptional
factors seem to be involved. Furthermore, several anti-AP-1 selective retinoids
failed to repress ET-1 promoter activity and to exhibit a cell growth-inhibitory 
effect on LNCaP cells, suggesting that different retinoid structural
configurations are required for the inhibition of an AP-1 complex versus an
AP-1/GATA-2 complex.

PMID: 9809984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Exp Hematol. 1998 Nov;26(12):1148-54.

GATA-1 and erythropoietin receptor genes are highly expressed in erythroleukemia.

Komatsu N(1), Kirito K, Izumi T, Eguchi M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

We examined expression of the erythroid-associated genes GATA-1 and
erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) in primary leukemia using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). GATA-1 and EPOR mRNAs were
detectable in all cases of erythroleukemia (French-American-British
classification: M6) or early erythroblastic leukemia. In all other leukemia
cases, including M2 through M5, stem cell leukemia, and adult T-cell leukemia,
these gene transcripts were undetectable. GATA-2 was detectable in all the cases 
of primary leukemias examined in this study, except one case of M5. In one case, 
the phenotype switched from myeloid (M2) to erythroid (M6) and then back to
myeloid. Northern blotting and RT-PCR revealed that GATA-1 and EPOR mRNAs were
significantly upregulated at the M6 stage compared with the M2 stage. GATA-1 may 
be involved in the expression of an erythroid phenotype in acute leukemia. We
generated HL-60 transfectants exogenously expressing GATA-1. The majority of
HL-60 cells expressing GATA-1 lacked azurophilic granules, and electron
microscopic analysis revealed that myeloperoxidase activity was negative.
Platelet peroxidase activity, which was detectable in both megakaryoblasts and
erythroid progenitors, was positive. However, EPOR and glycophorin A mRNAs were
undetectable by RT-PCR. These findings suggest that besides GATA-1, a third
factor may be required for the expression of mature erythroid phenotypes. In
addition, our results indicate that GATA-1 is involved in inactivation of
myeloperoxidase and activation of the platelet peroxidase.

PMID: 9808054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Br J Haematol. 1998 Sep;102(4):940-51.

Factor binding to the human gamma-globin gene distal CCAAT site: candidates for
repression of the normal gene or activation of HPFH mutants.

Partington GA(1), Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, The Randall Institute, Division of
Biomedical Sciences, King's College London.

We have examined factor binding to the distal human gamma-globin CCAAT site and
three naturally occurring hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin (HPFH)
mutations of this site. Factor binding was examined using nuclear extracts from
the erythroleukaemic cell lines K562 and MEL, and from A4 cells, a
non-transformed mouse bone marrow stem cell line, using the electrophoretic
mobility shift assay. Under standard binding conditions, in addition to the
previously reported binding by a CCAAT factor (CP1) and GATA-1, the wild-type
(wt) sequence bound high mobility factors which appeared to be GATA-2 isoforms.
However, when the non-specific competitor conditions were varied, the binding
profile with K562, but not MEL nuclear extract, was substantially altered. CP1
and GATA-1 were absent, and two new factors were detected, one of which bound
preferentially to the Greek and Japanese non-deletion HPFH mutants. However,
binding by the GATA-2 isoforms to the wt sequence was maintained with both cell
types, as it was using the A4 cell line. With modified binding conditions, in A4 
cells the two non-deletion and the Black deletion HPFH mutants each had a
different protein binding profile which was lost on erythroid induction of the
cells. We discuss the possibility that the GATA-2 isoforms bound to the wt
sequence may function to suppress wt gamma gene expression in the bone marrow.
Additionally, those factors which bind preferentially either to the deletion or
non-deletion HPFH mutants may play positive roles in establishing an active
chromatin structure.

PMID: 9734644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Sep;42(6):763-74.

Evidence for non-axial A/P patterning in the nonneural ectoderm of Xenopus and
zebrafish pregastrula embryos.

Read EM(1), Rodaway AR, Neave B, Brandon N, Holder N, Patient RK, Walmsley ME.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, King's College London, The Randall
Institute, United Kingdom.

Recent studies in early Xenopus and zebrafish embryos have demonstrated that
posteriorizing, non-axial signals arising from outside the organizer (or shield) 
contribute to A/P patterning of the neural axis, in contradiction to the
classical Spemann model in which such signals were proposed to be solely
organizer derived. Our studies on the early expression of the transcription
factors GATA-2 and 3 in both Xenopus and zebrafish nonneural ectoderm lend
support to the existence of such non-axial signaling in the A/P axis. Thus we
find that the earliest expression of GATA-2 and 3 is located in nonneural
ectoderm and is strongly patterned in a graded manner along the A/P axis, being
high anteriorly and absent from the most posterior regions. This results by early
neurula stages in three broad zones: an anterior region which is positive for
both GATA-2 and 3, a middle region which is positive for GATA-2 alone and a
posterior region in which neither gene is expressed. These regions correspond to 
head, trunk and tail ectoderm and may represent the beginnings of functional
segmentation of nonneural ectoderm, as suggested in the concept of the
'ectomere'. We find that A/P patterning of GATA expression in nonneural ectoderm 
may occur as early as late blastula/early gastrula stages. We investigate which
posteriorizing signals might contribute to such distinct non axial ectodermal
patterning in the A/P axis and provide evidence that both FGF and a Wnt family
member contribute towards the final A/P pattern of GATA expression in nonneural
ectoderm.

PMID: 9727832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5557-66.

The maternal CCAAT box transcription factor which controls GATA-2 expression is
novel and developmentally regulated and contains a double-stranded-RNA-binding
subunit.

Orford RL(1), Robinson C, Haydon JM, Patient RK, Guille MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, Division of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute of 
Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth PO1
2DY, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed at high levels in the nonneural
ectoderm of the Xenopus embryo at neurula stages, with lower amounts of RNA
present in the ventral mesoderm and endoderm. The promoter of the GATA-2 gene
contains an inverted CCAAT box conserved among Xenopus laevis, humans, chickens, 
and mice. We have shown that this sequence is essential for GATA-2 transcription 
during early development and that the factor binding it is maternal. The
DNA-binding activity of this factor is detectable in nuclei and chromatin bound
only when zygotic GATA-2 transcription starts. Here we report the
characterization of this factor, which we call CBTF (CCAAT box transcription
factor). CBTF activity mainly appears late in oogenesis, when it is nuclear, and 
the complex has multiple subunits. We have identified one subunit of the factor
as p122, a Xenopus double-stranded-RNA-binding protein. The p122 protein is
perinuclear during early embryonic development but moves from the cytoplasm into 
the nuclei of embryonic cells at stage 9, prior to the detection of CBTF activity
in the nucleus. Thus, the accumulation of CBTF activity in the nucleus is a
multistep process. We show that the p122 protein is expressed mainly in the
ectoderm. Expression of p122 mRNA is more restricted, mainly to the anterior
ectoderm and mesoderm and to the neural tube. Two properties of CBTF, its dual
role and its cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation, are shared with other vertebrate
maternal transcription factors and may be general properties of these proteins.

PMCID: PMC109140
PMID: 9710639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Int J Hematol. 1998 Jun;67(4):369-78.

Frequent expression of human Thy-1 antigen on pre-B cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(9;22).

Takahashi T(1), Mizutani M, Miwa H, Katayama N, Nishii K, Shikami M, Yamaguchi M,
Shiku H, Kamada N, Kita K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan.

Thy-1 (CDw90) is a phosphatidylinositol-anchored protein, and is expressed on
human pluripotential hematopoietic stem cells. The expression pattern of this
antigen on leukemia cells is still controversial. In this study, 72 adult
patients with pre-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B ALL) were examined
for the expression pattern of Thy-1 by using indirect immunofluorescence and
reversed transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods. Twelve cases
were judged positive on the basis of conventional immunophenotype criteria.
Thirteen cases showed a weak clonal shift on the fluorogram, even though their
positive percentages were from 6.7% to 14.9%. Thy-1 gene transcripts were
detected in all of the 13 cases showing a weak clonal shift. The study of
antibody binding capacity, which was calculated by the mean fluorescence
intensity of the test sample on the basis of a calibration curve using standard
beads, showed that cases with more than 150 sites/cell could be positive. Thy-1
positivity in pre-B ALL was not associated with the expression of B-cell
differentiation antigens. Thy-1 expression was significantly higher in pre-B ALL 
cases with karyotypic abnormalities than in those with normal karyotype (p =
0.0071). The t(9;22) abnormality was found in 18 of the 25 Thy-1+ cases.
Simultaneous expression of transcriptional factors, GATA-2 and SCL, was
frequently detected in the Thy-1+ cases. bcr-abl and GATA-2 are thought to play
important roles in the proliferation of immature hematopoietic cells. Indeed,
cell-cycle analysis showed that the cell population in the S/G2/M phase of the
present Thy-1+ cases was less than that in the Thy-1- cases (p = 0.001770). Our
data suggest that Thy-1 expression indicates the proliferative status of the
leukemia cells, not their phenotypic immaturity.

PMID: 9695410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mamm Genome. 1998 Aug;9(8):617-21.

The rat microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene (Mitf) maps at
4q34-q41 and is mutated in the mib rats.

Opdecamp K(1), Vanvooren P, Rivière M, Arnheiter H, Motta R, Szpirer J, Szpirer
C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurogenetics, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

The rat gene encoding the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf)
was assigned to rat Chromosome (Chr) 4q34-q41, as well as the Gata2 and Mem1
genes. Rat Chr 4 is homologous to mouse Chr 6 and human Chr 3, which carry the
Mitf (MITF) gene in these species (MMU 6, 40.0 cM, and HSA 3p14.1-p12.3). mib/mib
rats, which are characterized by depigmentation, microphtalmy, osteopetrosis, and
neurological disorders were shown to bear a deletion covering several kilobases
of genomic DNA in the Mitf gene and to lack Mitf mRNA. The Mitf mutation in the
mib/mib rats is thus very likely to be a Mitf null mutation, causing a phenotype 
similar to the one observed in the miVGA-9 mice, but including osteopetrosis as
an additional feature.

PMID: 9680380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Jun;9(6):487-96.

Thrombopoietin supports in vitro erythroid differentiation via its specific
receptor c-Mpl in a human leukemia cell line.

Yamada M(1), Komatsu N, Kirito K, Kashii Y, Tomizuka H, Okada K, Endo T, Fukumaki
Y, Shinjo K, Abe K, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) acts on megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis in vitro and in 
vivo. We isolated a novel subline, UT-7/GMT, from the human leukemia cell line
UT-7/GM (N. Komatsu, et al., Blood, 89: 4021-4033, 1997). A small population of
UT-7/GM cells positively stained for hemoglobin (Hb) after a 7-day exposure to
TPO. More than 50% of TPO-treated UT-7/GMT cells positively stained for Hb. Using
UT-7/GMT cells, we examined how TPO promotes hemoglobinization. TPO induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of the TPO receptor but not the erythropoietin (EPO)
receptor. There was no competition between TPO and EPO for binding to EPO
receptor. These findings suggest that TPO has a direct effect on
hemoglobinization via a specific receptor on UT-7/GMT cells. Isoelectric focusing
demonstrated that TPO induced fetal and adult Hb synthesis, whereas EPO induced
embryonic, fetal, and adult Hb synthesis. Thus, our data suggest that TPO has a
distinct action on erythropoiesis.

PMID: 9663467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 9;247(1):65-9.

Transcription factor NF-E2 is essential for the polyploidization of a human
megakaryoblastic cell line, Meg-J.

Kobayashi S(1), Teramura M, Ito K, Iwabe K, Inaba T, Mizoguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors regulating the process of megakaryocyte development remain 
largely unclarified. To clarify them further, we used a human megakaryoblastic
cell line, Meg-J, which showed prominant polyploidization and augmented platelet 
glycoprotein (GP) Ib expression after incubation with thrombopoietin (TPO, c-mpl 
ligand) and K252a (an indolocarbasole derivative). Under these conditions, we
analyzed the expression of the transcription factors and observed that the
expression of NF-E2 p45, but not those of GATA-1, GATA-2, Tal-1/SCL, Evi-1, and
MafK, was increased after TPO and K252a stimulation. Gel-shift assay confirmed
the enhanced binding activity to the NF-E2 site. The abolishment of NF-E2 p45
with NF-E2 antisense oligomers inhibited TPO plus K252a-induced polyploidization.
These findings suggest that NF-E2 p45 is essential for the polyploidization of
megakaryocytic cells.

PMID: 9636655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Virol. 1998 Jul;72(7):5579-88.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors bind to the U3 region of
Cas-Br-E and graffi retroviruses and transactivate their expression.

Barat C(1), Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département de Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3P8.

Cas-Br-E and Graffi are two murine viruses that induce myeloid leukemia in mice: 
while Cas-Br-E induces mostly non-T, non-B leukemia composed of very immature
cells, Graffi causes exclusively a granulocytic leukemia (E. Rassart, J. Houde,
C. Denicourt, M. Ru, C. Barat, E. Edouard, L. Poliquin, and D. Bergeron, Curr.
Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 211:201-210, 1995). In an attempt to understand the
basis of the myeloid specificity of these two retroviruses, we used DNase I
footprinting analysis and gel mobility shift assays to identify a number of
protein binding sites within the Cas-Br-E and Graffi U3 regions. Two protected
regions include potential GATA binding sites. Methylation interference analysis
with different hematopoietic nuclear extracts showed the importance of the G
residues in these GATA sites, and supershift assays clearly identified the
binding factors as GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Transient assays with long
terminal repeat (LTR)-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs showed that
these three GATA family members are indeed able to transactivate Cas-Br-E and
Graffi LTRs. Thus, the availability and relative abundance of the various members
of the GATA family of transcription factors in a given cell type could influence 
the transcriptional tissue specificity of murine leukemia viruses and hence their
disease specificity.

PMCID: PMC110213
PMID: 9621016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 8;273(19):11737-44.

The human ICAM-2 promoter is endothelial cell-specific in vitro and in vivo and
contains critical Sp1 and GATA binding sites.

Cowan PJ(1), Tsang D, Pedic CM, Abbott LR, Shinkel TA, d'Apice AJ, Pearse MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy 3065, Victoria,
Australia.

The expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (ICAM-2) in adult tissues is 
restricted to vascular endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. We have previously
shown that the endothelial-specific in vivo activity of the human ICAM-2 promoter
is contained within a small (0.33-kilobase (kbp)) 5'-flanking region of the gene.
Here we describe the in vitro characterization of this region. The ICAM-2
promoter is TATA-less, and transcription in endothelial cells initiates at four
sites. Reporter gene expression directed by the promoter was 125-fold greater
than vector alone in bovine aortic endothelial cells but less than 2-fold vector 
alone in non-endothelial (COS) cells, confirming that specificity in vivo was
paralleled in vitro. The addition of 2.7 kbp of 5'-flanking region to the
0.33-kbp fragment had no effect on promoter activity or specificity. The mutation
of an Sp1 motif centered at base pair -194 or an eight-base pair palindrome at
-268 each reduced promoter activity by 70%. Mutation of GATA motifs at -145 and
-53 reduced promoter activity by 78 and 61%, respectively. Specific binding of
bovine aortic endothelial cells nuclear proteins to the Sp1 and GATA sites was
demonstrated by gel shift analysis. Promoter activity in COS cells was
transactivated 3-4-fold by overexpression of GATA-2. The results presented here
suggest that transcription from the ICAM-2 promoter in endothelial cells is
regulated by the interplay of several positive-acting factors and provide the
basis for further analysis of endothelial-specific gene expression.

PMID: 9565596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 28;95(9):5121-6.

Modification of bacterial artificial chromosomes through chi-stimulated
homologous recombination and its application in zebrafish transgenesis.

Jessen JR(1), Meng A, McFarlane RJ, Paw BH, Zon LI, Smith GR, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The modification of yeast artificial chromosomes through homologous recombination
has become a useful genetic tool for studying gene function and enhancer/promoter
activity. However, it is difficult to purify intact yeast artificial chromosome
DNA at a concentration sufficient for many applications. Bacterial artificial
chromosomes (BACs) are vectors that can accommodate large DNA fragments and can
easily be purified as plasmid DNA. We report herein a simple procedure for
modifying BACs through homologous recombination using a targeting construct
containing properly situated Chi sites. To demonstrate a usage for this
technique, we modified BAC clones containing the zebrafish GATA-2 genomic locus
by replacing the first coding exon with the green fluorescent protein (GFP)
reporter gene. Molecular analyses confirmed that the modification occurred
without additional deletions or rearrangements of the BACs. Microinjection
demonstrated that GATA-2 expression patterns can be recapitulated in living
zebrafish embryos by using these GFP-modified GATA-2 BACs. Embryos microinjected 
with the modified BAC clones were less mosaic and had improved GFP expression in 
hematopoietic progenitor cells compared with smaller plasmid constructs. The
precise modification of BACs through Chi-stimulated homologous recombination
should be useful for studying gene function and regulation in cultured cells or
organisms where gene transfer is applicable.

PMCID: PMC20224
PMID: 9560239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Blood. 1998 May 1;91(9):3447-58.

Mechanisms of transcription in eosinophils: GATA-1, but not GATA-2,
transactivates the promoter of the eosinophil granule major basic protein gene.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Ackerman SJ, Minegishi N, Takiguchi M, Yamamoto M, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, University School of Medicine, Kumamoto, Japan.

Granule major basic protein (MBP) is expressed exclusively in eosinophils,
basophils, and placental trophoblasts. To identify the cis-elements and
transcription factors involved in regulating MBP expression, we subcloned 3.2 kb 
of sequence upstream of the exon 9 transcriptional start site (P2 promoter) and
serial 5' deletions into the pXP2 luciferase reporter vector. An 80% decrement in
promoter activity was obtained when MBP sequences between bp -117 to -67 were
deleted. To identify transcription factors that bind to and transactivate through
the bp -117 to -67 region, we first compared the upstream genomic sequences of
human and murine MBP; a potential GATA binding consensus site was conserved in
the 50-bp region between the two genes. To determine which GATA proteins bind
this consensus site, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), 
which showed that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 can bind to this consensus site. To
determine the functionality of this site, we tested whether GATA-1 and GATA-2,
either individually or in combination, can transactivate the MBP promoter in the 
Jurkat T cell line. Cotransfection with a GATA-1 expression vector produced
20-fold augmentation of MBP promoter activity, whereas GATA-2 had no activity. In
contrast, combined cotransfection of GATA-1 and GATA-2 decreased the ability of
GATA-1 to transactivate the MBP promoter by approximately 50%. Our results
provide the first evidence for a GATA-1 target gene in eosinophils, a negative
regulatory role for GATA-2 in MBP expression, and possibly eosinophil gene
transcription in general during myelopoiesis.

PMID: 9558404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Genes Cells. 1998 Jan;3(1):39-50.

Differential roles of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in growth and differentiation of mast
cells.

Harigae H(1), Takahashi S, Suwabe N, Ohtsu H, Gu L, Yang Z, Tsai FY, Kitamura Y, 
Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: While mast cells have been previously shown to express both GATA-1
and GATA-2 mRNAs, individual functions for these related factors during their
course of differentiation within the mast cell lineage have not yet been defined.
To address this question, the expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNAs and proteins 
were examined in three mouse mast cell progenitor lines as well as in mast cells 
isolated from both wild-type and GATA-1-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Both mast cell progenitor lines, as well as primary mouse bone
marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) and peritoneal mast cells (PMCs) were examined 
by RNA blotting and immunological analyses. GATA-2 protein was abundantly
expressed in all three mast cell lines and in BMMCs, but only weakly in some of
PMCs. In contrast, GATA-1 protein was expressed in PMCs and BMMCs after culture
in the presence of IL3 and SCF. We also found the presence of Alcian blue
staining-positive but berberine staining-negative mast cells in the skin of mice 
heterozygous to GATA-1 knock-down allele.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the expression of GATA factor-dependent
genes is regulated by GATA-2 during mast cell development and that GATA-1 is
required for the specification of differentiated mast cell phenotypes.

PMID: 9581981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. AIDS. 1998 Feb 12;12(3):253-9.

Hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-2 activates transcription from HIV-1 long
terminal repeat.

Towatari M(1), Kanei Y, Saito H, Hamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Research Institute for Disease
Mechanism and Control, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To study the role of the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-2 in
long terminal repeat (LTR)-directed transcriptional activation of HIV-1 in
hematopoietic progenitor cells, and to investigate possible GATA-2 binding sites 
in HIV-1 LTR.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Wild-type HIV-1 LTR, or mutants, ligated to a luciferase
reporter gene with or without a GATA-2 expression vector, were transfected into
COS cells, and standardized luciferase activity was examined. The binding
activity of GATA-2 to these sites was examined by electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay. These wild-type or mutant reporter genes were also transfected into the
murine hematopoietic progenitor cells, BAF3, in which GATA-2 was the
predominantly expressed transcription factor of the GATA family, to assay
LTR-directed transcription in intact hematopoietic machinery. Using a Tat
expression plasmid for cotransfection, the influence of Tat protein on
GATA-2-induced transactivation was determined.
RESULTS: In COS cells, LTR-dependent transactivation was highly enhanced by the
coexpression of GATA-2. Experiments with mutant LTR suggested the presence of
multiple GATA-2 binding sites, of which the major sites were identified.
Cotransfection of Tat with GATA-2 indicated that GATA-2 and Tat synergistically
enhanced the transcriptional activity. Transfection experiments in BAF3 cells
showed that the disruption of these GATA sites diminished LTR-driven activity to 
40% of the wild-type.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA-2 may be a key host cell regulator of HIV-1 expression in
hematopoietic stem cells. Manipulating this transactivation may represent a
valuable approach to controlling virus production in infected hematopoietic
progenitors. To elucidate the possible interaction between GATA-2 and Tat protein
in vivo might give new insights to the mechanism of impaired hematopoiesis in
AIDS patients.

PMID: 9517987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 17;95(4):1641-6.

Blood-borne seeding by hematopoietic and endothelial precursors from the
allantois.

Caprioli A(1), Jaffredo T, Gautier R, Dubourg C, Dieterlen-Lièvre F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie cellulaire et moléculaire du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique et du Collège de France 49bis, av. de la Belle Gabrielle, 
94736 Nogent s/Marne cedex, France. caprioli@infobiogen.fr

Until now the allantois has not been considered as a hematopoietic organ. Here we
report experimental evidence demonstrating the in situ emergence of both
hematopoietic and endothelial precursors in the avian allantoic bud. When the
prevascularized allantoic bud from a quail embryo was grafted in the coelom of a 
chicken host, hematopoietic and endothelial cells later were found in the bone
marrow of the host. Because the graft was located at a distance from the limb
bud, these cells could reach the bone marrow only by the circulatory pathway.
This blood-borne seeding may be accomplished by distinct hematopoietic and
endothelial precursors, or by hemangioblasts, the postulated common precursors of
these two lineages; we consider the latter interpretation more likely. We also
show by reverse transcription-PCR that the allantois region expresses very early 
the GATA genes involved in hematopoiesis and some beta-globin chain genes.

PMCID: PMC19130
PMID: 9465069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 6;273(6):3625-34.

Alternative promoters regulate transcription of the mouse GATA-2 gene.

Minegishi N(1), Ohta J, Suwabe N, Nakauchi H, Ishihara H, Hayashi N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-2 has been shown to be a key regulator in hematopoietic
progenitor cells. To elucidate how the expression of the GATA-2 gene is
controlled, we isolated the mouse GATA-2 (mGATA-2) gene. Transcription of mGATA-2
mRNAs was found to initiate from two distinct first exons, both of which encode
entirely untranslated regions, while the remaining five exons are shared by each 
of the two divergent mRNAs. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
analysis revealed that GATA-2 mRNA initiated at the upstream first exon (IS) in
Sca-1+/c-kit+ hematopoietic progenitor cells, whereas mRNA that initiates at the 
downstream first exon (IG) is expressed in all tissues and cell lines that
express GATA-2. While the structure of the IG exon/promoter shows high similarity
to those of the Xenopus and human GATA-2 genes, the IS exon/promoter has not been
described previously. When we examined the regulation contributing to IS
transcription using transient transfection assays, we found that sequences lying 
between -79 and -61 are critical for the cell type-specific activity of the IS
promoter. DNase I footprinting experiments and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated the binding of transcription factors to this region. These
data indicate that the proximal 80 base pair region of IS promoter is important
for the generation of cell type-specific expression of mGATA-2 from the IS exon.

PMID: 9452491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1997 Dec;11(6):1199-206.

Stem cell transcription factors.

Shivdasani RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The individual properties of hematopoietic stem cells, including self-renewal,
maintenance of pluripotency, and asymmetric cell division, must depend at some
level on the functions of specific transcription factors. Recently, valuable
insights into stem cell transcription factor function have emerged from targeted 
gene disruption (knockout) studies in mice. Absence of transcription factors
belonging to diverse protein families results in interference with expansion and 
differentiation of either the stem cell itself or of primitive multipotential
progenitors. The findings from these and complementary experiments provide a
framework for examining the transcription control of the earliest cellular events
in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9443052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Dec;8(12):1317-28.

Human erythropoietin receptor increases GATA-2 and Bcl-xL by a protein kinase
C-dependent pathway in human erythropoietin-dependent cell line AS-E2.

Tsushima H(1), Urata Y, Miyazaki Y, Fuchigami K, Kuriyama K, Kondo T, Tomonaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) is a cytokine known to stimulate proliferation and
differentiation of erythroid cells. However, recent gene disruption experiments
demonstrated that Epo receptor signaling is not an obligatory step in erythroid
differentiation. Here, we describe the role of Epo in proliferation, terminal
differentiation, and apoptosis in a novel human Epo-dependent cell line, AS-E2.
Upon withdrawal of Epo, the cells ceased to proliferate and underwent apoptotic
death. Accompanying this cell death, an increase in the number of
hemoglobin-positive cells of approximately 2-fold was observed. This was
associated with immediate up-regulation of the GATA-1:GATA-2 ratio and
down-regulation of Bcl-xL. Treatment with Epo or
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) up-regulated expression of GATA-2 and
Bcl-xL, and these elevations were inhibited by inhibitors of protein kinase C
(PKC), H7 and H8. HA1004, a structural analogue of H7 but a poor inhibitor of
PKC, had no inhibitory effect. Therefore, in AS-E2 cells, it is likely that Epo
plays a role in (a) proliferation, (b) inhibition of differentiation, and (c)
survival, by maintaining GATA-2 and Bcl-xL expression through activation of PKC.

PMID: 9419420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 26;272(39):24339-47.

Pit-1 and GATA-2 interact and functionally cooperate to activate the thyrotropin 
beta-subunit promoter.

Gordon DF(1), Lewis SR, Haugen BR, James RA, McDermott MT, Wood WM, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.
david.gordon@uchsc.edu

The molecular determinants governing cell-specific expression of the thyrotropin 
(TSH) beta-subunit gene in pituitary thyrotropes are not well understood. The P1 
region of the mouse TSHbeta promoter (-133 to -88) region interacts with Pit-1
and an additional 50-kDa factor at an adjacent site that resembles a consensus
GATA binding site. Northern and Western blot assays demonstrated the presence of 
GATA-2 transcripts and protein in TtT-97 thyrotropic tumors. In electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, a comigrating complex was observed with both TtT-97
nuclear extracts and GATA-2 expressed in COS cells. The complex demonstrated
binding specificity to the P1 region DNA probe and could be disrupted by a GATA-2
antibody. When both Pit-1 and GATA-2 were combined, a slower migrating complex,
indicative of a ternary protein-DNA interaction was observed. Cotransfection of
both Pit-1 and GATA-2 into CV-1 cells synergistically stimulated mouse TSHbeta
promoter activity 8.5-fold, while each factor alone had a minimal effect.
Mutations that abrogated this functional stimulatory effect mapped to the P1
region. Finally, we show that GATA-2 directly interacts with Pit-1 in solution.
In summary, these data demonstrate functional synergy and physical interaction
between homeobox and zinc finger factors and provide insights into the
transcriptional mechanisms of thyrotrope-specific gene expression.

PMID: 9305891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Blood. 1997 Aug 15;90(4):1435-47.

Hematopoietic-specific genes are not induced during in vitro differentiation of
scl-null embryonic stem cells.

Elefanty AG(1), Robb L, Birner R, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor, scl, plays an essential role in
hematopoietic development. Embryos in which the gene has been disrupted fail to
develop yolk sac erythropoiesis, and scl-null embryonic stem cells do not
contribute to hematopoiesis in chimeric mice. To analyze the molecular
consequences of scl deficiency, we compared the gene expression profiles of
control (wild-type and scl-heterozygous) and scl-null embryonic stem cells
differentiated in vitro for up to 12 days. In control and scl-null embryoid
bodies the temporal expression pattern of genes associated with the formation of 
ventral mesoderm, such as Brachyury, bone morphogenetic protein-4, and flk-1, was
identical. Similarly, GATA-2, CD34, and c-kit, which are coexpressed in
endothelial and hematopoietic lineages, were expressed normally in scl-null
embryonic stem cell lines. However, hematopoietic-restricted genes, including the
transcription factors GATA-1, EKLF, and PU.1 as well as globin genes and
myeloperoxidase, were only expressed in wild-type and scl-heterozygous embryonic 
stem cells. Indirect immunofluorescence was used to confirm the observations that
GATA-1 and globins were only present in control embryoid bodies but that CD34 was
found on both control and scl-null embryoid bodies. These data extend the
previous gene ablation studies and support a model whereby scl is absolutely
required for commitment of a putative hemangioblast to the hematopoietic lineage 
but that it is dispensable for endothelial differentiation.

PMID: 9269761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3417-25.

The proximal promoter region of the gene encoding human 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 contains GATA, AP-2, and Sp1 response elements: analysis of 
promoter function in choriocarcinoma cells.

Piao YS(1), Peltoketo H, Vihko P, Vihko R.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Oulu,
Finland.

The 5'-flanking region from -78 to +9 in the HSD17B1 gene serves as a promoter,
and an HSD17B1 silencer element is located in position -113 to -78. In the
present studies, we have characterized three regulatory elements in the proximal 
5'-flanking regions of the gene, using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and 
reporter gene analysis. First, nuclear factors recognized by antibodies against
Sp1 and Sp3 were found to bind the Sp1 motif in the region from -52 to -43.
Mutation of the Sp1-binding site decreased the promoter activity to 30% in JEG-3 
cells and to 60% in JAR cells, suggesting that binding to the Sp1 motif has a
substantial role in the complete functioning of the HSD17B1 promoter. Second, the
binding of AP-2 to its motif in the region from -62 to -53 led to reduced binding
of Sp1 and Sp3, and furthermore, mutation of the AP-2 element increased promoter 
activity to 260% in JEG-3 cells. The data thus implied that AP-2 can repress the 
function of the HSD17B1 promoter by preventing binding to the Sp1 motif. Finally,
GATA factors, GATA-3 in particular, were demonstrated to bind their cognate
sequence in the HSD17B1 silencer region, and mutations introduced into the
GATA-binding site increased transcriptional activity to the level seen in
constructs not containing the silencer element. Thus, GATA-3 seems to prevent
transcription in the constructs, and hence, the GATA motif also may operate as a 
negative control element for HSD17B1 transcription.

PMID: 9231796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 10;94(12):6267-72.

Promoter analysis in living zebrafish embryos identifies a cis-acting motif
required for neuronal expression of GATA-2.

Meng A(1), Tang H, Ong BA, Farrell MJ, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

We have used zebrafish embryos to dissect the promoter activity of a gene with a 
complex expression pattern during embryogenesis. GATA-2 is a transcription factor
required for hematopoiesis and is dynamically expressed in hematopoietic tissues 
and in the central nervous system. Using constructs containing zebrafish GATA-2
genomic flanking sequences and the green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene,
we demonstrate that distinct regulatory domains are required for hematopoietic,
enveloping layer (EVL), and neuronal expression of GATA-2. During gastrulation,
GFP expression is confined to the ventral ectoderm and lateral mesoderm and is
lacking in the dorsal shield. Cells derived from the regions expressing GFP give 
rise to hematopoietic progenitors, EVL cells, and neurons. Deletion analysis of
the 7.3-kb GATA-2 promoter region revealed that a 1.1-kb DNA sequence is critical
for expression of GATA-2 in neurons. Fine mapping revealed that a 31-bp region is
required for neuron enhancer activity, and mutagenesis showed that the DNA motif 
CCCTCCT is essential for GATA-2 promoter activity in the central nervous system
of zebrafish. Our use of zebrafish embryos can be exploited as a whole animal
system for the dissection of any developmentally regulated vertebrate promoter.

PMCID: PMC21038
PMID: 9177206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. EMBO J. 1997 May 15;16(10):2874-82.

The N-terminal fingers of chicken GATA-2 and GATA-3 are independent
sequence-specific DNA binding domains.

Pedone PV(1), Omichinski JG, Nony P, Trainor C, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM,
Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, USA.

The GATA family of vertebrate DNA binding regulatory proteins are expressed in
diverse tissues and at different times of development. However, the DNA binding
regions of these proteins possess considerable homology and recognize a rather
similar range of DNA sequence motifs. DNA binding is mediated through two
domains, each containing a zinc finger. Previous results have led to the
conclusion that although in some cases the N-terminal finger can contribute to
specificity and strength of binding, it does not bind independently, whereas the 
C-terminal finger is both necessary and sufficient for binding. Here we show that
although this is true for the N-terminal finger of GATA-1, those of GATA-2 and
GATA-3 are capable of strong independent binding with a preference for the motif 
GATC. Binding requires the presence of two basic regions located on either side
of the N-terminal finger. The absence of one of these near the GATA-1 N-terminal 
finger probably accounts for its inability to bind. The combination of a single
finger and two basic regions is a new variant of a motif that has been previously
found in the binding domains of other finger proteins. Our results suggest that
the DNA binding properties of the N-terminal finger may help distinguish GATA-2
and GATA-3 from GATA-1 and the other GATA family members in their selective
regulatory roles in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1169895
PMID: 9184231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Blood. 1997 May 15;89(10):3636-43.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is required for proliferation/survival of early
hematopoietic cells and mast cell formation, but not for erythroid and myeloid
terminal differentiation.

Tsai FY(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a critical role in maintaining 
the pool of early hematopoietic cells. To define its specific functions in the
proliferation, survival, and differentiation of hematopoietic cells, we analyzed 
the hematopoietic potential of GATA-2-/- cells in in vitro culture systems for
proliferation and maintenance of uncommitted progenitors or differentiation of
specific lineages. From a two-step in vitro differentiation assay of embryonic
stem cells and in vitro culture of yolk sac cells, we demonstrate that GATA-2 is 
required for the expansion of multipotential hematopoietic progenitors and the
formation of mast cells, but dispensable for the terminal differentiation of
erythroid cells and macrophages. The rare GATA-2-/- multipotential progenitors
that survive proliferate poorly and generate small colonies with extensive cell
death, implying that GATA-2 may play a role in both the proliferation and
survival of early hematopoietic cells. To explore possible mechanisms resulting
in the hematopoietic defects of GATA-2-/- cells, we interbred mutant mouse
strains to assess the effects of p53 loss on the behavior of GATA-2-/-
hematopoietic cells. Analysis of GATA-2-/-/p53-/- compound-mutant embryos shows
that the absence of p53 partially restores the number of total GATA-2-/-
hematopoietic cells, and therefore suggests a potential link between GATA-2 and
p53 pathways.

PMID: 9160668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:501-2.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human IL-5
gene promoter in IL-5 producing cells which express multiple GATA-binding
proteins.

Yamagata T, Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region, within the human IL-5
gene promoter, that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of these family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
PMA/A23187 stimulation are necessary for the IL-5 promoter activation. The
requirement of another regulatory element called CLE0, which lies downstream of
the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells express mRNA of three
GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3 and hGATA-4, and each of them has a
potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/ A) motif. However, using ATL-16T 
nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only GATA-binding protein
that forms specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA site. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells expressing
GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding affinity to the 
-70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the transactivation
ability was compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the highest activity. These
results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the transcriptional
regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple members of the
GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMID: 9209438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dev Biol. 1997 Apr 1;184(1):70-84.

Pattern formation in janus-mutant zebrafish embryos.

Abdelilah S(1), Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown 02129, 
USA.

Mechanisms that underlie the formation of the vertebrate body appear to be highly
conserved between amphibia and teleosts. For teleosts, however, mesoderm
induction and the establishment of dorsoventral polarity are poorly understood.
In this study, we present an analysis of early pattern formation in the zebrafish
maternal-effect mutation janus. This mutation frequently results in a separation 
of the cleavage stage blastoderm into two halves that undergo separate
development until fusion occurs at the end of gastrulation. Here, we employ
janus-mutant embryos to analyze the mechanisms of mesoderm formation and ventral 
specification in a teleost. Analysis of the expression of the panmesodermal
marker no tail in janus-mutant embryos indicates that mesoderm induction depends 
on a marginal position. In an analysis of ventral specification, we show that the
early expression of the ventral marker GATA-2 is confined to the area on both
blastodermal halves opposite the dorsal shield region. Since, in janus-mutant
embryos, the dorsal position is random with respect to the division plane
bisecting the two blastodermal halves, a variety of dorsoventral asymmetries
arise within individual embryos. In one constellation, the dorsal position is
localized to the plane of bisection and two ventral positions develop at opposite
ends of the blastodermal halves. Hence, ventral fates can be specified at any
position around the blastodermal margins and are excluded from the dorsal
position. The diblastodermic system of the janus-mutant embryo allows for the
study of the interactions of dorsal and ventral determinants in varying spatial
arrangements. We have studied pattern formation in dorsal half-blastoderms that
contain the entire shield region but only a reduced ventrolateral marginal zone. 
As assessed by the presence of the most ventral cell type, blood, ventral
specification within a dorsal half-blastoderm is not suppressed.

PMID: 9142985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Int J Hematol. 1997 Apr;65(3):239-49.

Expression of GATA transcription factors in myelogenous and lymphoblastic
leukemia cells.

Minegishi N(1), Morita S, Minegishi M, Tsuchiya S, Konno T, Hayashi N, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan.

In the hematopoietic lineage, the transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 show
restricted and largely overlapping expression profiles, but GATA-2 is uniquely
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors. GATA-3 is found exclusively in T
cells of hematopoietic lineage. To clarify whether these expression profiles are 
preserved or changed during the development of malignancies, we analyzed the
expression of GATA factors in the blasts from leukemic children. A total of 18
myelogenous leukemia and 24 lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cases were investigated.
In the majority of the former cases, GATA-2 mRNA expression and the expression of
CD34 and c-kit antigens on leukemic cells were demonstrated. In contrast, GATA-2 
mRNA and c-kit antigen could not be detected in CD34-positive cells from ALL
patients. GATA-3 mRNA was expressed in all T-ALL cases, but not in any precursor 
B-ALL. These findings suggest that down-regulation of GATA-2 and expression of
GATA-3 are important events for the commitment of cells to lymphoid and T cell
lineage, respectively. The expression profiles of GATA factors in leukemic cells 
are generally consistent with those in their normal counterparts, and thus
provide a useful tool to determine the lineage commitment of unclassified
leukemia.

PMID: 9114595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8781-90.

Distinct mechanisms direct SCL/tal-1 expression in erythroid cells and CD34
positive primitive myeloid cells.

Bockamp EO(1), McLaughlin F, Göttgens B, Murrell AM, Elefanty AG, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL/tal-1 gene (hereafter designated SCL) encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor which is pivotal for the normal development of all
hematopoietic lineages and which is expressed in committed erythroid, mast, and
megakaryocytic cells as well as in hematopoietic stem cells. The molecular basis 
for expression of SCL in stem cells and its subsequent modulation during lineage 
commitment is of fundamental importance for understanding how early "decisions"
are made during hematopoiesis. We now compare the activity of SCL promoters 1a
and 1b in erythroid cells and in CD34 positive primitive myeloid cells. SCL mRNA 
expression in CD34 positive myeloid cells did not require GATA-1. Promoter 1a
activity was weak or absent in CD34 positive myeloid cells and appeared to
correlate with the presence or absence of low levels of GATA-1. However, promoter
1b, which was silent in committed erythroid cells, was strongly active in
transient assays using CD34 positive myeloid cells, and functioned in a
GATA-independent manner. Interestingly, RNase protection assays demonstrated that
endogenous promoter 1b was active in both erythroid and CD34 positive myeloid
cells. These results demonstrate that fundamentally different mechanisms regulate
the SCL promoter region in committed erythroid cells and in CD34 positive myeloid
cells. Moreover these observations suggest that in erythroid, but not in CD34
positive myeloid cells, promoter 1b required integration in chromatin and/or
additional sequences for its activity. Stable transfection experiments showed
that both core promoters were silent following integration in erythroid or CD34
positive myeloid cells. Our data therefore indicate that additional regulatory
elements were necessary for both SCL promoters to overcome chromatin-mediated
repression.

PMID: 9079714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 6;232(1):65-8.

Regulation of aquaporin-2 gene transcription by GATA-3. off.

Uchida S(1), Matsumura Y, Rai T, Sasaki S, Marumo F.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Japan. suchida.med2@med.tmd.ac.jp

To evaluate the functional role of GATA motifs in the 5'-flanking region of a
kidney-specific AQP-2 water channel gene, we sought to isolate a GATA factor(s)
expressed in collecting ducts and determined the role on the AQP-2 promoter. Two 
cDNAs encoding GATA factors were isolated from rat kidney, whose sequences were
highly homologous with human GATA-2 and -3. Reverse-transcription PCR using
dissected nephron segments revealed that rat GATA-3 but not GATA-2 was expressed 
in collecting ducts, thus indicating that GATA-3 could interact with GATA motifs 
in the AQP-2 promoter. Transactivation experiments utilizing the rat GATA-3
expression vector indicated that rat GATA-3 increased the AQP-2 promoter activity
about fourfold. These results indicated that GATA motifs in the 5'-flanking
region of the hAQP-2 gene were functional cis-elements and that GATA-3 in
collecting ducts may be one of the important regulators of AQP-2 expression in
vivo.

PMID: 9125153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1430-9.

Negative regulation of the erythropoietin gene expression by the GATA
transcription factors.

Imagawa S(1), Yamamoto M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi-ken, Japan.

We examined regulation of the human erythropoietin (Epo) gene through the GATA
sequence in the Epo promoter and showed that Hep3B and HepG2 cells express human 
GATA-2 (hGATA-2) mRNA and protein. Nuclear extracts of QT6 cells transfected with
hGATA-1, 2, or 3 transcription factors showed specific binding to the GATA
element in the human Epo gene promoter by gel mobility shift assay. Transient
transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, or 3 showed that each of these
transcription factors significantly decreased the level of expression of Epo mRNA
as assessed by a competitive polymerase chain reaction. Transient transfection of
Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 and an Epo-reporter gene (growth hormone [GH])
construct showed significant inhibition of the Epo promoter. Antisense
oligonucleotide for hGATA-2 transcription factor significantly increased the Epo 
protein in Hep3B cells under 1% O2 for 24 hours incubation. Furthermore,
transient transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 and an Epo-reporter 
gene (luciferase) construct also showed significant inhibition of the Epo
promoter. However, transfection of the mutated GATA sequence of the
Epo-luciferase gene with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 interfere with the inhibition of the
Epo promoter. We conclude that the hGATA-1, 2, and 3 transcription factors
specifically bind to the GATA element in the human Epo gene promoter and
negatively regulate Epo gene expression.

PMID: 9028967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1260-9.

Characterization of the human platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
promoter: identification of a GATA-2 binding element required for optimal
transcriptional activity.

Gumina RJ(1), Kirschbaum NE, Piotrowski K, Newman PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Research Institute, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin,
Milwaukee 53201-2178, USA.

Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) is a 130-kD member of the
Ig gene superfamily that is expressed on platelets, endothelial cells, and
certain leukocyte subsets. To examine the factors controlling vascular-specific
expression of PECAM-1, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the PECAM-1 gene and
analyzed its transcriptional activity. 5'-Rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(5'-RACE) analysis showed that transcription initiation occurred at several
closely spaced nearby sites originating approximately 204 bp upstream from the
translation start site. Analysis of the sequence immediately upstream from the
transcription initiation site (TIS) showed no canonical TATA or CAAT elements,
however an initiator element commonly found in TATA-less promoters encompassed
the TIS. 5'-serially truncated PECAM-1 promoter segments cloned in front of a
luciferase reporter drove transcription in both a lineage- and
orientation-specific manner. Putative cis-acting control elements present within 
a 300-bp core promoter included two ets sites, an Sp1 site, tandem E-box domains,
two GATA-associated sites (CACCC), an AP-2 binding site, and a GATA element at
-24. Mutational analysis showed that optimal transcriptional activity required
the GATA sequence at position -24, and gel-shift assays further showed that the
GATA-2 transcription factor, but not GATA-1, bound to this region of the PECAM-1 
promoter. Understanding the cis- and transacting factors that regulate the
tissue-specific expression of PECAM-1 should increase our understanding of the
mechanisms by which vascular-specific gene expression is achieved.

PMID: 9028949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1182-8.

Cell-cycle-dependent regulation of erythropoietin receptor gene.

Komatsu N(1), Kirito K, Kashii Y, Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J, Suwabe N, Yamamoto M,
Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Hematology, Jichi Medical School,
Tochigi-ken, Japan.

To understand the regulatory mechanism of erythropoietin (EPO) receptor (EPOR)
gene expression, the effect of EPO on the steady-state level of EPOR mRNA was
examined using the human EPO-dependent cell line UT-7 as a model system. We found
that the treatment of UT-7 cells with EPO resulted in a transient decrease of the
EPOR mRNA level. This transient downregulation was also induced by stimulation
with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), another
stimulator of UT-7 cell growth. These results raised the possibility that EPOR
gene expression is in part related to cell growth. Moreover, it was found that
EPO-induced downregulation of EPOR mRNA level was preceded by a transient
downregulation of GATA-1 mRNA. To examine the relationship between the expression
of EPOR, GATA-1, and GATA-2 mRNA levels and the cell cycle, logarithmically
growing UT-7 cells were centrifugically fractionated according to the cell-cycle 
phase. Both EPOR and GATA-1 mRNA levels, but not the GATA-2 mRNA level,
concomitantly decreased at the G0/G1 phase and increased at the S and G2/M
phases. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that in
EPO-stimulated UT-7 cells, the dynamic changes in EPOR gene expression paralleled
the GATA-1 DNA-binding activity to the oligonucleotide probe containing a
GATA-binding site located at the promoter region of the EPOR gene. These findings
suggest that the regulation of EPOR mRNA level is mainly associated with GATA-1
gene expression in UT-7 cells undergoing proliferation, and that these serial
events are under the control of, or related to, the cell cycle.

PMID: 9028940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1154-64.

Initiation of murine embryonic erythropoiesis: a spatial analysis.

Silver L(1), Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics and Cancer
Center, NY 14642, USA.

Hematopoiesis in the mouse conceptus begins in the visceral yolk (VYS), with
primitive erythroblasts first evident in blood islands at the headfold stage
(E8.0). VYS erythropoiesis is decreased or abrogated by targeted disruption of
the hematopoietic transcription factors tal-1, rbtn2, GATA-1, and GATA-2. To
better understand the potential roles of these genes, and to trace the initial
temporal and spatial development of mammalian embryonic hematopoiesis, we
examined their expression patterns, and that of betaH1-globin, in normal mouse
conceptuses by means of in situ hybridization. Attention was focused on the
36-hour period from mid-primitive streak to early somite stages (E7.25 to E8.5), 
when the conceptus undergoes rapid morphologic changes with formation of the yolk
sac and blood islands. Each of these genes was expressed in extraembryonic
mesoderm, from which blood islands are derived. This VYS expression occurred in a
defined temporal sequence: tal-1 and rbtn2 transcripts were detected earlier than
the others, followed by GATA-2 and GATA-1, and then by betaH1-globin. Transcripts
for all of these genes were present in VYS mesoderm cell masses at the neural
plate stage (E7.5), indicating commitment of these cells to the erythroid lineage
before the appearance of morphologically recognizable erythroblasts. By early
somite stages (E8.5), GATA-2 mRNA expression is downregulated in VYS blood
islands as terminal primitive erythroid differentiation proceeds. We conclude
that primitive mammalian erythropoiesis arises during gastrulation through the
ordered temporal expression of tal-1, rbtn2, GATA2, and GATA-1 in a subset of
extraembryonic mesoderm cells. During the stages analyzed, tal-1 and rbtn2
expression was also present in posterior embryonic mesoderm, while GATA-1 and
GATA-2 expression was evident in extraembryonic tissues of ectodermal origin.

PMID: 9028937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Development. 1997 Feb;124(4):907-14.

GATA-2 and GATA-3 regulate trophoblast-specific gene expression in vivo.

Ma GT(1), Roth ME, Groskopf JC, Tsai FY, Orkin SH, Grosveld F, Engel JD, Linzer
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208,
USA.

We previously demonstrated that the zinc finger transcription factors GATA-2 and 
GATA-3 are expressed in trophoblast giant cells and that they regulate
transcription from the mouse placental lactogen I gene promoter in a transfected 
trophoblast cell line. We present evidence here that both of these factors
regulate transcription of the placental lactogen I gene, as well as the related
proliferin gene, in trophoblast giant cells in vivo. Placentas lacking GATA-3
accumulate placental lactogen I and proliferin mRNAs to a level 50% below that
reached in the wild-type placenta. Mutation of the GATA-2 gene had a similar
effect on placental lactogen I expression, but led to a markedly greater
reduction (5- to 6-fold) in proliferin gene expression. Placentas lacking GATA-2 
secrete significantly less angiogenic activity than wild-type placentas as
measured in an endothelial cell migration assay, consistent with a reduction in
expression of the angiogenic hormone proliferin. Furthermore, within the same
uterus the decidual tissue adjacent to mutant placentas displays markedly reduced
neovascularization compared to the decidual tissue next to wild-type placentas.
These results indicate that GATA-2 and GATA-3 are important in vivo regulators of
trophoblast-specific gene expression and placental function, and reveal a
difference in the effect of these two factors in regulating the synthesis of
related placental hormones.

PMID: 9043071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dev Biol. 1997 Jan 15;181(2):144-55.

GATA-2 is a maternal transcription factor present in Xenopus oocytes as a nuclear
complex which is maintained throughout early development.

Partington GA(1), Bertwistle D, Nicolas RH, Kee WJ, Pizzey JA, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Division of Biomedical Sciences, The
Randall Institute, King's College London, United Kingdom.

We show that Xenopus oocytes and embryos contain GATA-2, stored in nuclei as a
non-chromatin-bound complex. Its binding site specificity is different from that 
of GATA-1, having a much higher affinity for the motif with a core GATC sequence.
This binding site preference was markedly reduced by either release of the factor
with deoxycholate or purification on a DNA affinity column, suggesting a role for
a cofactor(s). The identity of the maternal GATA factor was established as GATA-2
in two ways: (1) binding to an oligonucleotide probe was abolished by inclusion
of either of two GATA-2 monoclonal antibodies, and (2) a protein of correct
molecular weight for GATA-2 was detected by immunoblotting with a polyclonal
antibody raised against a Xenopus GATA-2-specific peptide. Although predominantly
complexed, some of the oocyte GATA-2 is functional as a transcription factor
because the transcriptional activity of the chicken betaH-globin promoter
injected into oocytes was reduced by mutation of either of two GATA binding
sites. This effect was more pronounced when the stronger of the two sites was
mutated. Butyrate treatment of oocytes stimulated cap-site initiation by up to
17-fold with both normal promoter and GATA site mutant constructs, showing that
the mechanism of butyrate stimulation is not via GATA-2. The possible
significance of regulating the availability of maternal GATA-2 during early
development is discussed.

PMID: 9013926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil. 1997;191(1):105-11.

[Genetic control of hematopoiesis].

[Article in French]

Roméo PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, France.

Commitment and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells are associated with
the progressive restriction of cellular proliferation and the progressive
expression of a subset of genes encoding the markers of mature cells. These two
processes are genetically regulated and, in this paper, I review the expression
and function of the GATA family of transcription factors as an example of this
genetic regulation. GATA cis-acting elements are found in most of the regulatory 
regions of T-lymphoid, erythrocytic and megakaryocytic restricted genes. These
GATA motifs are recognized by the members of a family of transcriptional
regulators: the GATA family. Three members of this family, GATA-1, 2 and 3 are
expressed in hematopoietic cells. They are necessary for the erythrocytic and
megakaryocytic lineages (GATA-1), for the T-lymphoid lineage (GATA-3), and for
the proliferation of uncommitted hematopoietic precursors (GATA-2). GATA-1
displays at least four functions: activation of the erythrocytic and
megakaryocytic specific genes, regulation of the epsilon-->gamma globin switch
and control of the cell cycle. These two last functions will be discussed to show
the multiple facets of GATA-1 in the genetic regulation of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9181132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mamm Genome. 1997 Jan;8(1):69-70.

Gata2 maps to mouse chromosome 6.

Ciciotte SL(1), Tsai FY, Peters LL.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

PMID: 9021157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):436-43.

Differential regulation of neurogenesis by the two Xenopus GATA-1 genes.

Xu RH(1), Kim J, Taira M, Lin JJ, Zhang CH, Sredni D, Evans T, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Physiology, National Cancer Institute-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Previously, we have shown that the ventralizing factor bone morphogenetic protein
4 (BMP-4) can inhibit Xenopus neurogenesis. The erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1 functions downstream of the BMP-4 signaling pathway and mediates
BMP-4-induced erythropoiesis. We have found that similar to BMP-4, GATA-1b
inhibits neuralization of Xenopus animal cap (AC) cells. The neural inhibition is
not seen with GATA-1a, although both GATA-1a and GATA-1b RNAs are translated at
the same efficiency and induce globin expression equally in AC cells. GATA-1b RNA
injection into AC cells neither induces expression of Xbra (a general mesoderm
marker) nor affects expression of XK81 (epidermal keratin) or BMP-4 and Xvent-1
(two ventral markers). These data suggest that GATA-1b retains the epidermal fate
of the AC. Intact GATA-1b protein is required for both inhibition of neurogenesis
and induction of globin expression. Our findings indicate that GATA-1b can
function in ectoderm to specifically regulate neural inducing mechanisms,
apparently related to the expression of chordin, a neuralizing gene. Furthermore,
tadpole stage embryos injected with GATA-1b are devoid of all dorsoanterior
structures including neural tissue. This report provides evidence that the two
transcription factors, derived from a recent genome duplication, share a common
biological activity (stimulation of erythropoiesis) while also exhibiting a
distinct function (inhibition of neurogenesis).

PMCID: PMC231768
PMID: 8972224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Atherosclerosis. 1996 Dec 20;127(2):185-94.

Induction of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 by low-density lipoprotein.

Lin JH(1), Zhu Y, Liao HL, Kobari Y, Groszek L, Stemerman MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595, USA.

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is a well-established risk factor for
atherosclerosis. When endothelial cells are incubated with this lipoprotein in
pathophysiologic amounts, the cells are activated. Among the documented cellular 
responses to LDL is increased recruitment of monocytes, which are believed to
play a major role in promoting intimal plaque formation. The findings presented
here link an atheogenic lipoprotein, LDL, with the induction of an adhesion
molecule important in atherogenesis Human LDL induces the vascular cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (VCAM-1) transcriptionally with an increase in mRNA levels through
activation of the VCAM promoter. This effect is blocked by anti-VCAM antibodies. 
After a 2-day incubation in LDL, the binding of NF-kappa B, which is believed to 
be a key oxidative-stress sensor for VCAM regulation, remains at basal level. In 
contrast, the binding activities of AP-1 and GATA, on the other hand, are
increased by LDL. Thus, a component of LDL-enhanced endothelial recruitment of
monocytes is attributed to VCAM-1 expression, which appears to be mediated
through AP-1 and GATA. These data identify LDL as a VCAM-inducer possibly
distinct from cytokines and endotoxin.

PMID: 9125308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3839-50.

Regulation and function of transcription factor GATA-1 during red blood cell
differentiation.

Briegel K(1), Bartunek P, Stengl G, Lim KC, Beug H, Engel JD, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbruck-Center for Molecular Medicine, MDC, Berlin, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factor GATA-1 is a key regulator of red blood
cell differentiation. One seemingly contradictory aspect of GATA-1 function is
that, while it is abundant in erythroid progenitor cells prior to the onset of
overt differentiation, it does not significantly activate known GATA-1 target
genes in those cells. To investigate the mechanisms underlying GATA-1 function
during the transition from early to late erythropoiesis, we have examined its
expression and activity in normal avian erythroid progenitor cells before and
after induction of differentiation. In these primary progenitor cells, GATA-1
protein was predominantly located in the cytoplasm, while induction of
differentiation caused its rapid relocalization to the nucleus, suggesting that
nuclear translocation constitutes an important regulatory step in GATA-1
activation. As an alternative way of addressing the same question, we also
ectopically expressed a GATA-1/estrogen receptor fusion protein (GATA-1/ER) in
red blood cell progenitors, where nuclear translocation of, and transcriptional
activation by, this hybrid factor are conditionally controlled by estrogen. We
found that hormone-activated GATA-1/ER protein accelerated red blood cell
differentiation, and concomitantly suppressed cell proliferation. These
phenotypic effects were accompanied by a simultaneous suppression of c-myb and
GATA-2 transcription, two genes thought to be involved in the proliferative
capacity of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Thus, GATA-1 appears to promote
differentiation in committed erythroid progenitor cells both by inducing
differentiation-specific genes and by simultaneously suppressing genes involved
in cell proliferation.

PMID: 9012505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Gene. 1996 Nov 14;179(2):219-23.

Comparison of human and Xenopus GATA-2 promoters.

Fleenor DE(1), Langdon SD, deCastro CM, Kaufman RE.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

GATA proteins comprise a family of transcription factors that are required for
appropriate development of hematopoietic lineages. In order to understand the
transcriptional regulation of GATA genes, we have cloned the human GATA-2 gene
and identified and characterized its promoter. Comparison with the Xenopus GATA-2
promoter demonstrates highly conserved CCAAT box elements, which are essential
for appropriate Xenopus expression. Unlike the Xenopus gene, the human GATA-2
gene lacks GATA binding motifs within the first 800 bp of 5' flanking sequence.
In addition, the human GATA-2 promoter has two highly conserved ets sites that
resemble the binding site for a recently described ets repressor factor, ERF.
These conserved DNA sequence motifs provide strong candidate regions for the
regulation of GATA-2.

PMID: 8972903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 8;271(45):28439-44.

Histidine decarboxylase expression in mouse mast cell line P815 is induced by
mouse peritoneal cavity incubation.

Ohtsu H(1), Kuramasu A, Suzuki S, Igarashi K, Ohuchi Y, Sato M, Tanaka S,
Nakagawa S, Shirato K, Yamamoto M, Ichikawa A, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology I, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-77, Japan. J23613@CCTU.CC.TOHOKU.AC.JP

Phenotype of P815 mouse mast cells changes markedly during culture in the
peritoneal cavity of syngenic BDF1 mice. The cells, cultured for 1 week in the
peritoneal cavity of syngenic BDF1 mice, proliferate and express high levels of
L-histidine decarboxylase (HDC) and mouse mast cell protease (MMCP)-6 mRNAs,
indicating the ability of P815 cells to differentiate toward mature connective
tissue mast cells. Peritoneal fluid aspirated from P815-inoculated BDF1 mouse and
added to cultured P815 cells in vitro was also found to induce HDC mRNA
expression, suggesting that at least some of the humoral factors in the
peritoneal fluid induce HDC mRNA transcription. Among the erythroid transcription
factors, P815 cells expressed GATA-2 but not GATA-1 mRNA before and after the
intraperitoneal incubation. In contrast, the expression of NF-E2 subunit p45
disappeared, while expression of subunit mafK was markedly reduced after
incubation. Cotransfection assays using HDC-luciferase reporter and p45 and/or
mafK expression constructs showed that NF-E2 affects the transactivation of HDC
gene. These results suggest that NF-E2 is also an important transcription factor 
in mast cell differentiation.

PMID: 8910469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Nov;23(5-6):545-50.

Expression of erythroid-specific genes in megakaryoblastic disorders.

Ito E(1), Kasai M, Toki T, Arai K, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Currently available data indicate that erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation pathways are closely related to each other, and there may exist
progenitor cells common to those two lineages may exist. Acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia (AML-M7) and transient myeloproliferative disorder in Down's syndrome
(TMD) are characterized by rapid growth of abnormal blast cells which express
megakaryocytic markers. These blast cells express lineage-specific transcription 
factors such as GATA-1 common to these lineages and frequently express
erythroid-specific mRNAs such as gamma-globin and erythroid delta-aminolevulinate
synthase (ALAS-E), indicating that most of the blasts in M7 and TMD cases have
erythroid and megakaryocytic phenotypes. These results suggest that blasts in M7 
and TMD may correspond to progenitors of both erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages.

PMID: 9031085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Nov;23(5-6):431-6.

Pattern of expression and their clinical implications of the GATA family, stem
cell leukemia gene, and EVI1 in leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes.

Ohyashiki K(1), Ohyashiki JH, Shimamoto T, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors play a key role in controlling the cellular differentiation
of hematopoietic cells. Among the known transcription factors, both GATA-1 and
SCL play roles in the cellular differentiation of erythrocytic and megakaryocytic
lineages, while GATA-2 is thought to maintain and promote the proliferation of
early hematopoietic progenitors. In this review, the clinical implications of
expression of the GATA family, SCL, and EVI1 gene in various types of human
leukemia are discussed. De novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients may be
subdivided into three categories depending on the expression pattern of
transcription factors, i.e., GATA-1(+)SCL(+), GATA-1(+)SCL(-), and
GATA-1(-)SCL(-). AML patients with both GATA-1 and SCL expression have a poor
prognosis and have some characteristic clinical and hematologic features. The
EVI1 gene may be expressed through at least two pathways in hematologic
malignancies; one is related to chromosomal changes at 3q26, while the other is
related to myelodysplasia regardless of chromosomal changes at 3q26 region. These
findings suggest that the pattern of expression in transcription factors in
abnormal hematopoietic cells is reflected in the malignant phenotype and play a
role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

PMID: 9031072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 29;93(22):12355-8.

Arrested development of embryonic red cell precursors in mouse embryos lacking
transcription factor GATA-1.

Fujiwara Y(1), Browne CP, Cunniff K, Goff SC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The X chromosome-linked transcription factor GATA-1 is expressed specifically in 
erythroid, mast, megakaryocyte, and eosinophil lineages, as well as in
hematopoietic progenitors. Prior studies revealed that gene-disrupted GATA-1-
embryonic stem cells give rise to adult (or definitive) erythroid precursors
arrested at the proerythroblast stage in vitro and fail to contribute to adult
red blood cells in chimeric mice but did not clarify a role in embryonic (or yolk
sac derived) erythroid cells. To examine the consequences of GATA-1 loss on
embryonic erythropoiesis in vivo, we inactivated the GATA-1 locus in embryonic
stem cells by gene targeting and transmitted the mutated allele through the mouse
germ line. Male GATA-1- embryos die between embryonic day 10.5 and 11.5
(E10.5-E11.5) of gestation. At E9.5, GATA-1- embryos exhibit extreme pallor yet
contain embryonic erythroid cells arrested at an early proerythroblast-like stage
of their development. Embryos stain weakly with benzidine reagent, and yolk sac
cells express globin RNAs, indicating globin gene activation in the absence of
GATA-1. Female heterozygotes (GATA-1+/-) are born pale due to random inactivation
of the X chromosome bearing the normal allele. However, these mice recover during
the neonatal period, presumably as a result of in vivo selection for progenitors 
able to express GATA-1. Our findings conclusively establish the essential role
for GATA-1 in erythropoiesis within the context of the intact developing mouse
and further demonstrate that the block to cellular maturation is similar in
GATA-1- embryonic and definitive erythroid precursors. Moreover, the recovery of 
GATA-1+/- mice from anemia seen at birth provides evidence indicating a role for 
GATA-1 at the hematopoietic progenitor cell level.

PMCID: PMC37995
PMID: 8901585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Blood. 1996 Oct 15;88(8):3074-82.

The biologic properties of recombinant human thrombopoietin in the proliferation 
and megakaryocytic differentiation of acute myeloblastic leukemia cells.

Matsumura I(1), Kanakura Y, Kato T, Ikeda H, Horikawa Y, Ishikawa J, Kitayama H, 
Nishiura T, Tomiyama Y, Miyazaki H, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Japan.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is implicated as a primary regulator of megakaryopoiesis and
thrombopoiesis. However, the biologic effects of TPO on human acute myeloblastic 
leukemia (AML) cells are largely unknown. To determine if recombinant human (rh) 
TPO has proliferation-supporting and differentiation-inducing activities in AML
cells, 15 cases of AML cells that were exclusively composed of undifferentiated
leukemia cells and showed growth response to rhTPO in a short-term culture (72
hours) were subjected to long-term suspension culture with or without rhTPO. Of
15 cases, rhTPO supported proliferation of AML cells for 2 to 4 weeks in 4 cases 
whose French-American-British subtypes were M0, M2, M4, and M7, respectively. In 
addition to the proliferation-supporting activity, rhTPO was found to induce AML 
cells to progress to some degree of megakaryocytic differentiation at both
morphologic and surface-phenotypic level in 2 AML cases with M0 and M7 subtypes. 
The treatment of AML cells with rhTPO resulted in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation 
of the TPO-receptor, c-mpl, and STAT3 in all of cases tested. By contrast, the
expression of erythroid/megakaryocyte-specific transcription factors (GATA-1,
GATA-2, and NF-E2) was markedly induced or enhanced in only 2 AML cases that
showed megakaryocytic differentiation in response to rhTPO. These results
suggested that, at least in a fraction of AML cases, TPO could not only support
the proliferation of AML cells irrespective of AML subtypes, but could also
induce megakaryocytic differentiation, possibly through activation of GATA-1,
GATA-2, and NF-E2.

PMID: 8874206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Blood. 1996 Sep 15;88(6):1965-72.

The role of BMP-4 and GATA-2 in the induction and differentiation of
hematopoietic mesoderm in Xenopus laevis.

Maeno M(1), Mead PE, Kelley C, Xu RH, Kung HF, Suzuki A, Ueno N, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Niigata University, Japan.

Vertebrate embryonic blood formation is regulated by factors that participate in 
dorsal-ventral patterning and mesoderm induction. The GATA-binding transcription 
factors are required for normal hematopoiesis and are expressed during
gastrulation when ventral mesoderm (VM) is induced to form blood. Based on the
recent demonstration that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP-4) is a potent
ventralizing factor and inducer of hematopoietic tissue, we hypothesized that
GATA-2 could be induced or activated by BMP-4. Here we demonstrate that BMP-4 can
stimulate GATA-2 expression, and that expression of a dominant negative BMP-4
receptor can suppress GATA-2 induction by BMP-4 in ventral mesoderm.
Over-expression of GATA-2 in ventral mesoderm leads to increased globin
production and forced expression of GATA-2 in primitive ectoderm adjacent to
ventral mesoderm also stimulates globin expression. Our results suggest that
BMP-4 and GATA-2 can function in two adjacent germ layers, mesoderm and ectoderm,
to participate in blood cell formation during embryogenesis.

PMID: 8822915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mech Dev. 1996 Jul;57(2):199-214.

GATA factors and the origins of adult and embryonic blood in Xenopus: responses
to retinoic acid.

Bertwistle D(1), Walmsley ME, Read EM, Pizzey JA, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College
London, UK.

The transcription factors, GATA-1, -2 and -3 play essential roles in the
differentiation of haematopoietic cells. To study the process of blood formation 
during vertebrate development we have used the expression of these GATA factors
to locate haematopoietic cells in Xenopus embryos and to act as sensors for the
effects of all-trans retinoic acid (RA), a signalling molecule which influences
both anteroposterior patterning and haematopoietic differentiation. GATA factor
expression was detected in the leading edge of the gastrulating mesoderm, in the 
ventral blood island (VBI) and dorsolateral plate (DLP) mesoderms and in a
population of cells between the VBI and DLP. The VBI contributes to both
embryonic and adult blood, whereas the DLP contains precursors of adult blood
only, which have not been identified previously with molecular markers. The
possibility that the GATA-2-expressing cells between the VBI and DLP were
haematopoietic progenitors migrating from the VBI to the DLP was ruled out by
transplantation analysis. Differential effects of RA on the expression of GATA-1 
and GATA-2 suggest that RA has a direct action on haematopoietic differentiation,
rather than on the formation of haematopoietic mesoderm.

PMID: 8843397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3596-605.

GATA factors are essential for activity of the neuron-specific enhancer of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene.

Lawson MA(1), Whyte DB, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

The multicomponent neuron-specific enhancer of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) gene specifically targets expression to the GnRH-secreting neurons of the 
hypothalamus, a small population of specialized cells which play a central role
in regulating reproductive function. Utilizing the GnRH-secreting hypothalamic
neuronal cell line, GT1, as a model system, we show that members of the GATA
family of transcription factors regulate GnRH transcription through two GATA
factor-binding motifs that occur in a tandem repeat within the GnRH
neuron-specific enhancer. Although GT1 cells contain GATA-2 and GATA-4 mRNAs,
only GATA-4 was detected in a GnRH enhancer GATA site-specific complex.
Cotransfection experiments with wild-type and mutant GnRH enhancer reporter
plasmids with wild-type and dominant negative GATA factor expression vectors
demonstrated that both GATA-binding elements are functional in the context of the
enhancer. We conclude that GATA-binding proteins are important factors in
regulating the neuron-specific expression of the GnRH gene in hypothalamic cells.
Although the presence of GATA-2 in a neuronal cell type is not unusual, the
presence of GATA-4 in GT1 cells is novel for a neuronal cell type. However, the
presence of GATA-4 is consistent with the unique developmental origin of GnRH
neurons and may provide insight into the transcriptional mechanisms mediating the
differentiation of this limited population of GnRH-secreting neurons.

PMCID: PMC231355
PMID: 8668176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4552-60.

Establishment and characterization of the thrombopoietin-dependent megakaryocytic
cell line, UT-7/TPO.

Komatsu N(1), Kunitama M, Yamada M, Hagiwara T, Kato T, Miyazaki H, Eguchi M,
Yamamoto M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi,
Japan.

UT-7 is a human megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line with absolute dependence on
interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, or
erythropoietin (EPO) for growth and survival. We investigated the effect of
thrombopoietin (TPO), the ligand for the receptor encoded by c-mpl
proto-oncogene, on the proliferation and differentiation of UT-7 and its
sublines. We found that UT-7/GM, which is a subline of UT-7, but neither UT-7 nor
UT-7/EPO, can proliferate in response to TPO. The subline, UT-7/TPO, was
established from UT-7/GM by culture at lower concentrations of TPO. UT-7/TPO
cells had morphologically mature megakaryocytic characteristics such as developed
demarcation membrane in the cytoplasm and multinucleated appearance. This was
also confirmed by the high expression of platelet factor-4 and glycoprotein IIb
at the mRNA levels and by the high level of DNA content. UT-7/TPO can be
maintained by TPO alone, with a doubling time of 24 hours in log growth phase. In
the absence of TPO, the majority of the cells died within a few days. Thus,
UT-7/TPO has an absolute dependence on TPO for growth and survival and has mature
megakaryocytic features. The mRNA for c-mpl was detected in UT-7/TPO and, to a
lesser degree, in UT-7/GM. The mRNA level of NF- E2 p45, reported to be an
erythroid-specific transcription factor, was upregulated in UT-7/TPO, whereas it 
was down-regulated in the erythroid subline, UT-7/EPO. There were no significant 
differences in GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNA levels among UT-7 and its sublines. Not
only EPO but also TPO induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 tyrosine
kinase and STAT5-related protein. These findings indicate that UT-7/TPO would be 
a useful model with which to analyze the gene regulation of megakaryocytic
maturation-associated proteins and to study the specific actions of TPO.

PMID: 8639823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 May 28;93(11):5313-8.

The transcription factors c-myb and GATA-2 act independently in the regulation of
normal hematopoiesis.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The transcription factors c-myb and GATA-2 are both required for blood cell
development in vivo and in vitro. However, very little is known on their
mechanism(s) of action and whether they impact on complementary or overlapping
pathways of hematopoietic proliferation and differentiation. We report here that 
embryonic stem (ES) cells transfected with c-myb or GATA-2 cDNAs, individually or
in combination, underwent hematopoietic commitment and differentiation in the
absence of added hematopoietic growth factors but that stimulation with c-kit and
flt-3 ligands enhanced colony formation only in the c-myb transfectants. This
enhancement correlated with c-kit and flt-3 surface receptor up-regulation in
c-myb-(but not GATA-2-) transfected ES cells. Transfection of ES cells with
either a c-myb or a GATA-2 antisense construct abrogated erythromyeloid
colony-forming ability in methyl cellulose; however, introduction of a
full-length GATA-2 or c-myb cDNA, respectively, rescued the
hematopoiesis-deficient phenotype, although only c-myb-rescued ES cells expressed
c-kit and flt-3 surface receptors and formed increased numbers of hematopoietic
colonies upon stimulation with the cognate ligands. These results are in
agreement with previous studies indicating a fundamental role of c-myb and GATA-2
in hematopoiesis. Of greater importance, our studies suggest that GATA-2 and
c-myb exert their roles in hematopoietic gene regulation through distinct
mechanisms of action in nonoverlapping pathways.

PMCID: PMC39242
PMID: 8643572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Blood. 1996 Feb 1;87(3):999-1005.

TPA-induced arrest of erythroid differentiation is coupled with downregulation of
GATA-1 and upregulation of GATA-2 in an erythroid cell line SAM-1.

Kamesaki H(1), Michaud GY, Irving SG, Suwabe N, Kamesaki S, Okuma M, Cossman J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Radiology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Nagoya, Japan.

GATA-1 protein is thought to be a positive regulator of erythroid
differentiation. However, ectopic expression of a conditional GATA-2/estrogen
receptor chimera was shown to inhibit erythroid differentiation in a
hormone-dependent manner, suggesting the negative regulation of erythroid
differentiation by GATA-2 protein. Accordingly, we reasoned that the quantitative
balance of GATA-1 and GATA-2 protein might affect erythroid differentiation. In
this report, we performed specific and quantitative measurements of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 protein in a new erythroid cell line, SAM-1, after treatment with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). On the basis of these measurements,
we show that TPA-induced arrest of erythroid differentiation is coupled with the 
upregulation of GATA-2 protein, as well as the downregulation of GATA-1 protein. 
Our results suggest that it is the precise quantitative balance of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 protein that regulates erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 8562972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Blood. 1996 Feb 1;87(3):993-8.

Abundant expression of transcription factor GATA-2 in proliferating but not in
differentiated mast cells in tissues of mice: demonstration by in situ
hybridization.

Jippo T(1), Mizuno H, Xu Z, Nomura S, Yamamoto M, Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Although GATA-binding transcription factors (GATA-1 and GATA-2) are strongly
expressed in cultured mast cells (CMCs), their expression in mast cells within
tissues has not been reported. We examined the expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in
skin tissues of mice using Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization. mRNA
for GATA-2 but not for GATA-1 was expressed in skin mast cells of WB-+/+ embryos 
between days 15 and 17 postcoitum (pc). The expression was downregulated on and
after day 18 pc. Skin mast cells did not express GATA-2 after birth either. When 
the number of skin mast cells was compared with the number of GATA-2
mRNA-expressing cells, GATA-2 mRNA appeared to be expressed by mast cells only
when the number was increasing. When the mRNA expression of high-affinity IgE
receptor beta-subunit and mast cell carboxypeptidase A was used as
differentiation markers, the expression of these mRNAs continued even after the
downregulation of GATA-2 expression. To clarify the relationship of the
proliferation and GATA-2 expression, proliferating CMCs derived from WBB6F1-+/+
mice were transplanted into the peritoneal cavity of mast cell-deficient
WBB6F1-W/Wv mice. The CMCs stopped both the proliferation and GATA-2 expression
after the transplantation, suggesting the association of these two parameters in 
mast cells within tissues of mice.

PMID: 8562971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 15;15(2):319-33.

GATA transcription factors associate with a novel class of nuclear bodies in
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes.

Elefanty AG(1), Antoniou M, Custodio N, Carmo-Fonseca M, Grosveld FG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, UK.

The nuclear distribution of GATA transcription factors in murine haemopoietic
cells was examined by indirect immunofluorescence. Specific bright foci of GATA-1
fluorescence were observed in erythroleukaemia cells and primary murine
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes, in addition to diffuse nucleoplasmic
localization. These foci, which were preferentially found adjacent to nucleoli or
at the nuclear periphery, did not represent sites of active transcription or
binding of GATA-1 to consensus sites in the beta-globin loci. Immunoelectron
microscopy demonstrated the presence of intensely labelled structures likely to
represent the GATA-1 foci seen by immunofluorescence. The GATA-1 nuclear bodies
differed from previously described nuclear structures and there was no
co-localization with nuclear antigens involved in RNA processing or other
ubiquitous (Spl, c-Jun and TBP) or haemopoietic (NF-E2) transcription factors.
Interestingly, GATA-2 and GATA-3 proteins also localized to the same nuclear
bodies in cell lines co-expressing GATA-1 and -2 or GATA-1 and -3 gene products. 
This pattern of distribution is, thus far, unique to the GATA transcription
factors and suggests a protein-protein interaction with other components of the
nuclear bodies via the GATA zinc finger domain.

PMCID: PMC449947
PMID: 8617207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Acta Haematol. 1996;95(3-4):248-56.

GATA transcription factors negatively regulate erythropoietin gene expression.

Imagawa S(1), Yamamoto M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi-ken, Japan.

We examined regulation of the human erythropoietin (Epo) gene through the GATA
sequence in the Epo promoter, and demonstrated that Hep3B and HepG2 cells express
human GATA-2 (hGATA-2) mRNA and protein. Nuclear extracts of QT6 cells
transfected with hGATA-1, -2 or -3 transcription factors revealed specific
binding to the GATA element in the human Epo gene promoter by gel mobility shift 
assay. Transient transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, -2 or -3 demonstrated 
that each of these transcription factors significantly decreased the level of
expression of Epo mRNA as assessed by a competitive polymerase chain reaction.
Furthermore, transient transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, -2 and -3 and
and Epo reporter gene construct showed significant inhibition of the Epo
promoter. We conclude that the hGATA-1, -2 and -3 transcription factors
specifically bind to the GATA element in the human Epo gene promoter and
negatively regulate Epo gene expression.

PMID: 8677751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Leuk Res. 1995 Dec;19(12):933-43.

Megakaryocytic differentiation of a leukemic cell line, MC3, by phorbol ester:
induction of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and effects on expression of IL-6, IL-6
receptor, mpl and GATA genes.

Okabe M(1), Kunieda Y, Shoji M, Nakane S, Kurosawa M, Tanaka J, Hansen SR, Asaka 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

We investigated megakaryocytic differentiation in a newly-established
Ph1-positive leukemic cell line, MC3, which showed tri-lineage immunophenotypes
(myeloid antigens2+, CD19(1+) and CD41a1+) and was positive for CD34 and CD38.
TPA induced MC3 cells to differentiate to an early stage of megakaryocyte lineage
exhibiting an increase in the expression of platelet glycoproteins (GP) IIb/IIIa 
(CD41a), and an increase in cell size and nuclear ploidy. TPA treatment also
enhanced the expression of GPIIb mRNA, and induced the expression of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its receptor mRNAs, while it did not induce transcripts 
of the genes IL-11 and mpl ligand, and further decreased the transcript of the
mpl gene. Consistent with these findings, MC3 cells treated with TPA showed an
increased expression of GATA-1, but not GATA-3 transcripts, whereas those without
TPA treatment expressed only the GATA-2 transcript. These results provide an
insight into the study for the regulatory mechanism of megakaryocytopoiesis and
leukemic cell differentiation.

PMID: 8632663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Nov 7;92(23):10713-7.

Intraembryonic hematopoietic cell migration during vertebrate development.

Detrich HW 3rd(1), Kieran MW, Chan FY, Barone LM, Yee K, Rundstadler JA, Pratt S,
Ransom D, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Vertebrate hematopoietic stem cells are derived from vental mesoderm, which is
postulated to migrate to both extra- and intraembryonic positions during gastrula
and neurula stages. Extraembryonic migration has previously been documented, but 
the origin and migration of intraembryonic hematopoietic cells have not been
visualized. The zebrafish and most other teleosts do not form yolk sac blood
islands during early embryogenesis, but instead hematopoiesis occurs solely in a 
dorsal location known as the intermediate cell mass (IM) or Oellacher. In this
report, we have isolated cDNAs encoding zebrafish homologs of the hematopoietic
transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 and have used these markers to determine 
that the IM is formed from mesodermal cells in a posterior-lateral position on
the yolk syncytial layer of the gastrula yolk sac. Surprisingly, cells of the IM 
then migrate anteriorly through most of the body length prior to the onset of
active circulation and exit onto the yolk sac. These findings support a
hypothesis in which the hematopoietic program of vertebrates is established by
variations in homologous migration pathways of extra- and intraembryonic
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC40682
PMID: 7479870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Blood. 1995 Oct 15;86(8):3173-80.

The expression pattern of erythrocyte/megakaryocyte-related transcription factors
GATA-1 and the stem cell leukemia gene correlates with hematopoietic
differentiation and is associated with outcome of acute myeloid leukemia.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki JH, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Iwama H,
Nakazawa S, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

To understand the clinical implications of transcription factors and their
biologic roles during cellular differentiation in the hematopoietic system, we
examined the expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene in
human leukemia cell lines and various leukemia patients using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Cell lines exhibiting megakaryocytic or 
erythrocytic phenotypes had GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene transcripts, while
monocytic cell lines had no detectable GATA-1, GATA-2, or SCL gene mRNA. In some 
myeloid cell lines, GATA-1 expression, but not SCL gene expression, was detected;
GATA-1 expression in HL-60 cells was downregulated during the process of
monocytic differentiation. We next examined GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene
expression in 110 leukemia samples obtained from 76 patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), 19 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and 15 with chronic
myeloid leukemia in blast crisis (CML-BC). SCL gene expression was usually
accompanied by GATA-1 expression and was preferentially detected in patients with
leukemia exhibiting megakaryocytic or erythrocytic phenotypes, while patients
with monocytic leukemia were clustered in the group with no detectable GATA-1
expression. None of the patients with ALL or CML-lymphoid-BC expressed SCL. De
novo AML patients with SCL gene expression had a lower complete remission (CR)
rate and had a significantly poorer prognosis. Among the patients with AML not
expressing SCL, a high percentage of patients with CD7+ AML and CD19+ AML had
detectable GATA-1, while patients with GATA-1-negative AML had the best CR rate
(87.5%). Our results suggest that the expression pattern of transcription factors
reflects the lineage potential of leukemia cells, and GATA-1 and SCL gene
expression may have prognostic value for the outcome of patients with AML.

PMID: 7579412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

Gotta have GATA.

Simon MC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

PMID: 7550322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

Targeted disruption of the GATA3 gene causes severe abnormalities in the nervous 
system and in fetal liver haematopoiesis.

Pandolfi PP(1), Roth ME, Karis A, Leonard MW, Dzierzak E, Grosveld FG, Engel JD, 
Lindenbaum MH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Haematology, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

GATA-3 is one member of a growing family of related transcription factors which
share a strongly conserved expression pattern in all vertebrate organisms. In
order to elucidate GATA-3 function using a direct genetic approach, we have
disrupted the murine gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.
Mice heterozygous for the GATA3 mutation are fertile and appear in all respects
to be normal, whereas homozygous mutant embryos die between days 11 and 12
postcoitum (p.c.) and display massive internal bleeding, marked growth
retardation, severe deformities of the brain and spinal cord, and gross
aberrations in fetal liver haematopoiesis.

PMID: 7550312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4225-31.

Cooperative interaction of GATA-2 and AP1 regulates transcription of the
endothelin-1 gene.

Kawana M(1), Lee ME, Quertermous EE, Quertermous T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a 21-amino-acid vasoactive peptide initially characterized
as a product of endothelial cells. Reporter gene transfection experiments have
indicated that a GATA site and an AP1 site are essential for ET-1 promoter
function in endothelial cells, and GATA-2 appears to be the active GATA factor
which regulates ET-1 expression. To look for interactions between AP1 and GATA-2,
transactivation experiments were performed with expression vectors encoding
c-Jun, c-Fos, and GATA-2. Cooperativity between the AP1 complex and GATA-2 was
observed as a synergistic increase in transcriptional activity of the ET-1
reporter plasmid. In addition, AP1 was able to potentiate the action of GATA-2 on
reporter constructs lacking a functional AP1 site. In a similar fashion, GATA-2
was able to potentiate the action of AP1 despite deletion of the GATA site.
Experiments with GATA-1 and GATA-3 expression vectors provided evidence that this
capacity to interact with AP1 may be a characteristic of all GATA family members.
Biochemical evidence for AP1-GATA interaction was provided by immunoprecipitation
experiments. A GATA-2-specific antiserum was shown to immunoprecipitate in
vitro-synthesized Jun and Fos protein from reticulocyte lysate. Also, antisera
directed against Jun and Fos were able to immunoprecipitate from nuclear extracts
a GATA-binding protein, indicating the association of AP1 and GATA proteins in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC230661
PMID: 7623817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3830-9.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human
interleukin-5 gene promoter in interleukin-5-producing cells which express
multiple GATA-binding proteins.

Yamagata T(1), Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Honda H, Hirano N, Mano H, Yazaki Y,
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo University, Japan.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B-cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region within the human IL-5 
gene promoter that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of this family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-A23187 stimulation are necessary for IL-5
promoter activation. The requirement for another regulatory element called CLE0, 
which lies downstream of the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells 
express mRNAs of three GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3, and hGATA-4, and 
each of them has a potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/A) motif.
However, using ATL-16T nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only
GATA-binding protein that forms a specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA 
site. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells
expressing GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding
affinity for the -70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the
transactivation abilities were compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the
highest activity. These results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple
members of the GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMCID: PMC230622
PMID: 7791790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Br J Haematol. 1995 Jul;90(3):607-14.

Expression of erythroid-specific genes in acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia and
transient myeloproliferative disorder in Down's syndrome.

Ito E(1), Kasai M, Hayashi Y, Toki T, Arai K, Yokoyama S, Kato K, Tachibana N,
Yamamoto M, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (M7) and transient myeloproliferative disorder
in Down's syndrome (TMD) are characterized by rapid growth of abnormal blast
cells which express megakaryocytic markers. To clarify properties of the blast
cells in M7 and TMD cases, we examined erythroid markers expression in blasts
from six cases with M7 and seven cases with TMD in this study. Erythroid-specific
mRNAs encoding gamma-globin and erythroid delta-aminolevulinate synthase were
found to be expressed in blasts from most of these cases, indicating that
majorities of the blasts in M7 and TMD cases have erythroid and megakaryocytic
phenotypes. We also found that mRNAs encoding GATA-1 and GATA-2 are expressed in 
all these cases. These results suggest that M7 blasts and TMD blasts correspond
to the erythroid/megakaryocytic bipotential progenitor cells.

PMID: 7647001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 23;270(25):15320-6.

Functional analysis of the human endothelial nitric oxide synthase promoter. Sp1 
and GATA factors are necessary for basal transcription in endothelial cells.

Zhang R(1), Min W, Sessa WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06536, USA.

To gain insights into the mechanisms of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) 
gene expression, we have cloned the eNOS promoter and fused it to a luciferase
reporter gene to map regions of the promoter important for basal transcription in
bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC). Transfection of BAEC with F1 luciferase
(LUC) (-1600 to +22 nucleotides) yielded a 35-fold increase in promoter.
Progressive deletion from -1600 to -1033 (F2 and F3 LUC) did not significantly
influence eNOS promoter activity. Further deletion from -1033 to -779 (F4 LUC)
resulted in an approximate 40% reduction in basal promoter activity, and still
further deletion from -779 to -494 (F5 LUC) did not markedly influence activity. 
Deletion from -494 to -166 (F6 LUC) reduced eNOS promoter activity by 40-50%.
Specific mutation of the consensus GATA site (-230) in the F3 LUC construct
reduced luciferase activity (by 25-30%). Gel shift analysis and antibody
depletion using BAEC nuclear extracts demonstrated in vitro binding of GATA-2 to 
the oligonucleotide sequence containing the -230 GATA site. Next, we mutated the 
Sp1 site (-103) in the F3 and F6 LUC constructs and in the F3 GATA mutant
construct. Expression of these Sp1 mutants in BAEC resulted in a 85-90% reduction
in normalized luciferase activity. Gel shift and antibody supershift analysis
using a BAEC nuclear extracts demonstrated four specific, DNA-protein complexes
binding to the eNOS Sp-1 site, with the slowest migrating form composed of Sp1
and another nuclear protein. These data demonstrate that the Sp1 site is an
important cis-element in the core eNOS promoter.

PMID: 7541039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Blood. 1995 Jun 15;85(12):3713-8.

Ecotropic virus integration site-1 gene preferentially expressed in
post-myelodysplasia acute myeloid leukemia: possible association with GATA-1,
GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression.

Ohyashiki JH(1), Ohyashiki K, Shimamoto T, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

We investigated expression of the human ecotropic virus integration site-1 (EVI1)
gene in patients with leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) using the
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. The EVI1
transcripts were detected in 5 (10.0%) of 50 patients with de novo acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), including two AML patients with trilineage myelodysplasia, and in
8 (34.8%) of 23 patients with post-myelodysplastic syndrome AML (post-MDS AML).
EVI1 expression was also detected in 6 (35.3%) of 17 MDS patients and three of
six patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in myelomegakaryoblast crisis.
No EVI1 transcripts were detected in patients with acute lymphoid leukemia (n =
15) or CML in lymphoid blast crisis (n = 4). Chromosomal abnormalities at the
3q26 region, where the EVI1 gene is located, were found in one patient with MDS
and two patients with CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis who had EVI1 expression. Our
results showed that EVI1 expression was frequent in patients with post-MDS AML
and AML with trilineage myelodysplasia, regardless of the presence or absence of 
3q26 abnormalities. EVI1 expression was accompanied by expression of GATA-1 and
GATA-2, and often by stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression. In patients with
post-MDS AML, EVI1 expression was not always associated with a 3q26 abnormality, 
whereas EVI1 expression in CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis was often linked to a
3q26 abnormality. Our results suggest that the leukemogenic role of EVI1
expression may differ between post-MDS AML and leukemia, with EVI1 expression
associated with a 3q26 abnormality.

PMID: 7780155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4601-5.

Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells contain high levels of mRNA for c-kit,
GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb and low levels or no mRNA for c-fms and the
receptors for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and interleukins 5 and 7.

Orlic D(1), Anderson S, Biesecker LG, Sorrentino BP, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Section, National Center for Human Genome Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (PHSCs) were highly enriched from mouse bone
marrow by counterflow centrifugal elutriation, lineage subtraction, and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting based on high c-kit receptor expression
(c-kitBR). We used reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to assay the
c-kitBR subset and the subsets expressing low (c-kitDULL) and no (c-kitNEG) c-kit
receptor for expression of mRNA encoding hematopoietic growth factor receptors
and transcription factors. The c-kitBR cells had approximately 3.5-fold more
c-kit mRNA than unfractionated bone marrow cells. The c-kitDULL cells had 47-58% 
of the c-kit mRNA found in c-kitBR cells and the c-kitNEG cells had 4-9% of the
c-kit mRNA present in c-kitBR cells. By comparing mRNA levels in c-kitBR cells
(enriched for PHSCs) with those of unfractionated bone marrow, we demonstrated
that c-kitBR cells contained low or undetectable levels of mRNA for c-fms,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor, interleukin 5 receptor (IL-5R),
and IL-7R. These same cells had moderate levels of mRNA for erythropoietin
receptor, IL-3R subunits IL-3R alpha (SUT-1), AIC-2A, and AIC-2B, IL-6R and its
partner gp-130, and the transcription factor GATA-1 and high levels of mRNA for
transcription factors GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb. We conclude from these
findings that PHSCs are programmed to interact with stem cell factor, IL-3, and
IL-6 but not with granulocyte or macrophage colony-stimulating factor. These
findings also indicate that GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb activities may be
involved in PHSC maintenance or proliferation.

PMCID: PMC41992
PMID: 7538677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Clin Invest. 1995 May;95(5):2346-58.

Differential expression and functional role of GATA-2, NF-E2, and GATA-1 in
normal adult hematopoiesis.

Labbaye C(1), Valtieri M, Barberi T, Meccia E, Masella B, Pelosi E, Condorelli
GL, Testa U, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

We have explored the expression of the transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and 
NF-E2 in purified early hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) induced to gradual 
unilineage erythroid or granulocytic differentiation by growth factor stimulus.
GATA-2 mRNA and protein, already expressed in quiescent HPCs, is rapidly induced 
as early as 3 h after growth factor stimulus, but then declines in advanced
erythroid and granulocytic differentiation and maturation. NF-E2 and GATA-1 mRNAs
and proteins, though not detected in quiescent HPCs, are gradually induced at
24-48 h in both erythroid and granulocytic culture. Beginning at late
differentiation/early maturation stage, both transcription factors are further
accumulated in the erythroid pathway, whereas they are suppressed in the
granulopoietic series. Similarly, the erythropoietin receptor (EpR) is induced
and sustainedly expressed during erythroid differentiation, although beginning at
later times (i.e., day 5), whereas it is barely expressed in the granulopoietic
pathway. In the first series of functional studies, HPCs were treated with
antisense oligomers targeted to transcription factor mRNA: inhibition of GATA-2
expression caused a decreased number of both erythroid and granulocyte-monocytic 
clones, whereas inhibition of NF-E2 or GATA-1 expression induced a selective
impairment of erythroid colony formation. In a second series of functional
studies, HPCs treated with retinoic acid were induced to shift from erythroid to 
granulocytic differentiation (Labbaye et al. 1994. Blood. 83:651-656); this was
coupled with abrogation of GATA-1, NF-E2, and EpR expression and conversely
enhanced GATA-2 levels. These results indicate the expression and key role of
GATA-2 in the early stages of HPC proliferation/differentiation. Conversely,
NF-E2 and GATA-1 expression and function are apparently restricted to erythroid
differentiation and maturation: their expression precedes that of the EpR, and
their function may be in part mediated via the EpR.

PMCID: PMC295853
PMID: 7738198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Bone. 1995 May;16(5):587-93.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the human tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase (TRAP) gene.

Reddy SV(1), Kuzhandaivelu N, Acosta LG, Roodman GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology, Audie Murphy Veterans Administration
Hospital, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio 78284, USA.

Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) is expressed at high levels in
osteoclasts and may play an important role in the bone resorptive process.
However, factors regulating human TRAP gene expression have not been clearly
defined. Therefore, we isolated a genomic clone (CL-9) for TRAP containing a
14-kb insert. A restriction map was generated for this insert, and a 2.6-kb ApaI 
fragment containing the 5'-flanking region was subcloned. Sequence analysis of
this fragment revealed the presence of candidate transcription factor-binding
sequences for H-APF-1, SP1, GATA2, and the c-Myc proto-oncogene. PCR analysis of 
RNA isolated from human osteoclastomas and pagetic bone revealed a 276-bp intron 
at -1 bp to -276 bp relative to the ATG and a transcript originating from this
intron. Rapid amplification of the 5' end of the human TRAP mRNA by PCR indicated
the presence of a 93-bp untranslated region 5' from the intron. Promoter activity
was detected in the DNA fragment from +1 bp to -1903 bp relative to the ATG
initiation codon, which drove the transient expression of a luciferase reporter
gene when transfected into HRE H9 rabbit endometrial cells. Comparison of the
human TRAP 5'-flanking region with mouse TRAP and uteroferrin revealed 41% and
47% homology, respectively. This suggests that regulation of human TRAP gene
expression may differ from that for the murine TRAP gene.

PMID: 7654474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):4101-7.

Regulation of GATA-2 phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinase and
interleukin-3.

Towatari M(1), May GE, Marais R, Perkins GR, Marshall CJ, Cowley S, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Fund Centre, London, United Kingdom.

GATA-2 is a member of a family of transcription factors which bind a common DNA
sequence motif (WGA-TAR) through an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger domain. 
An essential role for GATA-2 in the development of hematopoietic stem cells has
recently been shown in gene targeting experiments in mice. Here we show that
GATA-2 exists in hematopoietic progenitor cells as a phosphoprotein. Stimulation 
of progenitors with interleukin-3 (IL-3) results in enhanced phosphorylation of
GATA-2 which occurs within 5 min. IL-3 is known to signal in part through
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, and evidence for MAP kinase signaling in 
the control of GATA-2 phosphorylation was obtained by genetically manipulating
the MAP kinase pathway in COS cells using either constitutively activating or
interfering mutants of MAP kinase kinase. Furthermore, using an interfering
mutant of MAP kinase kinase, we directly demonstrated a critical role for the MAP
kinase pathway in the IL-3-dependent phosphorylation of GATA-2 in hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Finally, in vitro phosphorylation experiments using recombinant
GATA-2 raise the possibility that MAP kinase itself may phosphorylate GATA-2. Our
results provide evidence for phosphorylation via the MAP kinase pathway
constituting a cytoplasmic link between GATA-2 and growth factor receptors and
are consistent with the hypothesis that GATA-2 is involved in the growth factor
responsiveness and proliferation control of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMID: 7876160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 16;10(4):631-9.

Regulation of lineage restricted haemopoietic transcription factors in cell
hybrids.

Murrell AM(1), Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 encode lineage restricted haemopoietic
transcription factors. We have previously shown that SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2 are
expressed in multipotent progenitors prior to lineage commitment, but are
down-regulated during granulocyte/monocyte differentiation. The phenomenon of
gene extinction in cell hybrids may reveal negative regulatory mechanisms
operating during normal differentiation. We have therefore analysed the
regulation of SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 in cell hybrids formed by the fusion
of cell lines representing different haemopoietic lineages. Expression of GATA-3 
was extinguished in both human and murine erythroid x T cell hybrids, an
observation which suggests that erythroid cells contain factors capable of
repressing GATA-3 expression. By contrast expression of SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2
was not extinguished in erythroid x T or in erythroid x B cell hybrids. These
data suggest that T cells and B cells do not contain trans-acting factors capable
of down-regulating expression of SCL, GATA-1 or GATA-2, and therefore raise the
possibility that a 'hit and run' mechanism may repress these genes during normal 
haemopoiesis. HpaII sites within the SCL promoter were unmethylated in erythroid 
cells but methylated in T cells. Erythroid x T and erythroid x B cell hybrids
contained both methylated and unmethylated SCL promoters, thus implicating a
heritable cis-acting mechanism in the regulation of the SCL gene in lymphoid cell
lines. These results provide the first analysis of SCL and GATA gene regulation
in stable cell hybrids.

PMID: 7862440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. EMBO J. 1995 Feb 15;14(4):757-66.

Nuclear translocation of a maternal CCAAT factor at the start of gastrulation
activates Xenopus GATA-2 transcription.

Brewer AC(1), Guille MJ, Fear DJ, Partington GA, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College,
London, UK.

The transcription factor GATA-2 is present in blood cell precursors and plays a
pivotal role in the control of erythroid differentiation. In Xenopus embryos, low
levels of GATA-2 mRNA are maternally derived, while the onset of zygotic GATA-2
expression coincides with commitment to haematopoietic lineages. However, its
initial transcriptional activation is not restricted to the presumptive blood
islands, but occurs throughout ventral and lateral regions, in all three germ
layers. In order to determine how this expression pattern is controlled, we have 
isolated and characterized the Xenopus GATA-2 gene. We show that 1.65 kb of 5'
flanking sequences are sufficient to direct both correct transcriptional
initiation in oocytes and appropriate temporal and spatial gene expression in
early embryos. The transgene is activated during gastrulation and by neurula
stages in predominantly expressed in the ventral hemisphere. We demonstrate that 
a CCAAT element is necessary for gene activity in both systems and that extracts 
prepared from oocytes and embryos contain a factor which specifically recognizes 
this element. We also show that cytoplasmic localization inhibits the function of
this CCAAT factor until the beginning of gastrulation, when the zygotic GATA-2
gene is activated. These observations extend our understanding of the mechanisms 
by which maternal factors control the temporal activation of transcription in
early vertebrate embryos.

PMCID: PMC398141
PMID: 7882979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Exp Hematol. 1995 Feb;23(2):99-107.

GATA transcription factors: key regulators of hematopoiesis.

Weiss MJ(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA.

PMID: 7828675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):634-41.

The C-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 or GATA-2 is sufficient to induce
megakaryocytic differentiation of an early myeloid cell line.

Visvader JE(1), Crossley M, Hill J, Orkin SH, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The GATA-1 and GATA-2 transcription factors, which each contain two homologous
zinc fingers, are important hematopoietic regulators expressed within the
erythroid, mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages. Enforced expression of either 
factor in the primitive myeloid line 416B induces megakaryocytic differentiation.
The features of their structure required for this activity have been explored.
The ability of 12 GATA-1 mutants to promote 416B maturation was compared with
their DNA-binding activity and transactivation potential. Differentiation did not
require any of the seven serine residues that are phosphorylated in vivo, an
N-terminal region bearing the major transactivation domain, or a C-terminal
segment beyond the fingers. Removal of a consensus nuclear localization signal
following the second finger did not block differentiation or nuclear
translocation. The N-terminal finger was also dispensable, although its removal
attenuated differentiation. In contrast, the C-terminal finger was essential,
underscoring its distinct function. Remarkably, only 69 residues spanning the
C-terminal finger were required to induce limited megakaryocytic differentiation.
Analysis of three GATA-2 mutants led to the same conclusion. Endogenous GATA-1
mRNA was induced by most mutants and may contribute to differentiation. Because
the GATA-1 C-terminal finger could bind its target site but not transactivate a
minimal reporter, it may direct megakaryocytic maturation by derepressing
specific genes and/or by interacting with another protein which provides the
transactivation function.

PMCID: PMC231921
PMID: 7823932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Development. 1994 Nov;120(11):3257-66.

GATA factor activity is required for the trophoblast-specific transcriptional
regulation of the mouse placental lactogen I gene.

Ng YK(1), George KM, Engel JD, Linzer DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The molecular determinants governing tissue-specific gene expression in the
placenta are at present only poorly defined, particularly with respect to the
regulation of specific hormone genes whose products are vital to embryonic
development and the maintenance of a nurturing maternal environment. In
continuing our analysis of the trophoblast-specific expression of the mouse
placental lactogen I gene, we now demonstrate that the transcription factors
GATA-2 and GATA-3 regulate the activity of this gene promoter. These factors are 
expressed in placental trophoblast cells, with peak levels of the GATA-2, GATA-3 
and placental lactogen I mRNAs each accumulating at midgestation. Analysis of a
region of the placental lactogen I gene promoter, previously shown to be
sufficient for directing trophoblast-specific transcription, revealed the
presence of three consensus binding sites for GATA-2 or GATA-3. Both GATA-2 and
GATA-3 bind to these sites in vitro and mutation of these sites results in a
significant decrease in promoter activity as assayed by transient transfection
into the choriocarcinoma-derived cell line Rcho-1, which expresses endogenous
GATA-2 and GATA-3. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA factors in Rcho-1 cells
stimulates transcription from a co-transfected placental lactogen I gene
promoter. Most significantly, expression of GATA-2 or GATA-3 was found to induce 
transcription from this promoter in transfected non-trophoblast (fibroblast)
cells. These data indicate that GATA factors are both limiting and required
transcriptional regulatory molecules in placental trophoblasts, and that the
tissue specificity of the placental lactogen I gene is determined, at least in
part, by GATA-2 and/or GATA-3.

PMID: 7720565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Nature. 1994 Sep 15;371(6494):221-6.

An early haematopoietic defect in mice lacking the transcription factor GATA-2.

Tsai FY(1), Keller G, Kuo FC, Weiss M, Chen J, Rosenblatt M, Alt FW, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Blood cell development relies on the expansion and maintenance of haematopoietic 
stem and progenitor cells in the embryo. By gene targeting in mouse embryonic
stem cells, we demonstrate that the transcription factor GATA-2 plays a critical 
role in haematopoiesis, particularly of an adult type. We propose that GATA-2
regulates genes controlling growth factor responsiveness or the proliferative
capacity of early haematopoietic cells.

PMID: 8078582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Dev Biol. 1994 Sep;165(1):193-205.

Ventral expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in the Xenopus embryo defines induction
of hematopoietic mesoderm.

Kelley C(1), Yee K, Harland R, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Harvard Medical School,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

The early embryonic events involved in the commitment of mesoderm to form blood
have not been studied in detail for lack of molecular markers. We have studied
the expression of the hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2
during Xenopus embryogenesis. During development GATA-1 expression is localized
to the ventral region of the embryo and precedes the expression of embryonic
globins. GATA-2 is highly expressed in the ventral region of the embryo by the
end of gastrulation and later is expressed in the blood island region and the
central nervous system. Lithium-induced dorsalization of embryos abrogates GATA-2
expression, and uv-induced ventralization of embryos leads to a radially
symmetrical expression of GATA-2. Therefore, GATA-2 expression reflects the
ventral character of the embryo. The expression of the GATA-binding proteins and 
globin in ventral marginal zone explants demonstrates that hematopoiesis is
programmed as early as the blastula stage. GATA-1 and GATA-2 are also expressed
in cultured animal cap explants, suggesting that these cells have hematopoietic
potential. The developmental expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 is consistent with
their role in hematopoiesis in higher organisms and defines the ventral regions
of the early embryo that give rise to hematopoietic progenitors. Our studies
indicate that these genes will be useful in defining the inductive events that
lead to the formation of hematopoietic mesoderm.

PMID: 8088437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2623-32.

GATA-and SP1-binding sites are required for the full activity of the
tissue-specific promoter of the tal-1 gene.

Lecointe N(1), Bernard O, Naert K, Joulin V, Larsen CJ, Romeo PH, Mathieu-Mahul
D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 9942, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, France.

The tal-1 gene, which is frequently activated in human T cell acute leukemias
(T-ALLs), codes for a protein of the basic helix-loop-helix family (b-HLH) and
potentially a transcription factor. In human and murine hematopoiesis tal-1 is
expressed during the differentiation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic and
mastocytic cell lineages. The expression of tal-1 appears to be comodulated with 
that of the transcription factor GATA-1 gene, suggesting that the GATA-1 protein 
may regulate the tal-1 gene activity in these hematopoietic lineages. To get
further insights into the molecular mechanisms that control tal-1 expression, we 
have isolated 5' sequences of the murine gene and compared them to their human
counterparts. The 5' flanking sequences from the two genes show several regions
of high homology. The alignment of both sequences enabled us to predict that
similarly, to the human, the mouse gene contains two alternative first exons (Ia 
and Ib). Remarkably, in both species, the proximal region of the tissue-specific 
exon Ia (i.e. gene segment -122 to +1) contains two GATA-motifs (at -65 and -33) 
and one SP-1 consensus binding site (-59). Mobility shift assays demonstrate that
GATA proteins are able to interact with both GATA-motifs in a sequence specific
fashion, but with different efficiencies. Moreover transfection studies show that
the GATA-1 protein directly mediates tal-1 transcription by interacting with the 
-122/+1 fragment, defined as a minimal promoter in erythroid cells. Mutagenesis
of the promoter establishes that the -33 GATA-binding site present in this
fragment is critical for tal-1 expression in erythroid cells, but by itself does 
not lead to full promoter activity. Indeed, further mutations show that the
second -65 GATA-binding site and the binding motif for SP1 (-59) significantly
contribute to the overall activity of the proximal tal-1 promoter. Altogether,
our data provide evidence that GATA-1 cooperates with the transcription factor
SP1 to mediate the erythroid-specific expression of the tal-1 gene.

PMID: 8058326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Development. 1994 Sep;120(9):2519-29.

Negative control of Xenopus GATA-2 by activin and noggin with eventual expression
in precursors of the ventral blood islands.

Walmsley ME(1), Guille MJ, Bertwistle D, Smith JC, Pizzey JA, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College
London, UK.

To increase our understanding of haematopoiesis during early vertebrate
development, we have studied the expression pattern of the transcription factor
GATA-2 in Xenopus embryos, and asked how this is regulated. We show that the
blood island precursors of the ventral mesoderm express GATA-2 RNA at neural tube
stages, some 5 hours before globin RNA is detected in their derivatives. Prior to
this however, GATA-2 is expressed much more widely within the embryo. Maternal
transcripts are uniformly distributed, and zygotic transcription is activated
during gastrulation throughout ventral and lateral regions of the embryo, with
expression highest in the sensorial ectoderm and only weak in the ventral
mesoderm. The domain of GATA-2 expression in neurulae outlines the region of the 
neural plate and suggests a possible wider role in dorsoventral patterning. To
identify the signals involved in regulating this pattern of expression, we
performed experiments with embryo explants. GATA-2 is activated autonomously in
isolated animal caps and this activation is suppressed by the mesoderm-inducing
factor activin, but not by FGF. Thus, the down-regulation of GATA-2 observed in
the region of the Spemann organiser may be a response to an activin-like signal
emanating from the dorsal-vegetal region or Nieuwkoop centre. GATA-2 activation
in animal caps and ventral marginal zones was suppressed by co-culturing with
dorsal marginal zones, suggesting that a signal from the Spemann organiser is
involved in suppression of GATA-2 in the dorsal region of the embryo. Expression 
of a candidate for this signal, noggin, had the same effect. Taken together, the 
observations presented here suggest that GATA-2 activation occurs by default in
the absence of signals, that the restriction of its expression within the early
embryo is controlled by negative signals emanating from the Nieuwkoop centre and 
the organiser, and that noggin and activin-like molecules play a role in these
signalling pathways.

PMID: 7956828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 1994 Aug 15;84(4):1074-84.

Transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in erythroid, early myeloid, and CD34+
human leukemia-derived cell lines.

Nagai T(1), Harigae H, Ishihara H, Motohashi H, Minegishi N, Tsuchiya S, Hayashi 
N, Gu L, Andres B, Engel JD, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

To understand the functional roles that the GATA factors may play during
hematopoietic cell differentiation, we examined the expression of GATA factor
mRNAs and protein products in various human cell lines. Blot hybridization
analyses demonstrated that GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNAs are expressed abundantly in a 
set of cell lines established from human myelogenous leukemia cells, but the
expression pattern of each factor is distinct. GATA-2 mRNA is expressed in all
cell lines tested that express erythroid markers, and, in addition, the mRNA is
also expressed in three CD34+ cell lines and two early myeloid cell lines. In
contrast, the expression of GATA-1 mRNA showed tight correlation to that of the
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage markers. We also found that the GATA-2 probe
identifies two types of mRNA. Structural analysis of genomic DNA clones encoding 
human GATA-2 coupled with RNA blot analysis demonstrated that there exists an
alternative use of polyadenylation consensus sequences in a single exon and this 
causes the molecular heterogeneity among GATA-2 mRNAs. Through immunochemical and
immunohistochemical analyses using anti-GATA-1- and anti-GATA-2-specific
antibodies, GATA-2 protein was clearly shown to be present in the nuclei of
leukemia-derived early myeloid and CD34+ cell lines, whereas both GATA-1 and
GATA-2 proteins are expressed in erythroid/megakaryocytic cell lines. Thus, the
expression profile of GATA-2 is consistent with the hypothesis that GATA-2 plays 
unique roles for the transcriptional activation of genes in cells at an early
stage of hematopoietic differentiation and in developing cells of the erythroid
and myeloid lineages.

PMID: 7519472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 2;91(16):7737-41.

PU.1 and GATA: components of a mast cell-specific interleukin 4 intronic
enhancer.

Henkel G(1), Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences University,
Portland 97201.

Interleukin 4 (IL-4), a critical immunoregulatory cytokine, is produced by a
subset of T lymphocytes and cells of the mast cell/basophil lineage. There are
cell-specific differences in the regulatory elements that control IL-4
transcription in these two cell types. A 683-bp Bgl II fragment, located within
the second intron of the murine IL-4 gene, was previously shown to exhibit mast
cell-specific enhancer activity. To define critical cis-acting elements that
regulate this enhancer, a series of deletions from the 5' and 3' ends of the Bgl 
II fragment were generated. Their effect on enhancer activity was assessed in
IL-4-producing mast cell lines in transient transfection assays. Two functionally
independent subregions, E1 and E2, were defined in this analysis. Both are
required for full enhancer activity. Sequences identical to previously defined
DNA-binding sites for SP1 and GATA are present within E1, and an ets binding site
is located within E2. Although mutation of the SP1 sites had no effect on
enhancer function, alteration of either the GATA or ets site reduced enhancer
activity by 50-60%. Proteins that associate with the IL-4 intronic GATA and ets
sites were detected in mast cell nuclear extracts by mobility-shift assays.
Specific antibodies identified these factors as GATA-1 and GATA-2 and the ets
family member PU.1. GATA-1, GATA-2, and PU.1 exhibit cell-specific expression,
suggesting that these proteins play a critical role in the lineage-restricted
activity of the IL-4 intronic enhancer in mast cells.

PMCID: PMC44477
PMID: 8052653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Seikagaku. 1994 Aug;66(8):1138-42.

[Structure and function of GATA transcription factors; possible roles in cell
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Muraosa Y(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai.

PMID: 7963854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5592-602.

GATA-binding proteins regulate the human gonadotropin alpha-subunit gene in the
placenta and pituitary gland.

Steger DJ(1), Hecht JH, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0674.

The human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene is expressed in two quite
dissimilar tissues, the placenta and anterior pituitary. Tissue-specific
expression is determined by combinations of elements, some of which are common
and others of which are specific to each tissue. In the placenta, a composite
enhancer confers specific expression. It contains four protein-binding sites: two
cyclic AMP (cAMP) response elements that bind CREB, a trophoblast-specific
element that binds TSEB, and a sequence motif, AGATAA, that matches the consensus
binding site for a family of transcription factors termed the GATA-binding
proteins. In pituitary gonadotropes, the cAMP response elements remain important 
for expression, TSEB is absent, and elements further upstream participate in
tissue-specific expression. Here we establish a regulatory role for the GATA
element in both the placenta and pituitary by demonstrating that a mutation of
this element decreases alpha-subunit gene expression 15-fold in JEG-3 human
placental cells and 2.5-fold in alpha T3-1 mouse pituitary gonadotropes. In JEG-3
cells, human GATA-2 (hGATA-2) and hGATA-3 are highly expressed and both proteins 
bind to the alpha-subunit gene GATA element. In alpha T3-1 cells, the GATA motif 
is bound by mouse GATA-2 (mGATA-2) and an mGATA-4-related protein. Cotransfection
of hGATA-2 or hGATA-3 into alpha T3-1 cells activates the alpha-subunit gene
threefold. These studies establish a role for the GATA-binding proteins in
placental and pituitary alpha-subunit gene expression, significantly expanding
the known target genes of GATA-2, GATA-3, and perhaps GATA-4.

PMCID: PMC359078
PMID: 7518566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Leukemia. 1994 Jul;8(7):1176-80.

GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression in acute myeloid leukemia.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki JH, Ohyashiki K, Kawakubo K, Kimura N, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors play an important role in the normal developmental process 
of hematopoietic cells. However, expression of transcription factors and its
implication in various human leukemias is not well understood. We have studied
GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression in 30 patients with 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by the reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction assay. In AML both GATA-1 and SCL genes were commonly expressed in M6
and M7 leukemias, and also in leukemias bearing the platelet-associated antigen. 
We found some AML patients with GATA-1, but not SCL expression. Most CD7+ AML and
t(8;21)(q22;q22)-AML were included in this group, which often demonstrated
immunoglobulin heavy chain and/or T-cell receptor gene rearrangements.
Consequently, GATA-1+ SCL- AML may originate from early myeloid progenitors.
Moreover, most AML patients of the M3, M4, or M5 groups were GATA-1- SCL-. Our
data suggest that the expression pattern of transcription factors may help to
define distinct phenotypes of AML cells.

PMID: 8035609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 1994 Jul 1;84(1):189-99.

Characterization of cell phenotype by a novel cDNA library subtraction system:
expression of CD8 alpha in a mast cell-derived interleukin-4-dependent cell line.

Hara T(1), Harada N, Mitsui H, Miura T, Ishizaka T, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

We have established a unique variant cell line, MC/9.IL-4, which continuously
proliferates in the presence of interleukin-4 (IL-4), from a murine interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent mast cell line, MC/9 (referred to as MC/9.IL-3). Compared with
MC/9.IL-3 cells, MC/9.IL-4 cells are smaller, lack cytoplasmic granules and
metachromasia, carry a very small amount of histamine, and express fewer
high-affinity IgE receptors (IgERs) and IL-3 receptors. To further characterize
MC/9.IL-4, we developed a novel method to enrich cell type-specific cDNAs by cDNA
library subtraction and applied it for MC/9.IL-3 versus MC/9.IL-4. Sequence
analysis of cDNA clones isolated by this technique showed that MC/9.IL-4 cells
specifically express CD8 alpha and expression of mast cell-specific proteases and
major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII) is considerably decreased. It
was also noted that responsiveness to the IL-3-agonistic antibody F9 and
expression of the transcription factor GATA-2 is diminished in MC/9.IL-4,
indicating that MC/9.IL-4 have lost major characteristics of the bone
marrow-derived cultured mast cells. Because other T-cell marker antigens, CD8
beta, CD4, Thy-1, were not detected on MC/9.IL-4 cells, MC/9.IL-4 cells may
represent an unknown class of hematopoietic cells that express CD8 alpha. This
cell line will be useful in studies of IL-4-mediated signal transduction, as well
as transcriptional regulation of mast cell characteristic genes. This study also 
demonstrates the effective use of the cDNA library subtraction strategy to
characterize unknown types of hematopoietic cells at the molecular level.

PMID: 8018917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Genes Dev. 1994 May 15;8(10):1184-97.

Novel insights into erythroid development revealed through in vitro
differentiation of GATA-1 embryonic stem cells.

Weiss MJ(1), Keller G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells lacking the transcription factor GATA-1 do not
produce mature red blood cells either in vivo or in vitro. To define the
consequences of GATA-1 loss more precisely, we used an in vitro ES cell
differentiation assay that permits enumeration of primitive (EryP) and definitive
(EryD) erythroid precursors and recovery of pure erythroid colonies. In contrast 
to normal ES cells, GATA-1- ES cells fail to generate EryP precursors. EryD
precursors, however, are normal in number but undergo developmental arrest and
death at the proerythroblast stage. Contrary to initial expectations, arrested
GATA-1(-)-definitive proerythroblasts express GATA target genes at normal levels.
Transcripts of the related factor GATA-2 are remarkably elevated in GATA-1-
proerythroblasts. These findings imply substantial interchangeability of GATA
factors in vivo and suggest that GATA-1 normally serves to repress GATA-2 during 
erythropoiesis. The approach used here is a paradigm for the phenotypic analysis 
of targeted mutations affecting hematopoietic development.

PMID: 7926723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Apr;23(1-2):100-10.

Temporal and spatial changes in GATA transcription factor expression are
coincident with development of the chicken optic tectum.

Kornhauser JM(1), Leonard MW, Yamamoto M, LaVail JH, Mayo KE, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The molecular mechanisms specifying patterns of gene expression in the vertebrate
brain, which in turn determine the developmental fates of specific neurons, are
yet to be clearly defined. Individual members of a recently identified family of 
transcriptional regulatory proteins, the GATA factors, are required for the
differentiation of certain hematopoietic cell lineages. We show here that two of 
the members of this gene family, GATA-2 and GATA-3, are expressed within discrete
cell populations of the chicken optic tectum during embryogenesis, and that they 
have highly restricted patterns of expression in the developing chicken brain.
Furthermore, the induction of GATA factor expression within specific cell layers 
parallels the well established spatial (rostral to caudal) and temporal pattern
of optic tectum development. The observation that both the timing of appearance
and the localization of expression of GATA-2 and GATA-3 are correlated with optic
tectum development suggest that these transcription factors may be associated
with the initiation of gene transcription required for the determination of
specific neuronal fates within visual areas of the vertebrate brain.

PMID: 8028475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 14;269(2):883-9.

The interaction of GATA-binding proteins and basal transcription factors with
GATA box-containing core promoters. A model of tissue-specific gene expression.

Aird WC(1), Parvin JD, Sharp PA, Rosenberg RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02136.

The core promoters of the rat platelet factor 4 (PF4), mouse erythropoietin and
chicken beta globin genes contain a GATA motif in place of the consensus TATAAA
site. In the case of the PF4 gene, this site has been shown to play a critical
role in restricting transcription to the megakaryocyte lineage. In order to
understand the mechanism of tissue specificity, we investigated the function of
the GATA box-containing promoters in vitro. Our studies show that the
TATA-binding protein of TFIID is required for initiation of transcription from
the GATA box-containing promoters. GATA-1 interacts with the core promoter GATA
motif and inhibits generation of preinitiation complexes. The functional
significance of the inhibition of preinitiation complexes is supported by in
vitro transcription assays in which transcription from the PF4 and erythropoietin
core promoters is suppressed by GATA-1. We also demonstrate that GATA-2 inhibits 
initiation of transcription from the PF4 core promoter. Based on these results,
we propose a model in which repression of PF4 expression in nonmegakaryocytes is 
mediated, in part, by competition between GATA-binding proteins and basal factors
for the core promoter.

PMID: 8288642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biochem. 1994 Jan;115(1):6-14.

Gastric proton pump (H+/K(+)-ATPase): structure and gene regulation through GATA 
DNA-binding protein(s).

Maeda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Osaka University.

Progress in molecular biological studies on the gastric proton pump
(H+/K(+)-ATPase) now enable us to discuss not only its subunit protein structures
and catalysis but also the organizations of its subunit genes and their
cell-specific transcription. The primary structures of the catalytic alpha and
glycosylated beta subunits are similar to those of the corresponding subunits of 
Na+/K(+)-ATPase. The residues located in the catalytic and cation binding sites
have been proposed from the combined results of protein chemical studies and
sequence comparisons of P-type cation transporting ATPases. Most of the positions
of exon/intron boundaries of the genes for the H+/K(+)- and Na+/K(+)-ATPase alpha
and beta subunits are conserved, suggesting that the alpha and beta subunit
genes, respectively, of the two ATPases were derived from common ancestors. In
contrast to the Na+/K(+)-ATPase subunits, the H+/K(+)-ATPase alpha and beta
subunits are expressed specifically in gastric parietal cells. Consistent with
their cell-specific transcription, a gastric mucosal nuclear protein(s) was shown
to recognize a sequence motif in the 5'-upstream regions of the H+/K(+)-ATPase
alpha and beta subunit genes. Furthermore, novel zinc finger proteins (GATA-GT1
and GATA-GT2) that bind to this motif were found in the gastric parietal cells.
These proteins are likely to play important roles in transcriptional regulation
of the gastric proton pump genes.

PMID: 8188638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Development. 1993 Oct;119(2):519-31.

Expression of the chicken GATA factor family during early erythroid development
and differentiation.

Leonard MW(1), Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The DNA motif WGATAR has been identified within transcriptional regulatory
domains of globin and other erythroid-specific genes and the activator proteins
that bind to this regulatory element, the GATA factors, belong to a multi-gene
family that is expressed in chicken erythroid cells. Here we show that, as in
chickens, multiple members of the GATA factor family are expressed in human and
murine erythroid cells. During the early stages of chicken embryogenesis (well
before blood island formation), each of the GATA family members is transcribed
with a unique temporal and spatial pattern. In the primitive erythroid lineage,
transcription of the embryonic epsilon-globin gene parallels GATA-1 expression
while the switch to beta-globin transcription in definitive erythroid cells is
directly preceded by a pronounced increase in GATA-3 accumulation. The timing and
pattern of expression of these different mRNAs during avian erythroid development
and differentiation suggests that temporally regulated changes in GATA factor
expression are required for vertebrate hematopoiesis.

PMID: 8287800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Blood. 1993 Sep 1;82(5):1493-501.

Megakaryocytic differentiation induced in 416B myeloid cells by GATA-2 and GATA-3
transgenes or 5-azacytidine is tightly coupled to GATA-1 expression.

Visvader J(1), Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.

The GATA 'zinc-finger' transcription factors are thought to have important roles 
in the control of hematopoiesis. GATA-1 and GATA-2 are found in the erythroid,
mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages, and GATA-3 in T lymphocytes. GATA-1 is
required for erythroid development and has recently been shown by gene transfer
to direct megakaryocytic differentiation of the primitive myeloid cell line 416B.
Here we show that enforced expression in 416B cells of either the GATA-2 or
GATA-3 gene also induces megakaryocytic differentiation, as assessed by cellular 
morphology, acetylcholinesterase activity, polyploid DNA content, and loss of
Mac-1 expression. No erythroid or mast cell differentiation was found.
Unexpectedly, the level of endogenous GATA-1 mRNA had increased 20- to 30-fold
among the transfectants, whereas that of GATA-2 mRNA was unaltered and endogenous
GATA-3 transcripts remained undetectable. This finding suggests that GATA-2 and
GATA-3 lie upstream of GATA-1 in a regulatory hierarchy and that, in 416B cells, 
GATA-1 may mediate the phenotypic changes induced by GATA-2 or GATA-3.
Furthermore, 416B cells treated with the DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
underwent megakaryocytic differentiation accompanied by a marked increase in the 
level of GATA-1 mRNA but not that of GATA-2 or GATA-3. These results strongly
implicate GATA factors in megakaryocytic differentiation and suggest that, at
least for 416B cells, GATA-1 is a dominant regulator of maturation along this
lineage.

PMID: 7689871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Blood. 1993 Aug 15;82(4):1071-9.

Dynamics of GATA transcription factor expression during erythroid
differentiation.

Leonard M(1), Brice M, Engel JD, Papayannopoulou T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.

Although the formation of terminally differentiated erythroid cells has been
shown to require the presence of a functional GATA-1 gene in vivo, the role of
this transcription factor and other members of the GATA family at earlier stages 
of erythroid differentiation is unclear. In this report, the expression of
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 has been examined in enriched peripheral blood
progenitors before and after culture in a well-characterized liquid culture
system. In addition primary leukemic cells as well as several erythroleukemic and
nonerythroid cell lines were analyzed for GATA factor expression. The results
show that the profile of GATA factor expression in erythroid cells is distinct
from that of myeloid or lymphoid lineages. Erythroleukemic cell lines express
little or no GATA-3, but high levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2. When they are induced 
to display the terminal erythroid phenotype, little change in the level of GATA-1
is detected but a significant decline in the levels of GATA-2 is observed
commensurate with the degree of maturation achieved by the cells. Enrichment of
erythroid progenitors from peripheral blood leads to selection of cells that
express both GATA-1 and GATA-2. As the enriched populations are cultured in
suspension in the presence of multiple cytokines, the levels of both GATA-1 and
GATA-2 initially increase. However, in cultures containing only erythropoietin,
which show exclusive erythroid differentiation, the levels of GATA-1 continue to 
increase, whereas GATA-2 expression declines as erythroid maturation progresses. 
In contrast, cultures lacking Epo (ie, with interleukin-3 and kit ligand) display
limited progression towards both the myeloid and erythroid pathways, and high
levels of expression of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 are maintained. Despite the
initial upregulation of GATA-1 expression in the latter cultures, terminal
erythroid differentiation does not occur in the absence of erythropoietin. These 
results indicate that GATA-1 upregulation is associated with both the initiation 
and the maintenance of the erythroid program, but that these two processes appear
to be under separate regulatory control. Thus, the dynamic changes in the levels 
of different GATA factors that occur during primary erythroid differentiation
suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the progression to
specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 8353273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4011-22.

DNA-binding specificities of the GATA transcription factor family.

Ko LJ(1), Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3500.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors, which are related by a high 
degree of amino acid sequence identity within their zinc finger DNA-binding
domains, each show distinct but overlapping patterns of tissue-restricted
expression. Although GATA-1, -2, and -3 have been shown to recognize a consensus 
sequence derived from regulatory elements in erythroid cell-specific genes,
WGATAR (in which W indicates A/T and R indicates A/G), the potential for more
subtle differences in the binding preferences of each factor has not been
previously addressed. By employing a binding selection and polymerase chain
reaction amplification scheme with randomized oligonucleotides, we have
determined the binding-site specificities of bacterially expressed chicken
GATA-1, -2, and -3 transcription factors. Whereas all three GATA factors bind an 
AGATAA erythroid consensus motif with high affinity, a second, alternative
consensus DNA sequence, AGATCTTA, is also recognized well by GATA-2 and GATA-3
but only poorly by GATA-1. These studies suggest that all three GATA factors are 
capable of mediating transcriptional effects via a common erythroid consensus
DNA-binding motif. Furthermore, GATA-2 and GATA-3, because of their distinct
expression patterns and broader DNA recognition properties, may be involved in
additional regulatory processes beyond those of GATA-1. The definition of an
alternative GATA-2-GATA-3 consensus sequence may facilitate the identification of
new target genes in the further elucidation of the roles that these transcription
factors play during development.

PMCID: PMC359950
PMID: 8321208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):3999-4010.

DNA-binding specificity of GATA family transcription factors.

Merika M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

GATA-binding proteins constitute a family of transcription factors that recognize
a target site conforming to the consensus WGATAR (W = A or T and R = A or G).
Here we have used the method of polymerase chain reaction-mediated random site
selection to assess in an unbiased manner the DNA-binding specificity of GATA
proteins. Contrary to our expectations, we show that GATA proteins bind a variety
of motifs that deviate from the previously assigned consensus. Many of the
nonconsensus sequences bind protein with high affinity, equivalent to that of
conventional GATA motifs. By using the selected sequences as probes in the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we demonstrate overlapping, but distinct,
sequence preferences for GATA family members, specified by their respective
DNA-binding domains. Furthermore, we provide additional evidence for interaction 
of amino and carboxy fingers of GATA-1 in defining its binding site. By
performing cotransfection experiments, we also show that transactivation
parallels DNA binding. A chimeric protein containing the finger domain of areA
and the activation domains of GATA-1 is capable of activating transcription in
mammalian cells through GATA motifs. Our findings suggest a mechanism by which
GATA proteins might selectively regulate gene expression in cells in which they
are coexpressed.

PMCID: PMC359949
PMID: 8321207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Blood. 1993 Jun 15;81(12):3234-41.

Expression of mRNA for the GATA-binding proteins in human eosinophils and
basophils: potential role in gene transcription.

Zon LI(1), Yamaguchi Y, Yee K, Albee EA, Kimura A, Bennett JC, Orkin SH, Ackerman
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

The expression of the hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and
GATA-3 was studied in eosinophils and basophils. Eosinophils express mRNA for
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Basophils express GATA-2 and GATA-3. Treatment of
HL-60 eosinophilic sublines with either interleukin-5 or butyric acid increased
the expression of GATA-1 mRNA concomitant with the expression of
eosinophil-specific genes, whereas levels of GATA-2 mRNA remained relatively
constant. The presence of mRNA for these proteins in eosinophils and basophils
suggests that gene transcription in these lineages may be regulated by
GATA-binding proteins.

PMID: 8507862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genes Dev. 1993 Jun;7(6):1097-109.

Ectopic expression of a conditional GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera arrests
erythroid differentiation in a hormone-dependent manner.

Briegel K(1), Lim KC, Plank C, Beug H, Engel JD, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.

The GATA factors are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins in
eukaryotes that share extensive homology in their DNA-binding domains. One
enigmatic aspect of GATA factor expression is that several GATA proteins, which
ostensibly share the same DNA-binding site specificity, are coexpressed in
erythroid cells. To elucidate the roles of individual GATA factors in
erythropoiesis, conditional alleles of GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were prepared
by fusing each of the factors to the hormone-binding domain of the human estrogen
receptor (ER). These GATA/ER chimeric factors were shown to be hormone-inducible 
trans-activating proteins in transient transfection assays. When stably
introduced into primary erythroblasts or conditionally transformed erythroid
progenitors cells, exogenous GATA-2/ER promoted proliferation and inhibited
terminal differentiation in an estrogen-dependent manner. These phenotypic
effects are specifically attributable to the action of ectopically expressed
GATA-2/ER because erythroblasts expressing exogenous GATA-2 are constitutively
arrested in differentiation and because erythroid progenitors expressing either
Gal/ER or GATA-3/ER do not display a hormone-responsive block in differentiation.
Thus, the GATA-2 transcription factor appears to play a role in regulating the
self-renewal capacity of early erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 8504932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Differentiation. 1993 Jan;52(2):169-76.

Murine erythroleukemia cells contain two distinct GATA-binding proteins that have
different patterns of expression during cellular differentiation.

Aumont FL(1), Trudel P, Wall L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut du cancer de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

GATA-1 is a major transcription factor of the erythroid lineage that has been
implicated in the induced expression of a variety of red cell-specific genes
during terminal differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells. Although the
GATA-1 protein is present at nearly equal levels before and after differentiation
of murine erythroleukemia cells, in this study it was found that in the early
commitment stages of the differentiation program there is a transient decrease in
the GATA-1 mRNA and DNA binding activity levels due to a temporary block in
transcription of the gene. Moreover, using a whole cell extraction procedure it
was discovered that murine erythroleukemia cells contain a second GATA binding
activity (denoted GATA-rel) which appears to be distinct from the GATA-1 factor
based on its non-reactivity to two GATA-1 antisera. This protein has a limited
tissue specificity, as it could not be detected in extracts from CHO, NIH 3T3, or
COS cells. Similarly to the GATA-1 DNA-binding activity, the GATA-rel activity
decreased during the early stages of differentiation. However, unlike GATA-1,
GATA-rel activity did not return to pre-induced levels at later times. These
results suggest that changes in gene expression during erythroid terminal
differentiation may involve an interplay on levels of different GATA-binding
factors.

PMID: 8472887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. EMBO J. 1992 Nov;11(11):4073-81.

The SCL gene product: a positive regulator of erythroid differentiation.

Aplan PD(1), Nakahara K, Orkin SH, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Navy Medical Branch, Bethesda, MD 20889.

The SCL (tal-1, TCL5) gene is a member of the basic domain, helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) class of putative transcription factors. We found that (i) the SCL
promoter for exon Ia contains a potential recognition site for GATA-binding
transcription factors, (ii) SCL mRNA is expressed in all erythroid tissues and
cell lines examined, and (iii) SCL mRNA increases upon induced differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, and inferred that SCL may play a physiologic 
role in erythroid differentiation. We used gel shift and transfection assays to
demonstrate that the GATA motif in the SCL promoter binds GATA-1 (and GATA-2),
and also mediates transcriptional transactivation. To identify a role for SCL in 
erythroid differentiation, we generated stable transfectants of MEL and K562 (a
human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line that can differentiate along the
erythroid pathway) cells overexpressing wild-type, antisense or mutant SCL cDNA. 
Increasing the level of SCL expression in two independent MEL lines (F4-6 and
C19, a 745 derivative) and K562 cells increased the rate of spontaneous (i.e. in 
the absence of inducer) erythroid differentiation. Conversely, induced
differentiation was inhibited in MEL transfectants expressing either antisense
SCL cDNA or a mutant SCL lacking the basic domain. Our experiments suggest that
the SCL gene can be a target for the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 and
that the SCL gene product serves as a positive regulator of erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC556917
PMID: 1396592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Blood. 1992 Aug 1;80(3):575-81.

GATA-binding transcription factors in hematopoietic cells.

Orkin SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

PMID: 1638017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jan 15;267(2):1279-85.

Human transcription factor GATA-2. Evidence for regulation of preproendothelin-1 
gene expression in endothelial cells.

Dorfman DM(1), Wilson DB, Bruns GA, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

Previously, we showed that the promoter of the gene encoding preproendothelin-1
(PPET-1) contains a GATA motif that is essential for activity and interacts with 
a nuclear factor similar in size and binding specificity to the erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1. To identify this endothelial GATA-binding protein, a
human endothelial cell cDNA library was screened with oligonucleotide probes for 
a portion of the zinc finger domain of GATA-1. A 2.6-kilobase cDNA encoding a 470
amino acid protein was obtained. Sequence analysis revealed a predicted protein
which is the human counterpart of a related chicken protein, designated GATA-2.
Human GATA-2 is expressed by a variety of cells, including erythroid, HeLa, and
endothelial cells. A complex of a GATA-containing probe and recombinant GATA-2
expressed in COS cells comigrates with that present in gel shift experiments with
nuclear extract derived from endothelial cells. In addition, expressed human
GATA-2 protein transactivates reporter gene constructs containing either minimal 
GATA promoter elements or the native PPET-1 promoter in a cotransfection assay.
Retinoic acid treatment of endothelial cells results in down-regulation of GATA-2
expression as well as down-regulation of PPET-1 gene expression. Human homologs
of other known GATA-binding transcription factors are either absent from
endothelial cells (in the case of GATA-1) or made in small quantities and not
significantly affected by retinoid acid in these cells (in the case of GATA-3),
making it unlikely that they regulate the PPET-1 gene. We propose that GATA-2 is 
the GATA-binding protein required for PPET-1 gene expression in endothelial
cells.

PMID: 1370462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):22948-53.

GATA-binding transcription factors in mast cells regulate the promoter of the
mast cell carboxypeptidase A gene.

Zon LI(1), Gurish MF, Stevens RL, Mather C, Reynolds DS, Austen KF, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115.

The transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were found to be expressed
in several mouse and rat mast cell lines that contain mast cell carboxypeptidase 
A (MC-CPA) and other proteases in their cytoplasmic granules. GATA-1 mRNA was not
detected in P815 cells, an immature mouse mastocytoma-derived cell line that
lacks electron-dense granules and has low levels of secretory granule proteases. 
Because the 5'-flanking regions of the mouse and human MC-CPA genes contained a
conserved GATA-binding motif 51 base pairs upstream of their translation
initiation sites, the ability of GATA-binding proteins to regulate the promoter
activity of the MC-CPA gene was examined in rat basophilic leukemia cells, mouse 
P815 cells, and transfected mouse P815 cells that expressed GATA-1. In all three 
mast cell lines, the promoter activity of the MC-CPA gene depended on the GATA
binding site. GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 are thus the first DNA-binding proteins 
identified in mast cells which regulate the promoter activity of a gene that
encodes a secretory granule protease.

PMID: 1744088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 1;88(23):10642-6.

Expression of GATA-binding proteins during embryonic development in Xenopus
laevis.

Zon LI(1), Mather C, Burgess S, Bolce ME, Harland RM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.

Proteins that recognize the core sequence GATA are important regulators of
hematopoietic-specific gene transcription. We have characterized cDNAs encoding
the Xenopus laevis homologues of three related transcription factors, designated 
GATA-1, -2, and -3. Comparative sequence analysis reveals strong conservation of 
the zinc-finger DNA-binding domain among all vertebrate GATA-binding proteins.
GATA-2 and GATA-3 polypeptides are homologous throughout their entire sequences, 
whereas GATA-1 sequence is conserved only in the region responsible for DNA
binding. In Xenopus, RNAs encoding GATA-binding proteins are expressed in both
larval and adult erythroid cells. GATA-1, -2, and -3 RNAs are first detectable in
early gastrula (Nieuwkoop developmental stage 11). This is earlier than the
appearance of the early larval alpha T1 globin RNA (stage 15), beta T1 globin RNA
(stage 26), or blood island formation (stage 30). The expression of GATA-1, -2,
and -3 in early development may signal an early commitment of mesoderm to form
hematopoietic tissue.

PMCID: PMC52986
PMID: 1961730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 25;266(24):16188-92.

Cloning of the GATA-binding protein that regulates endothelin-1 gene expression
in endothelial cells.

Lee ME(1), Temizer DH, Clifford JA, Quertermous T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Previously, we have identified two regions (A and B) of the endothelin-1 promoter
that are important for the expression of this gene in cultured vascular
endothelial cells. The cis-acting sequence in one of these regions (Region A)
includes the core binding motif GATA, raising the possibility that this region of
DNA mediates binding of a member of the GATA-binding protein family. In this
report, we describe the use of polymerase chain reaction in conjunction with cDNA
cloning to characterize the GATA-binding protein expressed in endothelial cells. 
The nucleotide sequence of endothelial cell cDNA clones is highly homologous to
that of the chicken GATA-2 (NF-E1b) gene, indicating that our clones encode the
human GATA-2 gene transcript. By RNA blot analysis, this gene is expressed in
cultured cell lines derived from a number of different tissues. Transactivation
experiments utilizing human GATA-2 eukaryotic expression vectors indicate that
the GATA-2 protein interacts with the endothelin-1 GATA sequence to increase
transcription of reporter genes in both BAEC and HeLa cells. These data provide
the first evidence for a non-erythroid target gene regulated by GATA-2 and
indicate that GATA-2 may have a more broad role in transcriptional regulation
than the erythroid-specific GATA-1 protein.

PMID: 1714909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


