
1. Dev Growth Differ. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12276. [Epub ahead of print]

Roles of ERa during mouse trophectoderm lineage differentiation: revealed by
antagonist and agonist of ERa.

Cheng X(1), Xu S(2), Song C(1), He L(2), Lian X(2), Liu Y(1), Wei J(1,)(2), Pang 
L(1), Wang S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Engineering Center, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China. (2)Department
of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China.

During mouse early embryogenesis, blastomeres increase in number by the morula
stage. Among them, the outer cells are polarized and differentiated into
trophectoderm (TE), while the inner cells remain unpolarized and give rise to
inner cell mass (ICM). TE provides an important liquid environment for ICM
development. In spite of extensive research, the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TE formation are still obscure. In order to investigate the roles of estrogen
receptor a (ERa) in this course, mouse 8-cell embryos were collected and cultured
in media containing ERa specific antagonist MPP and/or agonist PPT. The results
indicated that MPP treatment inhibits blastocyst formation in a dose-dependent
manner, while PPT, at proper concentration, promotes the cavitation ratio of
mouse embryos. Immunofluorescence staining results showed that MPP significantly 
decreased the nuclear expression of CDX2 in morula, but no significant changes of
OCT4 were observed. Moreover, after MPP treatment, the expression levels of the
genes related to TE specification, Tead4, Gata3 and Cdx2, were significantly
reduced. Overall, these results indicated that ERa might affect mouse embryo
cavitation by regulating TE lineage differentiation.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 27037955  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

Sarcomatoid Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder: Analysis of 28 Cases With
Emphasis on Clinicopathologic Features and Markers of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal
Transition.

Sanfrancesco J, McKenney JK, Leivo MZ, Gupta S, Elson P, Hansel DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute (Drs Sanfrancesco and
McKenney) and the Quantitative Health Sciences Institute (Dr Elson), Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; and the Department of Pathology, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla (Drs Leivo, Gupta, and Hansel). Dr Sanfrancesco
is now with the Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University, St
Louis, Missouri.

CONTEXT: -Sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma (UCa) is a rare but aggressive variant
of bladder cancer that can show diagnostic challenges even using ancillary
techniques.
OBJECTIVE: -To examine immunohistochemical markers in the context of sarcomatoid 
UCa, including those associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
DESIGN: -Twenty-eight cases of sarcomatoid UCa were rereviewed. Clinical outcomes
were obtained through database search. Immunohistochemistry for clinical and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers was performed.
RESULTS: -All patients had biopsy-proven invasive UCa; 61% (17 of 28) had
sarcomatoid UCa at initial diagnosis. A recognizable epithelial component(s) was 
present in 17 lesions. The sarcomatoid component accounted for 65% of the lesion 
(average), with heterologous elements present in 3 of 28 cases (11%). The
morphologic spectrum of the sarcomatoid element included spindled not otherwise
specified, myxoid, pseudoangiosarcomatous, and malignant fibrous
histiocytoma-like undifferentiated features. The sarcomatoid component was
immunoreactive for pancytokeratin (22 of 26; 85%), p63 (20 of 26; 77%),
cytokeratin 903 (17 of 26; 65%), cytokeratin 7 (16 of 26; 62%), GATA3 (16 of 26; 
62%), and cytokeratin 5/6 (16 of 26; 62%). STAT-6, CD31, CD34, and HMB45 were all
nonreactive, whereas smooth muscle actin often showed at least focal
immunoreactivity (22 of 26; 85%). Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers
were frequently expressed, including vimentin (26 of 26; 100%), FoxC2 (26 of 26; 
100%), SNAIL (23 of 26; 88.5%), and ZEB1 (18 of 26; 69.2%). Follow-up was
available for 24 patients (median, 7 months). Sixteen of 28 patients (57%) died
of disease (overall mean survival, 9.1 months). The presence of myxoid or
chordoid features was associated with reduced survival (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: -Sarcomatoid UCa is an aggressive form of UCa that frequently
expresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers, suggesting a possible
mechanism associated with aggressive tumor behavior.

PMID: 27031776  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0304-3835(16)30198-7. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2016.03.038. [Epub ahead of print]

GATA3 mRNA expression, but not mutation, associates with longer progression-free 
survival in ER-positive breast cancer patients treated with first-line tamoxifen 
for recurrent disease.

Liu J(1), Prager-van der Smissen WJ(1), Look MP(1), Sieuwerts AM(2), Smid M(1),
Meijer-van Gelder ME(1), Foekens JA(1), Hollestelle A(1), Martens JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Wytemaweg 80,
3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Cancer
Genomics Netherlands, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus
MC Cancer Institute, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: j.martens@erasmusmc.nl.

In breast cancer, GATA3 mutations have been associated with a favorable prognosis
and the response to neoadjuvant aromatase inhibitor treatment. Therefore, we
investigated whether GATA3 mutations predict the outcome of tamoxifen treatment
in the advanced setting. In a retrospective study consisting of 235 hormone-naive
patients with ER-positive breast cancer who received tamoxifen as first-line
treatment for recurrent disease, GATA3 mutations (in 14.0% of patients) did not
significantly associate with either the overall response rate (ORR) or with the
length of progression-free survival (PFS) after the start of tamoxifen therapy.
Interestingly, among 148 patients for whom both mutation and mRNA expression data
were available, GATA3 mutations associated with an increased expression of GATA3.
However, only 23.7% of GATA3 high tumors had a mutation. Evaluation of the
clinical significance of GATA3 mRNA revealed that it was associated with
prolonged PFS, but not with the ORR, also in multivariate analysis. Thus, GATA3
mRNA expression, but not GATA3 mutation, is an independent predictor of prolonged
PFS in ER-positive breast cancer patients who received first-line tamoxifen for
recurrent disease. Besides GATA3 mutation, other mechanisms must exist that
underlie increased GATA3 levels.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27018307  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar 23. pii: molcanther.0144.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Dll4 Inhibition plus Aflibercept Markedly Reduces Ovarian Tumor Growth.

Huang J(1), Hu W(1), Hu L(2), Previs RA(1), Dalton HJ(1), Yang XY(1), Sun Y(1),
McGuire M(1), Rupaimoole R(1), Nagaraja AS(1), Kang Y(3), Liu T(4), Nick AM(5),
Jennings NB(1), Coleman RL(1), Jaffe RB(2), Sood AK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. (2)Center for Reproductive Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco. (3)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai Medical College. (4)General Surgery, Xiehe Hospital.
(5)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. (6)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and
Reproductive Medicine, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
asood@mdanderson.org.

Dll4, one of the Notch ligands, is overexpressed in ovarian cancer, especially in
tumors resistant to anti-VEGF therapy. Here, we examined the biological effects
of dual anti-Dll4 and anti-VEGF therapy in ovarian cancer models. Using Dll4-Fc
blockade and anti-Dll4 antibodies (murine REGN1035 and human REGN421), we
evaluated the biological effects of Dll4 inhibition combined with aflibercept or 
chemotherapy in orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer. We also examined
potential mechanisms by which dual Dll4 and VEGF targeting inhibits tumor growth 
using immunohistochemical staining for apoptosis and proliferation markers.
Reverse phase protein arrays were used to identify potential downstream targets
of Dll4 blockade. Dual targeting of VEGF and Dll4 with murine REGN1035 showed
superior anti-tumor effects in ovarian cancer models compared to either
monotherapy. In the A2780 model, REGN1035 (targets murine Dll4) or REGN421
(targets human Dll4) reduced tumor weights by 62% and 82%, respectively;
aflibercept alone reduced tumor weights by 90%. Greater therapeutic effects were 
observed for Dll4 blockade (REGN1035) combined with either aflibercept or
docetaxel (P < 0.05 for the combination vs. aflibercept). The superior anti-tumor
effects of REGN1035 and aflibercept were related to increased apoptosis in tumor 
cells compared to the monotherapy. We also found that GATA3 expression was
significantly increased in tumor stroma from the mice treated with REGN1035
combined with docetaxel or aflibercept, suggesting an indirect effect of these
combination treatments on the tumor stroma. These findings identify that dual
targeting of Dll4 and VEGF is an attractive therapeutic approach.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 27009216  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Oncol Lett. 2016 Mar;11(3):1936-1942. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

S100A8/A9 is associated with estrogen receptor loss in breast cancer.

Bao YI(1), Wang A(1), Mo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic and Translational Cancer Research Laboratory, The Second Hospital of
Jiaxing, Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314000, P.R. China.

S100A8 and S100A9 are calcium-binding proteins that are secreted primarily by
granulocytes and monocytes, and are upregulated during the inflammatory response.
S100A8 and S100A9 have been identified to be expressed by epithelial cells
involved in malignancy. In the present study, the transcriptional levels of
S100A8 and S100A9 were investigated in various subtypes of breast cancer (BC),
and the correlation with estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and GATA binding protein 3
(GATA3) gene expression was evaluated using microarray datasets. The expression
of S100A8 and S100A9 in BC cells was assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The regulation of ESR1 and GATA3 by administration of
recombinant S100A8/A9 was examined in the BC MCF-7 cell line using quantitative
(q)PCR. The association between S100A8 and S100A9 and overall survival (OS) was
investigated in GeneChip® data of BC. The expression levels of S100A8 and S100A9 
were higher in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2)-amplified and
basal-like BC. The messenger (m)RNA levels of S100A8 and S100A9 were inversely
correlated with ESR1 and GATA3 expression. S100A8/A9 induced a 10-fold decrease
in the mRNA levels of ESR1 in MCF-7 cells. Poor OS was associated with high
expression levels of S100A9, but not with high expression levels of S100A8 in BC.
In conclusion, strong expression and secretion of S100A8/A9 may be associated
with the loss of estrogen receptor in BC, and may be involved in the poor
prognosis of Her2+/basal-like subtypes of BC.

PMCID: PMC4774479
PMID: 26998104  [PubMed]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 17;11(3):e0151292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151292.
eCollection 2016.

An Interleukin 13 Polymorphism Is Associated with Symptom Severity in Adult
Subjects with Ever Asthma.

Accordini S(1), Calciano L(1), Bombieri C(2), Malerba G(2), Belpinati F(2), Lo
Presti AR(2), Baldan A(2), Ferrari M(3), Perbellini L(4), de Marco R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, Department of Diagnostics and
Public Health, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)Section of Biology and
Genetics, Department of Neurological, Biomedical and Movement Sciences,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (3)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (4)Unit of Occupational
Medicine, Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy.

Different genes are associated with categorical classifications of asthma
severity. However, continuous outcomes should be used to catch the heterogeneity 
of asthma phenotypes and to increase the power in association studies.
Accordingly, the aim of this study was to evaluate the association between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in candidate gene regions and continuous measures
of asthma severity, in adult patients from the general population. In the Gene
Environment Interactions in Respiratory Diseases (GEIRD) study (www.geird.org),
326 subjects (aged 20-64) with ever asthma were identified from the general
population in Verona (Italy) between 2007 and 2010. A panel of 236 SNPs tagging
51 candidate gene regions (including one or more genes) was analysed. A symptom
and treatment score (STS) and pre-bronchodilator FEV1% predicted were used as
continuous measures of asthma severity. The association of each SNP with STS and 
FEV1% predicted was tested by fitting quasi-gamma and linear regression models,
respectively, with gender, body mass index and smoking habits as potential
confounders. The Simes multiple-test procedure was used for controlling the false
discovery rate (FDR). SNP rs848 in the IL13 gene region (IL5/RAD50/IL13/IL4) was 
associated with STS (TG/GG vs TT genotype: uncorrected p-value = 0.00006,
FDR-corrected p-value = 0.04), whereas rs20541 in the same gene region, in
linkage disequilibrium with rs848 (r2 = 0.94) in our sample, did not reach the
statistical significance after adjusting for multiple testing (TC/CC vs TT:
uncorrected p-value = 0.0003, FDR-corrected p-value = 0.09). Polymorphisms in
other gene regions showed a non-significant moderate association with STS (IL12B,
TNS1) or lung function (SERPINE2, GATA3, IL5, NPNT, FAM13A) only. After adjusting
for multiple testing and potential confounders, SNP rs848 in the IL13 gene region
is significantly associated with a continuous measure of symptom severity in
adult subjects with ever asthma.

PMCID: PMC4795623
PMID: 26986948  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S0091-6749(16)00198-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.12.1330. [Epub ahead of print]

Clonal expansion of CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes in patients with IgG4-related 
disease.

Mattoo H(1), Mahajan VS(1), Maehara T(2), Deshpande V(1), Della-Torre E(1),
Wallace ZS(1), Kulikova M(1), Drijvers JM(1), Daccache J(1), Carruthers MN(1),
Castellino F(1), Stone JR(1), Stone JH(3), Pillai S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass; Section 
of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial Diagnostic and
Surgical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Mass. Electronic address: jhstone@partners.org.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.
Electronic address: pillai@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a systemic condition of unknown
cause characterized by highly fibrotic lesions with dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrates. CD4(+) T cells constitute the major inflammatory cell population in 
IgG4-RD lesions.
OBJECTIVE: We used an unbiased approach to characterize CD4(+) T-cell subsets in 
patients with IgG4-RD based on their clonal expansion and ability to infiltrate
affected tissue sites.
METHODS: We used flow cytometry to identify CD4(+) effector/memory T cells in a
cohort of 101 patients with IgG4-RD. These expanded cells were characterized by
means of gene expression analysis and flow cytometry. Next-generation sequencing 
of the T-cell receptor ß chain gene was performed on CD4(+)SLAMF7(+) cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes (CTLs) and CD4(+)GATA3(+) TH2 cells in a subset of patients to
identify their clonality. Tissue infiltration by specific T cells was examined by
using quantitative multicolor imaging.
RESULTS: CD4(+) effector/memory T cells with a cytolytic phenotype were expanded 
in patients with IgG4-RD. Next-generation sequencing revealed prominent clonal
expansions of these CD4(+) CTLs but not CD4(+)GATA3(+) memory TH2 cells in
patients with IgG4-RD. The dominant T cells infiltrating a range of inflamed
IgG4-RD tissue sites were clonally expanded CD4(+) CTLs that expressed SLAMF7,
granzyme A, IL-1ß, and TGF-ß1. Clinical remission induced by rituximab-mediated
B-cell depletion was associated with a reduction in numbers of disease-associated
CD4(+) CTLs.
CONCLUSIONS: IgG4-RD is prominently linked to clonally expanded IL-1ß- and
TGF-ß1-secreting CD4(+) CTLs in both peripheral blood and inflammatory tissue
lesions. These active, terminally differentiated, cytokine-secreting effector
CD4(+) T cells are now linked to a human disease characterized by chronic
inflammation and fibrosis.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26971690  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Hum Immunol. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S0198-8859(16)30027-1. doi:
10.1016/j.humimm.2016.03.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of CD30 transcripts with Th1 responses and proinflammatory cytokines 
in patients with end-stage renal disease.

Velásquez SY(1), Opelz G(2), Rojas M(1), Süsal C(2), Alvarez CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Inmunología Celular e Inmunogenética, Instituto de Investigaciones
Médicas, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(2)Department of Transplantation Immunology, Institute of Immunology, University 
of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Grupo de Inmunología Celular e
Inmunogenética, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia. Electronic address:
cristian.alvarez@udea.edu.co.

High serum sCD30 levels are associated with inflammatory disorders and poor
outcome in renal transplantation. The contribution to these phenomena of
transcripts and proteins related to CD30-activation and -cleavage is unknown. We 
assessed in peripheral blood of end-stage renal disease patients (ESRDP)
transcripts of CD30-activation proteins CD30 and CD30L, CD30-cleavage proteins
ADAM10 and ADAM17, and Th1- and Th2-type immunity-related factors t-bet and
GATA3. Additionally, we evaluated the same transcripts and release of sCD30 and
32 cytokines after allogeneic and polyclonal T-cell activation. In peripheral
blood, ESRDP showed increased levels of t-bet and GATA3 transcripts compared to
healthy controls (HC) (both P<0.01) whereas levels of CD30, CD30L, ADAM10 and
ADAM17 transcripts were similar. Polyclonal and allogeneic stimulation induced
higher levels of CD30 transcripts in ESRDP than in HC (both P<0.001). Principal
component analysis (PCA) in allogeneic cultures of ESRDP identified two
correlation clusters, one consisting of sCD30, the Th-1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>, MIP-1a,
RANTES, sIL-2Ra, MIP-1ß, TNF-ß, MDC, GM-CSF and IL-5, and another one consisting 
of CD30 and t-bet transcripts, IL-13 and proinflammatory proteins IP-10, IL-8,
IL-1Ra and MCP-1. Reflecting an activated immune state, ESRDP exhibited after
allostimulation upregulation of CD30 transcripts in T cells, which was associated
with Th1 and proinflammatory responses.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26970513  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 9. pii: clincanres.2840.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

The Genomic Landscape of Male Breast Cancers.

Piscuoglio S(1), Ng CK(1), Murray MP(2), Guerini-Rocco E(1), Martelotto LG(3),
Geyer FC(4), Bidard FC(5), Berman S(6), Fusco N(6), Sakr RA(7), Eberle C(6), De
Mattos-Arruda L(8), Macedo GS(6), Akram M(1), Baslan T(9), Hicks J(10), King
TA(11), Brogi E(1), Norton L(12), Weigelt B(3), Hudis CA(13), Reis-Filho JS(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. (2)Department
of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. (3)Pathology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. (4)Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Institute of Cancer
Research. (5)Medical Oncology, Institut Curie. (6)Pathology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center. (7)Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
(8)Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital. (9)Cancer, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory. (10)Cancer Center, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. (11)Department of
Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. (12)Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. (13)Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center. (14)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center reisfilj@mskcc.org.

PURPOSE: Male breast cancer (MaBC) is rare and its genomic landscape has yet to
be fully characterized. Lacking studies in men, treatment of MaBC patients is
extrapolated from results in females with the disease (FBC). We sought to define 
whether MaBCs harbor somatic genetic alterations in genes frequently altered in
FBCs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: All MaBCs were estrogen receptor-positive and all but two
were HER2 negative. 59 MaBCs were subtyped by immunohistochemistry and
tumor-normal pairs were microdissected and subjected to massively parallel
sequencing targeting all exons of 241 genes frequently mutated in FBCs or
DNA-repair related. The repertoires of somatic mutations and copy number
alterations of MaBCs were compared to that of subtype-matched FBCs.
RESULTS: 29% and 71% of MaBCs were immunohistochemically classified as luminal
A-like or luminal B-like, respectively. MaBCs displayed a heterogeneous
repertoire of somatic genetic alterations that to some extent recapitulated that 
of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive/HER2-negative FBCs, including recurrent
mutations affecting PIK3CA (20%) and GATA3 (15%). ER-positive/HER2-negative
MaBCs, however, less frequently harbored 16q losses, and PIK3CA and TP53
mutations than ER-positive/HER2-negative FBCs. In addition, MaBCs were found to
be significantly enriched for mutations affecting DNA repair-related genes.
CONCLUSION: MaBCs less frequently harbor somatic genetic alterations typical of
ER-positive/HER2-negative FBCs, such as PIK3CA and TP53 mutations and losses of
16q, suggesting that at least a subset of MaBCs are driven by a distinct
repertoire of somatic changes. Given the genomic differences, caution may be
needed in the application of biological and therapeutic findings from studies of 
FBCs to MaBCs.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26960396  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Pathol Res Pract. 2016 Jan 22. pii: S0344-0338(16)30004-8. doi:
10.1016/j.prp.2016.01.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Cytokeratin 7-negative mammary Paget's disease: A diagnostic pitfall.

Ozerdem U(1), McNiff JM(1), Tavassoli FA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, PO Box 208023,
New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School
of Medicine, PO Box 208023, New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. Electronic address:
fattaneh.tavassoli@yale.edu.

Pathologists should be aware of the existence of a rare CK7-negative variant of
breast carcinoma in general, and of Paget's disease in particular. Cytokeratin
7-negative Paget's disease and CK7-negative ductal intraepithelial neoplasia
(ductal carcinoma in situ) present a major diagnostic challenge for pathologists 
since there is limited awareness of their existence. When there is classic
Paget's morphology on H&E sections, GATA3 positivity should resolve any doubts
about the diagnosis in the setting of a CK7-negative neoplastic cell population.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26944832  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016 Mar 3. pii: cebp.0528.2015. [Epub ahead of
print]

Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study in childhood leukemia among
Hispanics.

Hsu LI(1), Briggs F(2), Shao X(3), Metayer C(3), Wiemels JL(4), Chokkalingam
AP(3), Barcellos LF(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley
lingi122@gmail.com. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University. (3)School of Public Health, University
of California, Berkeley. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is nearly 20%
higher among Hispanics than non-Hispanic Whites. Previous studies have shown
evidence for association between risk of ALL and variation within IKZF1, ARID5B, 
CEBPE, CDKN2A, GATA3, and BM1-PIP4K2A genes. However, variants identified only
account for <10% of the genetic risk of ALL.
METHODS: We applied pathway-based analyses to GWAS data from the California
Childhood Leukemia Study to determine whether different biological pathways were 
overrepresented in childhood ALL and major ALL subtypes. Furthermore, we applied 
causal inference and data reduction methods to prioritize candidate genes within 
each identified overrepresented pathway, while accounting for correlation among
SNPs.
RESULTS: Pathway analysis results indicate that different ALL subtypes may
involve distinct biological mechanisms. Focal adhesion is a shared mechanism
across the different disease subtypes. For ALL, the top five overrepresented
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways include axon guidance, protein
digestion and absorption, melanogenesis, leukocyte transendothelial migration,
and focal adhesion (PFDR < 0.05). Notably, these pathways are connected to
downstream MAPK or Wnt signaling pathways which have been linked to B-cell
malignancies. Several candidate genes for ALL, such as COL6A6 and COL5A1 were
identified through targeted maximum likelihood estimation.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to show distinct biological pathways are
overrepresented in different ALL subtypes using pathway-based approaches, and
identified potential gene candidates using causal inference methods.
IMPACT: The findings demonstrate that newly developed bioinformatics tools and
causal inference methods can provide insights to furthering our understanding of 
the pathogenesis of leukemia.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26941364  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: jclinpath-2015-203565. doi:
10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203565. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic mutations in accordance with a low malignant potential tumour are not
demonstrated in clear cell papillary renal cell carcinoma.

Raspollini MR(1), Castiglione F(1), Cheng L(2), Montironi R(3), Lopez-Beltran
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology and Molecular Diagnostics, University Hospital
Careggi, Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (3)Section of 
Pathological Anatomy, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health
Polytechnic University of the Marche Region, School of Medicine, United
Hospitals, Ancona, Italy. (4)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery,
Cordoba University Medical School, Cordoba, Spain Champalimaud Clinical Center,
Lisbon, Portugal.

Clear cell papillary renal cell carcinoma (CCPRCC) cases were evaluated for
mutations on the following genes: KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, ALK, ERBB2, DDR2,
MAP2K1, RET and EGFR. Four male and three female patients of age 42-74 years were
evaluated. All cases were incidentally detected by ultrasound and ranged
1.8-3.5 cm. Microscopic examination showed variably tubulopapillary, tubular
acinar, cystic architecture and the characteristic linear arrangement of nuclei. 
The cells were reactive with CK7 (strong), CA IX (cup-shape) and 34 ß E12. CD10, 
AMACR/RACEMASE and GATA3 were negative. There were no mutations on any of the
investigated genes. This preliminary observation supports the concept that CCPRCC
might be indeed an indolent tumour worth it to be named as clear cell papillary
neoplasm of low potential.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26941183  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4912. [Epub ahead of print]

In human alloreactive CD4+ T-cells, dichloroacetate inhibits aerobic glycolysis, 
induces apoptosis and favors differentiation towards the regulatory T-cell subset
instead of effector T-cell subsets.

Eleftheriadis T(1), Sounidaki M(1), Pissas G(1), Antoniadi G(1), Liakopoulos
V(1), Stefanidis I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medical School, University of Thessaly, 41110
Larissa, Greece.

Although kidney transplantation is the best therapy for end-stage renal disease, 
rejection remains a concern, and currently available immunosuppressive agents
contribute to morbidity and mortality. Thus, novel immunosuppressive drugs are
required. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is already used in the treatment of congenital
lactic acidosis and characterized by limited toxicity. As DCA inhibits aerobic
glycolysis, which is a prerequisite for CD4+ T-cell proliferation and
differentiation into effector T-cells, its possible immunosuppressive role in
mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR), a model of alloreactivity, was investigated.
Glucose and lactate concentrations were measured in the supernatants, and cell
proliferation was assessed immunoenzymatically. CD4+ T-cells were then isolated
from the MLRs and the expression of cleaved caspase-3, various enzymes involved
in glycolysis, and the signature transcription factors of CD4+ T-cell subsets
were evaluated by western blotting. In MLRs, DCA decreased glucose consumption
and aerobic glycolysis, while it exerted a negligible effect on cell
proliferation. In CD4+ T-cells, DCA induced apoptosis, and decreased the
expression of glucose trasporter-1, hexokinase II, lactate dehydrogenase-A and
phosphorylated pyruvate dehydrogenase, while it increased total pyruvate
dehydrogenase. In addition, DCA increased the expression of transcription factor 
forkhead box P3, whereas it decreased the expression of T-box transcription
factor TBX21, trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3 and
retinoic acid receptor related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t. In conclusion, in alloreactive
CD4+ T-cells, DCA inhibits aerobic glycolysis, induces apoptosis and favors
differentiation towards the regulatory T-cell subset. These characteristics
render it a promising immunosuppressive agent in the field of transplantation.

PMID: 26935268  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. J Immunol. 2016 Apr 1;196(7):3006-18. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502094. Epub 2016
Feb 29.

HIV Skews the Lineage-Defining Transcriptional Profile of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-Specific CD4+ T Cells.

Riou C(1), Strickland N(2), Soares AP(2), Corleis B(3), Kwon DS(3), Wherry EJ(4),
Wilkinson RJ(5), Burgers WA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Virology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa; Institute of
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape
Town, South Africa; c.riou@uct.ac.za. (2)Division of Medical Virology, Department
of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape
Town, South Africa; Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine,
University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa; (3)Ragon Institute of
MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Division of Infectious Diseases,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02139; (4)Department of Microbiology, 
Institute for Immunology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104; (5)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa; Department of
Medicine, Imperial College London, London W21 PG, United Kingdom; Francis Crick
Institute Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom; and Clinical
Infectious Diseases Research Initiative, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape
Town, South Africa.

HIV-infected persons are at greater risk of developing tuberculosis (TB) even
before profound CD4 loss occurs, suggesting that HIV alters CD4(+) T cell
functions capable of containing bacterial replication. An effective immune
response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis most likely relies on the development of a
balanced CD4 response, in which distinct CD4(+) Th subsets act in synergy to
control the infection. To define the diversity of M. tuberculosis-specific CD4(+)
Th subsets and determine whether HIV infection impacts such responses, the
expression of lineage-defining transcription factors T-bet, Gata3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and
Foxp3 was measured in M. tuberculosis-specific CD4(+) T cells in HIV-uninfected
(n = 20) and HIV-infected individuals (n = 20) with latent TB infection. Our
results show that, upon 5-d restimulation in vitro, M. tuberculosis-specific
CD4(+) T cells from healthy individuals have the ability to exhibit a broad
spectrum of Th subsets, defined by specific patterns of transcription factor
coexpression. These transcription factor profiles were skewed in HIV-infected
individuals where the proportion of T-bet(high)Foxp3(+) M. tuberculosis-specific 
CD4(+) T cells was significantly decreased (p = 0.002) compared with
HIV-uninfected individuals, a change that correlated inversely with HIV viral
load (p = 0.0007) and plasma TNF-a (p = 0.027). Our data demonstrate an important
balance in Th subset diversity defined by lineage-defining transcription factor
coexpression profiles that is disrupted by HIV infection and suggest a role for
HIV in impairing TB immunity by altering the equilibrium of M.
tuberculosis-specific CD4(+) Th subsets.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4799776 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26927799  [PubMed - in process]


15. Genome Biol. 2016 Feb 27;17(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0897-0.

GATA3-dependent cellular reprogramming requires activation-domain dependent
recruitment of a chromatin remodeler.

Takaku M(1), Grimm SA(2), Shimbo T(1), Perera L(3), Menafra R(4), Stunnenberg
HG(4), Archer TK(1), Machida S(5), Kurumizaka H(5), Wade PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. (2)Integrative
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genome Integrity and Structural Biology,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculties of Science and Medicine,
Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (5)Laboratory of Structural Biology,
Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan. (6)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
wadep2@niehs.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor-dependent cellular reprogramming is integral to 
normal development and is central to production of induced pluripotent stem
cells. This process typically requires pioneer transcription factors (TFs) to
induce de novo formation of enhancers at previously closed chromatin. Mechanistic
information on this process is currently sparse.
RESULTS: Here we explore the mechanistic basis by which GATA3 functions as a
pioneer TF in a cellular reprogramming event relevant to breast cancer, the
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET). In some instances, GATA3 binds
previously inaccessible chromatin, characterized by stable, positioned
nucleosomes where it induces nucleosome eviction, alters local histone
modifications, and remodels local chromatin architecture. At other loci, GATA3
binding induces nucleosome sliding without concomitant generation of accessible
chromatin. Deletion of the transactivation domain retains the chromatin binding
ability of GATA3 but cripples chromatin reprogramming ability, resulting in
failure to induce MET.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide mechanistic insights into GATA3-mediated
chromatin reprogramming during MET, and suggest unexpected complexity to TF
pioneering. Successful reprogramming requires stable binding to a nucleosomal
site; activation domain-dependent recruitment of co-factors including BRG1, the
ATPase subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex; and appropriate
genomic context. The resulting model provides a new conceptual framework for de
novo enhancer establishment by a pioneer TF.

PMCID: PMC4769547
PMID: 26922637  [PubMed - in process]


16. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2016 Feb;36(2):186-9.

[ROG,GATA3 and T-bet mRNA levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
patients with chronic hepatitis B].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang K(1), Shu X, Luo HF, Zhu FQ, Cao H, Xu QH, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Infectious Diseases, 2Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Liver Disease, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou
510630, China. E-mail: zhangka613@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of ROG, GATA3 and T-bet in the progression of 
chronic hepatitis B (CHB).
METHODS: The mRNA levels of ROG, GATA3 and T-bet in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) from 135 patients with CHB (including 45 mild cases, 42 moderate
cases, and 48 severe cases) and 15 healthy control subjects were detected by
real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: The levels of T-bet mRNA in the PBMCs were significantly higher in CHB
patients than in the healthy controls (P<0.05), and also differed significantly
between the 3 groups of CHB patients (P<0.05). ROG mRNA levels were significantly
higher in severe cases of CHB than in the healthy controls and mild and moderate 
CHB cases (P<0.05), but were similar among the latter 3 groups (P>0.05). The mRNA
level of GATA3 in the PBMCs were significantly higher in moderate and severe CHB 
cases than in the healthy controls and mild CHB cases (P<0.05). The T-bet/GATA3
ratio was significantly greater in the 3 CHB groups than in the control group
(P<0.05) but comparable between the 3 CHB groups (P>0.05). ROG levels were not
correlated with GATA3 levels or T-bet/GATA3 ratio in the CHB cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The mRNA levels of ROG, GATA3 and T-bet in the PBMCs are obviously
up-regulated in CHB patients and these 3 genes may participate in the progression
of CHB. ROG plays an important role in correcting and maintaining the new balance
of Th1/Th2.

PMID: 26922013  [PubMed - in process]


17. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Apr;51:180-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.02.023. Epub
2016 Feb 23.

Conserved hemopoietic transcription factor Cg-SCL delineates hematopoiesis of
Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas.

Song X(1), Wang H(2), Chen H(1), Sun M(2), Liang Z(2), Wang L(2), Song L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China; University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine
Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Mariculture & Stock Enhancement in North China's Sea,
Ministry of Agriculture, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian 116023, China.
Electronic address: lshsong@dlou.edu.cn.

Hemocytes are the effective immunocytes in bivalves, which have been reported to 
be derived from stem-like cells in gill epithelium of oyster. In the present
work, a conserved haematopoietic transcription factor Tal-1/Scl (Stem Cell
Leukemia) was identified in Pacific oyster (Cg-SCL), and it was evolutionarily
close to the orthologs in deuterostomes. Cg-SCL was highly distributed in the
hemocytes as well as gill and mantle. The hemocyte specific genes Integrin, EcSOD
and haematopoietic transcription factors GATA3, C-Myb, c-kit, were down-regulated
when Cg-SCL was interfered by dsRNA. During the larval developmental stages, the 
mRNA transcripts of Cg-SCL gradually increased after fertilization and peaked at 
early trochophore larvae stage (10 hpf, hours post fertilization), then sharply
decreased in late trochophore larvae stage (15 hpf) before resuming in umbo
larvae (120 hpf). Whole-mount immunofluorescence assay further revealed that the 
immunoreactivity of Cg-SCL appeared in blastula larvae with two approximate
symmetric spots, and this expression pattern lasted in gastrula larvae. By
trochophore, the immunoreactivity formed a ring around the dorsal region and then
separated into two remarkable spots at the dorsal side in D-veliger larvae. After
bacterial challenge, the mRNA expression levels of Cg-SCL were significantly
up-regulated in the D-veliger and umbo larvae, indicating the available
hematopoietic regulation in oyster larvae. These results demonstrated that Cg-SCL
could be used as haematopoietic specific marker to trace potential developmental 
events of hematopoiesis during ontogenesis of oyster, which occurred early in
blastula stage and maintained until D-veliger larvae.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26915307  [PubMed - in process]


18. Int J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb 23. pii: 1066896916632909. [Epub ahead of print]

Breast Carcinoma With Unrecognized Neuroendocrine Differentiation Metastasizing
to the Pancreas: A Potential Diagnostic Pitfall.

Christensen L(1), Mortensen MB(2), Detlefsen S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (2)HPB
Section, Department of Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Sonke.Detlefsen@rsyd.dk.

The current World Health Organization classification recognizes 3 subtypes of
breast carcinomas with neuroendocrine features. Their reported prevalence is
highly variable, ranging from <1% to up to 20% of all breast carcinomas. We
report the case of a 73-year-old woman who underwent lumpectomy with a
postoperative diagnosis of invasive ductal breast carcinoma. Six weeks after
lumpectomy, pancreatic biopsies showed tumor cells with neuroendocrine features. 
The first immunohistochemical panel showed positivity for synaptophysin and
cytokeratins, raising suspicion of a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor. However, a 
second panel revealed positivity for estrogen receptors and GATA3. On review of
the lumpectomy specimen, a significant neuroendocrine component was found,
leading to the final diagnosis of breast carcinoma with neuroendocrine features
metastasizing to the pancreas. Neuroendocrine markers are not routinely analyzed 
in breast tumors. Hence, metastases from breast carcinomas with unrecognized
neuroendocrine features may lead to false diagnoses of primary neuroendocrine
tumors at different metastatic sites, such as the pancreas.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26912472  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Feb;156(1):21-32. doi: 10.1007/s10549-016-3718-y.
Epub 2016 Feb 23.

Whole exome sequencing of rare aggressive breast cancer histologies.

Dieci MV(1,)(2), Smutná V(3,)(4,)(5), Scott V(3,)(4), Yin G(6), Xu R(6), Vielh
P(7,)(8), Mathieu MC(7), Vicier C(3,)(4,)(5), Laporte M(8), Drusch F(8), Guarneri
V(1,)(2), Conte P(1,)(2), Delaloge S(4,)(9), Lacroix L(4,)(8), Fromigué O(3,)(4),
André F(3,)(4,)(5,)(9), Lefebvre C(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padova,
Via Giustiniani 2, 35121, Padua, Italy. (2)Medical Oncology 2, Veneto Institute
of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Via Gattamelata 64, 35128, Padua, Italy. (3)INSERM Unit
U981, 114 rue E Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif, France. (4)Gustave Roussy, 114 rue E 
Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif, France. (5)Univ. Paris Sud, 63 rue Gabriel Péri,
94270, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (6)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(7)Department of Medical Biology and Pathology, Gustave Roussy, 114 rue E
Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif, France. (8)Laboratory of Translational Research and
Biobank, Gustave Roussy, 114 rue E Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif, France.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, 114 rue E Vaillant, 94805,
Villejuif, France. (10)INSERM Unit U981, 114 rue E Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif,
France. celine.lefebvre@gustaveroussy.fr. (11)Gustave Roussy, 114 rue E Vaillant,
94805, Villejuif, France. celine.lefebvre@gustaveroussy.fr.

Little is known about mutational landscape of rare breast cancer (BC) subtypes.
The aim of the study was to apply next generation sequencing to three different
subtypes of rare BCs in order to identify new genes related to cancer
progression. We performed whole exome and targeted sequencing of 29
micropapillary, 23 metaplastic, and 27 pleomorphic lobular BCs. Micropapillary
BCs exhibit a profile comparable to common BCs: PIK3CA, TP53, GATA3, and MAP2K4
were the most frequently mutated genes. Metaplastic BCs presented a high
frequency of TP53 (78 %) and PIK3CA (48 %) mutations and were recurrently mutated
on KDM6A (13 %), a gene involved in histone demethylation. Pleomorphic lobular
carcinoma exhibited high mutation rate of PIK3CA (30 %), TP53 (22 %), and CDH1
(41 %) and also presented mutations in PYGM, a gene involved in glycogen
metabolism, in 8 out of 27 samples (30 %). Further analyses of publicly available
datasets showed that PYGM is dramatically underexpressed in common cancers as
compared to normal tissues and that low expression in tumors is correlated with
poor relapse-free survival. Immunohistochemical staining on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues available in our cohort of patients confirmed higher
PYGM expression in normal breast tissue compared to equivalent tumoral zone. Next
generation sequencing methods applied on rare cancer subtypes can serve as a
useful tool in order to uncover new potential therapeutic targets. Sequencing of 
pleomorphic lobular carcinoma identified a high rate of alterations in PYGM.
These findings emphasize the role of glycogen metabolism in cancer progression.

PMID: 26907767  [PubMed - in process]


20. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 22;6:21630. doi: 10.1038/srep21630.

GATA3 inhibits GCM1 activity and trophoblast cell invasion.

Chiu YH(1,)(2), Chen H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Development of human placenta involves the invasion of trophoblast cells from
anchoring villi into the maternal decidua. Placental transcription factor GCM1
regulates trophoblast cell invasion via transcriptional activation of HtrA4 gene,
which encodes a serine protease enzyme. The GATA3 transcription factor regulates 
trophoblast cell differentiation and is highly expressed in invasive murine
trophoblast giant cells. The regulation of trophoblastic invasion by GCM1 may
involve novel cellular factors. Here we show that GATA3 interacts with GCM1 and
inhibits its activity to suppress trophoblastic invasion. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrates that GATA3 and GCM1 are coexpressed in villous cytotrophoblast
cells, syncytiotrophoblast layer, and extravillous trophoblast cells of human
placenta. Interestingly, GATA3 interacts with GCM1, but not the GCM2 homologue,
through the DNA-binding domain and first transcriptional activation domain in
GCM1 and the transcriptional activation domains and zinc finger 1 domain in
GATA3. While GATA3 did not affect DNA-binding activity of GCM1, it suppressed
transcriptional activity of GCM1 and therefore HtrA4 promoter activity.
Correspondingly, GATA3 knockdown elevated HtrA4 expression in BeWo and JEG-3
trophoblast cell lines and enhanced the invasion activities of both lines. This
study uncovered a new GATA3 function in placenta as a negative regulator of GCM1 
activity and trophoblastic invasion.

PMCID: PMC4761948
PMID: 26899996  [PubMed - in process]


21. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 18;11(2):e0149644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149644.
eCollection 2016.

Variations in T Cell Transcription Factor Sequence and Expression Associated with
Resistance to the Sheep Nematode Teladorsagia circumcincta.

Wilkie H(1), Gossner A(1), Bishop S(1), Hopkins J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute & R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush,
Midlothian, EH25 9RG, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0152396.

This study used selected lambs that varied in their resistance to the
gastrointestinal parasite Teladorsagia circumcincta. Infection over 12 weeks
identified susceptible (high adult worm count, AWC; high fecal egg count, FEC;
low body weight, BW; low IgA) and resistant sheep (no/low AWC and FEC, high BW
and high IgA). Resistance is mediated largely by a Th2 response and IgA and IgE
antibodies, and is a heritable characteristic. The polarization of T cells and
the development of appropriate immune responses is controlled by the master
regulators, T-bet (TBX21), GATA-3 (GATA3), ROR<U+03B3>t (RORC2) and RORa (RORA); and
several inflammatory diseases of humans and mice are associated with allelic or
transcript variants of these transcription factors. This study tested the
hypothesis that resistance of sheep to T. circumcincta is associated with
variations in the structure, sequence or expression levels of individual master
regulator transcripts. We have identified and sequenced one variant of sheep
TBX21, two variants of GATA3 and RORC2 and five variants of RORA from lymph node 
mRNA. Relative RT-qPCR analysis showed that TBX21, GATA3 and RORC2 were not
significantly differentially-expressed between the nine most resistant (AWC, 0;
FEC, 0) and the nine most susceptible sheep (AWC, mean 6078; FEC, mean 350).
Absolute RT-qPCR on all 45 animals identified RORVv5 as being significantly
differentially-expressed (p = 0.038) between resistant, intermediate and
susceptible groups; RORCv2 was not differentially-expressed (p = 0.77).
Spearman's rank analysis showed that RORAv5 transcript copy number was
significantly negatively correlated with parameters of susceptibility, AWC and
FEC; and was positively correlated with BW. RORCv2 was not correlated with AWC,
FEC or BW but was significantly negatively correlated with IgA antibody levels.
This study identifies the full length RORA variant (RORAv5) as important in
controlling the protective immune response to T. circumcincta infection in sheep.

PMCID: PMC4759366
PMID: 26890074  [PubMed - in process]


22. Exerc Immunol Rev. 2016;22:64-81.

Effects of acute aerobic exercise on leukocyte inflammatory gene expression in
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Perandini LA(1), Sales-de-Oliveira D(1), Almeida DC(2), Azevedo H(3),
Moreira-Filho CA(3), Cenedeze MA(2), Benatti FB(1,)(4), Lima FR(1), Borba E(1),
Bonfa E(1), Sa-Pinto AL(1), Roschel H(1,)(5), Camara NO(5), Gualano B(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, School of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Immunology, Department of
Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. (3)Laboratory of Pediatric Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)School of Physical
Education and Sport, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)Laboratory of
Transplantation Immunobiology, Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a persistent
systemic inflammation. Exercise induced inflammatory response in SLE remains to
be fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of
acuteexercise on leukocyte gene expression in active (SLEACTIVE) and inactive SLE
(SLEINACTIVE) patients and healthy controls(HC).METHODS: All subjects (n = 4 per 
group) performed a 30-min single bout of acute aerobic exercise (~70% of VO2peak)
on a treadmill, and blood samples were collected for RNA extraction from
circulating leukocyte at baseline, at the end of exercise, and after three hours 
of recovery. The expression of a panel of immune-related genes was evaluated by a
quantitative PCR array assay. Moreover, network-based analyses were performed to 
interpret transcriptional changes occurring after the exercise challenge.
RESULTS: In all groups, a single bout of acute exercise led to the
down-regulation of the gene expression of innate and adaptive immunity at the end
of exercise (e.g., TLR3, IFNG, GATA3, FOXP3, STAT4) with a subsequent
up-regulation occurring upon recovery. Exercise regulated the expression of
inflammatory genes in the blood leukocytes of the SLE patients and HC, although
the SLE groups exhibited fewer modulated genes and less densely connected
networks (number of nodes: 29, 40 and 58; number of edges: 29, 60 and 195;
network density: 0.07, 0.08 and 0.12, for SLEACTIVE, SLEINACTIVE and HC,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The leukocytes from the SLE patients, irrespective of disease
activity, showed a down-regulated inflammatory geneexpression immediately after
acute aerobic exercise, followed by an up-regulation at recovery. Furthermore,
less organized gene networks were observed in the SLE patients, suggesting that
they may be deficient in triggering a normal exercised-induced immune
transcriptional response.

Copyright © 2015 International Society of Exercise and Immunology. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26859426  [PubMed - in process]


23. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 8;7:10605. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10605.

Genome-wide association study identifies multiple susceptibility loci for
craniofacial microsomia.

Zhang YB(1,)(2), Hu J(2), Zhang J(2,)(3), Zhou X(2), Li X(4), Gu C(1), Liu T(2), 
Xie Y(2), Liu J(5), Gu M(1), Wang P(1), Wu T(1), Qian J(2), Wang Y(2), Dong X(6),
Yu J(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences and Key Laboratory of Genome Science and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. (2)Department of Ear Reconstruction, Plastic Surgery Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100144, China. (3)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA. (4)Department of Cardiology, Beijing
Anzhen Hospital of the Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100029,
China. (5)Beijing KPS biotechnology, Beijing 102206, China. (6)Department of
Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Craniofacial microsomia (CFM) is a rare congenital anomaly that involves immature
derivatives from the first and second pharyngeal arches. The genetic pathogenesis
of CFM is still unclear. Here we interrogate 0.9 million genetic variants in 939 
CFM cases and 2,012 controls from China. After genotyping of an additional 443
cases and 1,669 controls, we identify 8 significantly associated loci with the
most significant SNP rs13089920 (logistic regression P=2.15 × 10(-120)) and 5
suggestive loci. The above 13 associated loci, harboured by candidates of ROBO1, 
GATA3, GBX2, FGF3, NRP2, EDNRB, SHROOM3, SEMA7A, PLCD3, KLF12 and EPAS1, are
found to be enriched for genes involved in neural crest cell (NCC) development
and vasculogenesis. We then perform whole-genome sequencing on 21 samples from
the case cohort, and identify several novel loss-of-function mutations within the
associated loci. Our results provide new insights into genetic background of
craniofacial microsomia.

PMCID: PMC4748111
PMID: 26853712  [PubMed - in process]


24. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2016 Feb 3. pii: S0940-2993(16)30005-7. doi:
10.1016/j.etp.2016.01.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of mammary adenocarcinomas in male rats after
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea exposure-Potential for human male breast cancer model.

Yoshizawa K(1), Yuki M(2), Kinoshita Y(3), Emoto Y(2), Yuri T(2), Shikata N(4),
Elmore SA(5), Tsubura A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology II, Kansai Medical University, 2-5-1 Shin-machi,
Hirakata, Osaka 573-1010, Japan. Electronic address: yoshizak@hirakata.kmu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology II, Kansai Medical University, 2-5-1 Shin-machi,
Hirakata, Osaka 573-1010, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology II, Kansai Medical
University, 2-5-1 Shin-machi, Hirakata, Osaka 573-1010, Japan; Division of
Diagnostic Cytopathology and Histopathology, Kansai Medical University Takii
Hospital, Fumizono 10-15, Moriguchi, Osaka 570-8507, Japan. (4)Division of
Diagnostic Cytopathology and Histopathology, Kansai Medical University Takii
Hospital, Fumizono 10-15, Moriguchi, Osaka 570-8507, Japan. (5)Cellular &
Molecular Pathology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The frequency of breast cancer in men is extremely rare, reported to be less than
1% and there is currently no available animal model for male mammary tumors. We
compared the characteristics of various immunohistochemical markers in
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU)-induced mammary adenocarcinomas in male and female
Crj:CD(SD)IGS rats including: estrogen receptor a (ER), progesterone receptor
(PgR), androgen receptor (AR), receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (HER2),
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA).
Female mammary adenocarcinomas were strongly positive in the nuclei of tumor
cells for PCNA and ER (100%) with only 60% and 53% expressing PgR and GATA3,
respectively. 100% of male adenocarcinomas also exhibited strongly positive
expression in the nuclei of tumor cells for PCNA, with 25% expressing AR and only
8% showing positivity for ER. Male carcinomas did not express PgR or GATA3 and
none of the tumors, male or female, were positive for HER2. Based on the observed
ER and PgR positivity and HER2 negativity within these tumors, MNU-induced
mammary adenocarcinomas in female rats appear to be hormonally dependent, similar
to human luminal A type breast cancer. In contrast, MNU-induced mammary
adenocarcinomas in male rats showed no reactivity for ER, PgR, HER2 or GATA3,
suggesting no hormonal dependency. Both male and female adenocarcinomas showed
high proliferating activity by PCNA immunohistochemistry. Based on our literature
review, human male breast cancers are mainly dependent on ER and/or PgR,
therefore the biological pathogenesis of MNU-induced male mammary cancer in rats 
may differ from that of male breast cancer in humans.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26852374  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb 4. [Epub ahead of print]

Clear Cell Carcinoma of the Penis: An HPV-related Variant of Squamous Cell
Carcinoma: A Report of 3 Cases.

Sanchez DF(1), Rodriguez IM, Piris A, Cañete S, Lezcano C, Velazquez EF,
Fernandez-Nestosa MJ, Mendez-Pena JE, Hoang MP, Cubilla AL.

Author information: 
(1)*Instituto de Patología e Investigación School of Medicine, National
University of Asunción, Asunción, Paraguay ¶Polytechnic School, National
University of Asunción, San Lorenzo, Paraguay Mihm Cutaneous Pathology
Consultative Service, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
<U+2225>Miraca Life Sciences and Tuft University #Department of Pathology, Harvard
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA §University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

Penile clear cell carcinoma originating in skin adnexal glands has been
previously reported. Here, we present 3 morphologically distinctive penile tumors
with prominent clear cell features originating not in the penile skin but in the 
mucosal tissues of the glans surface squamous epithelium. Clinical and pathologic
features were evaluated. Immunohistochemical stains were GATA3 and p16. Human
papilloma virus (HPV) detection by in situ hybridization was performed in 3
cases, and whole-tissue section-polymerase chain reaction was performed in 1
case. Patients' ages were 52, 88, and 95 years. Tumors were large and involved
the glans and coronal sulcus in all cases. Microscopically, nonkeratinizing clear
cells predominated. Growth was in solid nests with comedo-like or geographic
necrosis. Focal areas of invasive warty or basaloid carcinomas showing in
addition warty or basaloid penile intraepithelial neoplasia were present in 2
cases. There was invasion of corpora cavernosa, lymphatic vessels, veins, and
perineural spaces in all cases. p16 was positive, and GATA3 stain was negative in
the 3 cases. HPV was detected in 3 cases by in situ hybridization and in 1 case
by polymerase chain reaction. Differential diagnoses included other HPV-related
penile carcinomas, skin adnexal tumors, and metastatic renal cell carcinoma.
Features that support primary penile carcinoma were tumor location, concomitant
warty and/or basaloid penile intraepithelial neoplasia, and HPV positivity.
Clinical groin metastases were present in all cases, pathologically confirmed in 
1. Two patients died from tumor dissemination at 9 and 12 months after penectomy.
Clear cell carcinoma, another morphologic variant related to HPV, originates in
the penile mucosal surface and is probably related to warty carcinomas.

PMID: 26848799  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):880-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.129254. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

The late and dual origin of cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons in the mouse
spinal cord.

Petracca YL(1), Sartoretti MM(1), Di Bella DJ(1), Marin-Burgin A(2), Carcagno
AL(1), Schinder AF(2), Lanuza GM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Lab, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias
Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina. (2)Neuronal Plasticity Lab,
Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina. 
(3)Developmental Neurobiology Lab, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Avenida Patricias
Argentinas 435, Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina GLanuza@Leloir.org.ar.

Considerable progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms that control 
the production of specialized neuronal types. However, how the timing of
differentiation contributes to neuronal diversity in the developing spinal cord
is still a pending question. In this study, we show that cerebrospinal
fluid-contacting neurons (CSF-cNs), an anatomically discrete cell type of the
ependymal area, originate from surprisingly late neurogenic events in the ventral
spinal cord. CSF-cNs are identified by the expression of the transcription
factors Gata2 and Gata3, and the ionic channels Pkd2l1 and Pkd1l2. Contrasting
with Gata2/3(+) V2b interneurons, differentiation of CSF-cNs is independent of
Foxn4 and takes place during advanced developmental stages previously assumed to 
be exclusively gliogenic. CSF-cNs are produced from two distinct dorsoventral
regions of the mouse spinal cord. Most CSF-cNs derive from progenitors
circumscribed to the late-p2 and the oligodendrogenic (pOL) domains, whereas a
second subset of CSF-cNs arises from cells bordering the floor plate. The
development of these two subgroups of CSF-cNs is differentially controlled by
Pax6, they adopt separate locations around the postnatal central canal and they
display electrophysiological differences. Our results highlight that
spatiotemporal mechanisms are instrumental in creating neural cell diversity in
the ventral spinal cord to produce distinct classes of interneurons, motoneurons,
CSF-cNs, glial cells and ependymal cells.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26839365  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Exp Med. 2016 Feb 8;213(2):235-49. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150990. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

miR-23~27~24 clusters control effector T cell differentiation and function.

Cho S(1), Wu CJ(2), Yasuda T(3), Cruz LO(1), Khan AA(4), Lin LL(1), Nguyen DT(1),
Miller M(5), Lee HM(1), Kuo ML(6), Broide DH(5), Rajewsky K(3), Rudensky AY(7),
Lu LF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093. (2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College 
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 333 Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Immune Regulation and
Cancer, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637. (5)Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093. (6)Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 333
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Immunology Program,
Ludwig Center at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (8)Division of Biological Sciences, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 Moores Cancer Center, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 lifanlu@ucsd.edu.

Coordinated repression of gene expression by evolutionarily conserved microRNA
(miRNA) clusters and paralogs ensures that miRNAs efficiently exert their
biological impact. Combining both loss- and gain-of-function genetic approaches, 
we show that the miR-23~27~24 clusters regulate multiple aspects of T cell
biology, particularly helper T (Th) 2 immunity. Low expression of this miRNA
family confers proper effector T cell function at both physiological and
pathological settings. Further studies in T cells with exaggerated regulation by 
individual members of the miR-23~27~24 clusters revealed that miR-24 and miR-27
collaboratively limit Th2 responses through targeting IL-4 and GATA3 in both
direct and indirect manners. Intriguingly, although overexpression of the entire 
miR-23 cluster also negatively impacts other Th lineages, enforced expression of 
miR-24, in contrast to miR-23 and miR-27, actually promotes the differentiation
of Th1, Th17, and induced regulatory T cells, implying that under certain
conditions, miRNA families can fine tune the biological effects of their
regulation by having individual members antagonize rather than cooperate with
each other. Together, our results identify a miRNA family with important
immunological roles and suggest that tight regulation of miR-23~27~24 clusters in
T cells is required to maintain optimal effector function and to prevent aberrant
immune responses.

© 2016 Cho et al.

PMCID: PMC4749926 [Available on 2016-08-08]
PMID: 26834155  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Immunol. 2016 Mar 1;196(5):2181-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500303. Epub 2016
Feb 1.

Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide-Exposed Endothelial Cells Bias Antigen
Presentation to CD4+ T Cells toward a Th17 Response.

Ding W(1), Stohl LL(1), Xu L(1), Zhou XK(2), Manni M(1), Wagner JA(3), Granstein 
RD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021; 
(2)Department of Health Care Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
New York, NY 10065; and. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065; and Feil Family Brain and Mind
Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021; 
rdgranst@med.cornell.edu.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a neuropeptide with well-established
immunomodulatory functions. CGRP-containing nerves innervate dermal blood vessels
and lymph nodes. We examined whether CGRP regulates the outcome of Ag
presentation by Langerhans cells (LCs) to T cells through actions on
microvascular endothelial cells (ECs). Exposure of primary murine dermal
microvascular ECs (pDMECs) to CGRP followed by coculture with LCs, responsive
CD4(+) T cells and Ag resulted in increased production of IL-6 and IL-17A
accompanied by inhibition of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-22 compared with wells
containing pDMECs treated with medium alone. Physical contact between ECs and LCs
or T cells was not required for this effect and, except for IL-4, we demonstrated
that IL-6 production by CGRP-treated pDMECs was involved in these effects. CD4(+)
cells expressing cytoplasmic IL-17A were increased, whereas cells expressing
cytoplasmic IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-4 were decreased by the presence of CGRP-treated pDMECs. 
In addition, the level of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t mRNA 
was significantly increased, whereas T-bet and GATA3 expression was inhibited.
Immunization at the site of intradermally administered CGRP led to a similar bias
in CD4(+) T cells from draining lymph node cells toward IL-17A and away from
IFN-<U+03B3>. Actions of nerve-derived CGRP on ECs may have important regulatory effects
on the outcome of Ag presentation with consequences for the expression of
inflammatory skin disorders involving Th17 cells.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4761517 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26829986  [PubMed - in process]


29. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22(5):616-38.

Cadherins: The Superfamily Critically Involved in Breast Cancer.

Ashaie MA, Chowdhury EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Australia. md.ezharul.hoque@monash.edu.

Breast cancer, one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity among
females, is regulated in part by diverse classes of adhesion molecules one of
which is known as cadherins. Located at adherens junctions, the members of this
superfamily are responsible for upholding proper cell-cell adhesion. Cadherins
possess diverse structures and functions and any alteration in their structures
or functions causes impeding of normal mammary cells development and maintenance,
thus leading to breast malignancy. E-, N-, P-, VE-, Proto-, desmosomal and FAT
cadherins have been found to regulate breast cancer in positive as well as
negative fashion, whereby both Ecadherin (CDH1) and N-cadherin (CDH2) contribute 
significantly towards transitioning from epithelial state to mesenchymal state
(EMT) and enacting the abnormal cells to invade and metastasize nearby and
distant tissues. Aberration in gene expression of cadherins can be either due to 
somatic or epigenetic silencing or via transcriptional factors. Besides other
cadherins, E-cadherin which serves as hallmark of EMT is associated with several 
regulatory factors such as Snail, Slug, Twist, Zeb, KLF4, NFI, TBX2, SIX, b-Myb, 
COX-2, Arf6, FOXA2, GATA3 and SMAR1, which modulate E-cadherin gene transcription
to promote or represses tumor invasion and colonization. Signaling molecules such
as Notch, TGF-ß, estrogen receptors, EGF and Wnt initiate numerous signaling
cascades via these vital factors of cell programming, controlling expression of
E-cadherin at transcriptional (mRNA) and protein level. Thus, interactions of
cadherins with their roles in tumor suppression and oncogenic transformation can 
be beneficial in providing valuable insights for breast cancer diagnosis and
therapeutics development.

PMID: 26825466  [PubMed - in process]


30. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 27;11(1):e0148062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148062.
eCollection 2016.

MycN Is Critical for the Maintenance of Human Embryonic Stem Cell-Derived Neural 
Crest Stem Cells.

Zhang JT(1), Weng ZH(1), Tsang KS(2), Tsang LL(1), Chan HC(1,)(3), Jiang
XH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of Education, Epithelial
Cell Biology Research Center, School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (2)Department of Anatomical and
Cellular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (3)The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Research Institute, Shenzhen, PR China.

The biologic studies of human neural crest stem cells (hNCSCs) are extremely
challenging due to the limited source of hNCSCs as well as ethical and technical 
issues surrounding isolation of early human embryonic tissues. On the other hand,
vast majority of studies on MycN have been conducted in human tumor cells, thus, 
the role of MycN in normal human neural crest development is completely unknown. 
In the present study, we determined the role of MycN in hNCSCs isolated from in
vitro-differentiating human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). For the first time, we 
show that suppression of MycN in hNCSCs inhibits cell growth and cell cycle
progression. Knockdown of MycN in hNCSCs increases the expression of Cdkn1a,
Cdkn2a and Cdkn2b, which encodes the cyclin-dependent kinases p21CIP1, p16 INK4a 
and p15INK4b. In addition, MycN is involved in the regulation of human
sympathetic neurogenesis, as knockdown of MycN enhances the expression of key
transcription factors involved in sympathetic neuron differentiation, including
Phox2a, Phox2b, Mash1, Hand2 and Gata3. We propose that unlimited source of
hNCSCs provides an invaluable platform for the studies of human neural crest
development and diseases.

PMCID: PMC4729679
PMID: 26815535  [PubMed - in process]


31. J Clin Invest. 2016 Mar 1;126(3):865-78. doi: 10.1172/JCI83894. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Lineage-affiliated transcription factors bind the Gata3 Tce1 enhancer to mediate 
lineage-specific programs.

Ohmura S, Mizuno S, Oishi H, Ku CJ, Hermann M, Hosoya T, Takahashi S, Engel JD.

The transcription factor GATA3 is essential for the genesis and maturation of the
T cell lineage, and GATA3 dysregulation has pathological consequences. Previous
studies have shown that GATA3 function in T cell development is regulated by
multiple signaling pathways and that the Notch nuclear effector, RBP-J, binds
specifically to the Gata3 promoter. We previously identified a T cell-specific
Gata3 enhancer (Tce1) lying 280 kb downstream from the structural gene and
demonstrated in transgenic mice that Tce1 promoted T lymphocyte-specific
transcription of reporter genes throughout T cell development; however, it was
not clear if Tce1 is required for Gata3 transcription in vivo. Here, we
determined that the canonical Gata3 promoter is insufficient for Gata3
transcriptional activation in T cells in vivo, precluding the possibility that
promoter binding by a host of previously implicated transcription factors alone
is responsible for Gata3 expression in T cells. Instead, we demonstrated that
multiple lineage-affiliated transcription factors bind to Tce1 and that this
enhancer confers T lymphocyte-specific Gata3 activation in vivo, as targeted
deletion of Tce1 in a mouse model abrogated critical functions of this T
cell-regulatory element. Together, our data show that Tce1 is both necessary and 
sufficient for critical aspects of Gata3 T cell-specific transcriptional
activity.

PMCID: PMC4767349 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26808502  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147477.
eCollection 2016.

Distribution of T Cells in Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Skin and
Responsiveness to Viral Infection.

Leal E(1), Granja AG(1), Zarza C(2), Tafalla C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal (CISA-INIA), Valdeolmos (Madrid),
Spain. (2)Skretting Aquaculture Research Centre, PO Box 48, Stavanger, 4001,
Norway.

Although the skin constitutes the first line of defense against waterborne
pathogens, there is a great lack of information regarding the skin associated
lymphoid tissue (SALT) and whether immune components of the skin are
homogeneously distributed through the surface of the fish is still unknown. In
the current work, we have analyzed the transcription of several immune genes
throughout different rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) skin areas. We found
that immunoglobulin and chemokine gene transcription levels were higher in a skin
area close to the gills. Furthermore, this skin area as well as other anterior
sections also transcribed significantly higher levels of many different immune
genes related to T cell immunity such as T cell receptor a (TCRa), TCR<U+03B3>, CD3,
CD4, CD8, perforin, GATA3, Tbet, FoxP3, interferon <U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>), CD40L and Eomes in
comparison to posterior skin sections. In agreement with these results,
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that anterior skin areas had a higher
concentration of CD3+ T cells and flow cytometry analysis confirmed that the
percentage of CD8+ T lymphocytes was also higher in anterior skin sections. These
results demonstrate for the first time that T cells are not homogeneously
distributed throughout the teleost skin. Additionally, we studied the
transcriptional regulation of these and additional T cell markers in response to 
a bath infection with viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV). We found that
VHSV regulated the transcription of several of these T cell markers in both the
skin and the spleen; with some differences between anterior and posterior skin
sections. Altogether, our results point to skin T cells as major players of
teleost skin immunity in response to waterborne viral infections.

PMCID: PMC4726708
PMID: 26808410  [PubMed - in process]


33. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Apr;39:194-200. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.01.015. Epub
2016 Jan 23.

The GATA3 gene is involved in leprosy susceptibility in Brazilian patients.

Medeiros P(1), da Silva WL(1), de Oliveira Gimenez BB(1), Vallezi KB(1), Moraes
MO(2), de Souza VN(1), Latini AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Lauro de Souza Lima, ILSL, Rodovia Comandante João Ribeiro de Barros
Km 225/226, Aimorés, CEP: 17034-97 Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de
Hanseníase, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Avenida Brasil n°4365, Manguinhos,
CEP: 21040-360, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (3)Instituto Lauro de Souza Lima, ILSL,
Rodovia Comandante João Ribeiro de Barros Km 225/226, Aimorés, CEP: 17034-97
Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: anacarlap@gmail.com.

Leprosy outcome is a complex trait and the host-pathogen-environment interaction 
defines the emergence of the disease. Host genetic risk factors have been
successfully associated to leprosy. The 10p13 chromosomal region was linked to
leprosy in familial studies and GATA3 gene is a strong candidate to be part of
this association. Here, we tested tag single nucleotide polymorphisms at GATA3 in
two case-control samples from Brazil comprising a total of 1633 individuals using
stepwise strategy. The A allele of rs10905284 marker was associated with leprosy 
resistance. Then, a functional analysis was conducted and showed that individuals
carrying AA genotype express higher levels of GATA-3 protein in lymphocytes. So, 
we confirmed that the rs10905284 is a locus associated to leprosy and influences 
the levels of this transcription factor in the Brazilian population.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26807920  [PubMed - in process]


34. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Feb;49:442-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.01.013. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Development and characterization of a cell line from tilapia head kidney with
melanomacrophage characteristics.

Wen CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National University of Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: wenchiumin@nuk.edu.tw.

A novel cell line THK, derived from the tilapia head kidney, was developed and
characterized. The THK cell line comprised fibroblastoid cells that markedly
proliferated in Leibovitz L-15 medium containing 2%-15% fetal bovine serum (FBS) 
at 20 °C-35 °C. Cell proliferation was dependent on the FBS concentration, and
the optimal temperature for proliferation ranged between 25 °C and 30 °C. THK
cells were characterized for the presence of phagocytic activity, acid
phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, a-naphthyl acetate esterase, lipofuscin, and
tyrosinase. Transcripts of CD33, CD53, CD82, CD205, macrophage colony stimulating
factor receptor, GATA2, and GATA3 that are specific for leucocytes or
monocytes/macrophages or both were detected in the THK cells through PCR.
However, THK cells lacked for CD83, a specific marker for dendritic cells. The
results indicated that the fibroblastoid THK cells were melanomacrophage-related 
progenitors. PCR revealed that the THK cells exhibited the transcripts of
toll-like receptor 1 (TLR1), TLR2, TLR3, and CD200, of which concern with
immunity as well as the transcripts of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3, angiomotin, and angiopoietin-like protein 2 that associate with
angiogenesis regulation and macrophage proliferation. THK cells were subcultured 
more than 90 times and can be useful for investigating the development and
functioning of the teleostean innate immune system.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806163  [PubMed - in process]


35. BMC Pediatr. 2016 Jan 22;16(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s12887-016-0550-9.

HDR syndrome in a Japanese girl with biliary atresia: a case report.

Higuchi Y(1,)(2), Hasegawa K(3), Yamashita M(4,)(5), Fujii Y(6), Tanaka H(7),
Tsukahara H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914,
Japan. yhiguchi218@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University
Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914, Japan.
yhiguchi218@gmail.com. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Hospital, 
2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914, Japan. haseyan@md.okayama-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914,
Japan. yamami@md.okayama-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University
Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914, Japan.
yamami@md.okayama-u.ac.jp. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University
Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914, Japan.
gmd422042@s.okayama-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama Saiseikai
General Hospital, 1-7-18 Ifuku, Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-8511, Japan.
hrtanaka@saiseidr.jp. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata,
Kita-ku, Okayama, 700-0914, Japan. tsukah-h@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR)
syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder. We report the first detailed case of 
hypoparathyroidism complicated by biliary atresia.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 1-year-old Japanese girl was admitted to our hospital for
living donor liver transplantation. She suffered from obstructive jaundice owing 
to biliary atresia. She also had persistent hypocalcemia. Despite oral calcium
and abundant vitamin D supplementation, a laboratory test showed hypocalcemia
(1.4 mmol/l) and hyperphosphatemia (2.6 mmol/l). The intact parathyroid hormone
level was normal (66 ng/l) with severe vitamin D deficiency (25-hydroxy vitamin
D: undetectable levels). There were no rachitic changes in metaphysis on X-rays. 
Her family history showed that her mother had sensorineural deafness, a low serum
calcium level (2.1 mmol/l), hypoplastic left kidney, and a past history of an
operation for right vesicoureteral reflux. We suspected that this patient and her
mother have hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia
syndrome. A heterozygous GATA3 gene mutation (c.736delGinsAT) was found in this
patient and her mother, but not in her father.
CONCLUSION: This familial case confirms the importance of family history in the
diagnosis of HDR syndrome. Regardless of marked vitamin D deficiency, the
complication of hypoparathyroidism prevented the onset of vitamin D deficiency
rickets in our patient.

PMCID: PMC4724082
PMID: 26800885  [PubMed - in process]


36. Inflammation. 2016 Apr;39(2):735-43. doi: 10.1007/s10753-015-0300-4.

Esculetin Attenuates Th2 and Th17 Responses in an Ovalbumin-Induced Asthmatic
Mouse Model.

Hongyan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Nanjing Municipal Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of T.C.M., 1
Jinling Road, Nanjing, 210001, Jiangsu Province, China. hongyan3128@163.com.

The purpose of the current study was to investigate the anti-asthmatic effect of 
esculetin (ES) and explore its potential mechanism with a mouse model of allergic
asthma. A total number of 50 mice were randomly assigned to five groups: control,
model, dexamethasone (Dex, 2 mg/kg), and ES (20 mg/kg, 40 mg/kg). Mouse asthma
model was developed with the sensitization and challenge of ovalbumin (OVA). The 
levels of IgE in serum, eosinophilia infiltration, Th2/Th17 cytokines, Th17 cell 
frequency, histological condition, and the protein expressions of ROR<U+03B3>t, GATA3
were detected. Our study demonstrated that ES inhibited, OVA-induced eosinophil
count, interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, IL-13, and IL-17A levels were recovered in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Flow cytometry (FCM) studies revealed that ES
substantially inhibited Th17 cells' percentage. Western blot study also indicated
that ES downregulated ROR<U+03B3>t and GATA3 expressions. Meanwhile, ES had beneficial
effects on the histological alteration. These findings suggested that ES might
effectively ameliorate the progression of asthma and could be used as a therapy
for patients with allergic asthma.

PMID: 26797918  [PubMed - in process]


37. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2015;168(3):173-81. doi: 10.1159/000442158. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Epigenetic Regulation in Early Childhood: A Miniaturized and Validated Method to 
Assess Histone Acetylation.

Harb H(1), Amarasekera M, Ashley S, Tulic MK, Pfefferle PI, Potaczek DP, Martino 
D, Kesper DA, Prescott SL, Renz H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Pathobiochemistry and Molecular Diagnostics,
Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic inflammatory diseases including allergies and asthma are
the result of complex interactions between genes and environmental factors.
Epigenetic mechanisms comprise a set of biochemical reactions that regulate gene 
expression. In order to understand the cause-effect relationship between
environmental exposures and disease development, methods capable of assessing
epigenetic regulation (also) in large cohorts are needed.
METHODS: For this purpose, we developed and evaluated a miniaturized chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay allowing for a cost-effective assessment of
histone acetylation of candidate genes in a quantitative fashion. This method was
then applied to assess H3 and H4 histone acetylation changes in cord blood (CB)
samples from an established cohort of Australian children exposed in the fetal
period to either very low or very high levels of maternal folate.
RESULTS: Our ChIP assay was validated for a minimum requirement of 1 × 105 target
cells (e.g. CD4+ T cells). Very high levels of maternal folate were significantly
associated with increased H3/H4 acetylation at GATA3 and/or IL9 promoter regions 
in CD4+ T cells in CB.
CONCLUSION: We developed a ChIP method allowing reliable assessment of H3/H4
acetylation using 1 × 105 cells only. Practical application of this assay
demonstrated an association between high maternal folate exposure and increased
histone acetylation, corresponding to a more transcriptionally permissive
chromatin status in the promoter regions of some Th2-related genes.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26789836  [PubMed - in process]


38. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 5;7(4):344-8. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.2249.

A Novel De Novo GATA Binding Protein 3 Mutation in a Turkish Boy with
Hypoparathyroidism, Deafness, and Renal Dysplasia Syndrome.

Yesiltepe Mutlu G(1), Kirmizibekmez H, Nakamura A, Fukami M, Hatun S.

Author information: 
(1)Zeynep Kamil Gynecologic and Pediatric Training and Research Hospital, Clinic 
of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey Phone: +90 262 303 87 31 E-mail:
gulyesiltepe@gmail.com.

Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR; OMIM 146255) syndrome is 
a rare disease, inherited dominantly and found to be related with GATA3 (GATA
binding protein 3) gene mutations. A 13-year and 8-month-old boy who presented
with hypocalcemia was diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism. He also had dysmorphic
facial features, renal anomaly (pelvic kidney), and mild sensorineural hearing
loss. His cranial computed tomography revealed multiple calcifications in
bilateral centrum semiovale, corona radiata, and basal ganglions suggesting a
persistent hypoparathyroidism. Thus, the presence of triad of HDR syndrome was
considered, and genetic analysis using a next-generation sequencer identified a
novel de novo missense mutation in exon 4 p.R276Q (c.827G>A) of GATA3 gene. This 
is the second patient who was reported to have a mutation in GATA3 gene from
Turkey. In conclusion, although HDR syndrome is a rare condition, it should be
kept in mind in patients with hypoparathyroidism. Classical triad can easily be
identified if patients diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism are also evaluated with 
a urinary tract ultrasound and an audiometer.

PMID: 26777049  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1874-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501232. Epub 2016
Jan 15.

Depletion of CD8+ T Cells Exacerbates CD4+ T Cell-Induced Monocyte-to-Fibroblast 
Transition in Renal Fibrosis.

Dong Y(1), Yang M(2), Zhang J(1), Peng X(1), Cheng J(1), Cui T(3), Du J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Diseases, Beijing
Institute of Heart, Lung, and Blood Vessel Diseases, Beijing Anzhen Hospital of
the Capital Medical University, Beijing 100029, China; and. (2)Key Laboratory of 
Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Diseases, Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung, and
Blood Vessel Diseases, Beijing Anzhen Hospital of the Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100029, China; and Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital of the Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100020, China. (3)Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital of the Capital
Medical University, Beijing 100020, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Diseases, Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung, and
Blood Vessel Diseases, Beijing Anzhen Hospital of the Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100029, China; and jdu@bcm.edu.

Bone marrow-derived monocyte-to-fibroblast transition is a key step in renal
fibrosis pathogenesis, which is regulated by the inflammatory microenvironment.
However, the mechanism by which the inflammatory microenvironment regulates this 
transition is not fully understood. In this study, we examined how the CD8(+) T
cell/IFN-<U+03B3> microenvironment regulates the monocyte-to-fibroblast transition in
renal fibrosis. Genetic ablation of CD8 promoted a monocyte-to-fibroblast
transition and increased renal interstitial fibrosis, whereas reconstitution of
CD8 knockout (KO) mice with CD8(+) T cells decreased fibrosis. However, depletion
of CD4(+) T cells in CD8 KO mice also reduced fibrosis. To elucidate the role of 
CD4(+) T cells in mediating CD8-regulated monocyte-to-fibroblast transition,
CD4(+) T cells were isolated from obstructed kidneys of CD8 KO or wild-type mice.
CD4(+) T cells isolated from CD8 KO obstructed kidney expressed more IL-4 and
GATA3 and less IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet and showed increased monocyte-to-fibroblast
transition in vitro compared with those isolated from wild-type obstructed
kidney. To examine the role of IFN-<U+03B3>-expressing CD8(+) T cells, we reconstituted 
CD8 KO mice with CD8(+) T cells isolated from IFN-<U+03B3> KO mice. The IFN-<U+03B3> KO CD8(+) 
cells had no effect on IL-4, GATA3, IFN-<U+03B3>, and T-bet mRNA expression in
obstructed kidneys or renal fibrosis. Taken together, our findings identify the
axis of CD8(+) T cells and IFN-<U+03B3>-CD4(+) T cells as an important microenvironment 
for the monocyte-to-fibroblast transition, which negatively regulates renal
fibrosis.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26773152  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1753-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501593. Epub 2016
Jan 15.

NK Cell-Specific Gata3 Ablation Identifies the Maturation Program Required for
Bone Marrow Exit and Control of Proliferation.

Ali AK(1), Oh JS(1), Vivier E(2), Busslinger M(3), Lee SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada; (2)Centre d'Immunologie de
Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université UM2, INSERM, U1104, CNRS UMR7280,
13288 Marseille, France; Immunologie, Hôpital de la Conception, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, 13385 Marseille, France; and. (3)Research
Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna 1030, Austria.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada; seunglee@uottawa.ca.

NK cells are innate lymphocytes capable of eliciting an innate immune response to
pathogens. NK cells develop and become mature in the bone marrow (BM) before they
migrate out to peripheral organs. Although the developmental program leading to
mature NK cells has been studied in the context of several transcription factors,
the stage-specific role of GATA3 in NK cell development has been incompletely
understood. Using NKp46-Cre-Gata3(fl/fl) mice in which Gata3 deficiency was
induced as early as the immature stage of NK cell differentiation, we
demonstrated that GATA3 is required for the NK cell maturation beyond the CD27
single-positive stage and is indispensable for the maintenance of liver-resident 
NK cells. The frequencies of NK cells from NKp46-Cre-Gata3(fl/fl) mice were found
higher in the BM but lower in peripheral organs compared with control
littermates, indicating that GATA3 controls the maturation program required for
BM egress. Despite the defect in maturation, upon murine CMV infection, NK cells 
from NKp46-Cre-Gata3(fl/fl) mice expanded vigorously, achieving NK cell
frequencies surpassing those in controls and therefore provided comparable
protection. The heightened proliferation of NK cells from NKp46-Cre-Gata3(fl/fl) 
mice was cell intrinsic and associated with enhanced upregulation of CD25
expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate that GATA3 is a critical
regulator for NK cell terminal maturation and egress out of the BM and that
immature NK cells present in the periphery of NKp46-Cre-Gata3(fl/fl) mice can
rapidly expand and provide a reservoir of NK cells capable of mounting an
efficient cytotoxic response upon virus infection.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26773150  [PubMed - in process]


41. Hum Pathol. 2016 Feb;48:37-47. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.035. Epub 2015 Oct 
28.

The role of GATA3 in breast carcinomas: a review.

Asch-Kendrick R(1), Cimino-Mathews A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231;
Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231.
Electronic address: acimino1@jhmi.edu.

GATA3 is a zinc-binding transcription factor that regulates the differentiation
of many human tissue types, including the mammary gland. In surgical pathology,
immunohistochemistry for GATA3 is largely used to support urothelial or breast
origin in a carcinoma of unknown origin. GATA3 is sensitive but not entirely
specific in this setting. Although GATA3 labeling is highest in estrogen
receptor-positive carcinomas, it also labels estrogen receptor-negative
carcinomas and thus has particular diagnostic utility in the setting of
triple-negative breast carcinomas, which are typically negative for other
mammary-specific markers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772397  [PubMed - in process]


42. Hum Pathol. 2016 Feb;48:18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.028. Epub 2015 Oct 
23.

The utility of CDX2, GATA3, and DOG1 in the diagnosis of testicular neoplasms: an
immunohistochemical study of 109 cases.

Osman H(1), Cheng L(1), Ulbright TM(1), Idrees MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46020. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46020.
Electronic address: midrees@iupui.edu.

We identified 109 testicular tumors, including pure and mixed germ cell tumors
and sex cord-stromal tumors, and conducted immunohistochemical staining for CDX2,
DOG1, and GATA3 to address the potential utility of these readily available and
commonly used markers in the evaluation of testicular tumors. Their expression
has not been previously thoroughly examined in testicular germ cell tumors. The
distribution, percentage, and intensity of positivity were assessed. CDX2 was
positive in all yolk sac tumors, 25% of choriocarcinomas, 9% of seminomas, and 4%
of embryonal carcinomas (sensitivity for yolk sac tumor, 100%; specificity, 89%
[teratomas excluded]). CDX2 also stained glandular components within teratomas
and identified inconspicuous yolk sac tumor components in 3 cases previously
diagnosed as pure embryonal carcinoma. GATA3 was positive in all choriocarcinomas
(sensitivity, 100%). Weak GATA3 immunostaining was also seen in 12% of yolk sac
tumors and 2 of 2 primitive neuroectodermal tumors. DOG1 was negative in all
tumors, but stained spermatocytes and spermatids and the luminal borders of the
epididymis and rete testis of nonneoplastic testis. We conclude that CDX2 is a
sensitive and relatively specific marker for yolk sac tumor among the
nonteratomatous germ cell tumors. It may serve to screen for yolk sac tumor
components often overlooked on hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides. GATA3 is
helpful in the recognition of trophoblastic cells, especially of intermediate
type. DOG1 is a sensitive marker for spermatocytes and needs to be further
studied for its significance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772394  [PubMed - in process]


43. Histopathology. 2016 Jan;68(1):86-95. doi: 10.1111/his.12877.

Markers of metastatic carcinoma of breast origin.

Gown AM(1), Fulton RS(1), Kandalaft PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)PhenoPath Laboratories, Seattle, WA, USA. (2)Pacific Pathology Partners,
Seattle, WA, USA.

This review summarizes the three major breast-associated markers that can be of
assistance in evaluating metastatic carcinomas for which a breast primary
diagnosis is entertained. These markers include gross cystic disease fluid
protein-15 (GCDFP-15), mammaglobin, and GATA3. The first two are cytoplasmic
markers that show comparable sensitivities for breast cancer, although relatively
few of the published studies have employed the same antibodies against the target
molecule, making direct comparisons challenging. GATA3 is a nuclear transcription
factor that shows superior sensitivity to GCDFP-15 and mammaglobin. However, the 
specificity of GATA3 can pose challenges, inasmuch as carcinomas of the bladder
and other sites can show significant levels of positivity. Determination of the
optimal panel of antibodies employed in a given clinical setting will thus depend
on the non-breast tumours included in the differential diagnosis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26768031  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2015 Dec 1. pii: S1684-1182(15)00913-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2015.10.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantitative analysis of tissue inflammation and responses to treatment in immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome, and review of 
literature.

Chen CA(1), Chung WC(2), Chiou YY(1), Yang YJ(1), Lin YC(3), Ochs HD(4), Shieh
CC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan,
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (4)Seattle Children's
Research Institute and Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cshieh@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-linked (IPEX) syndrome is a severe autoimmune disease that is caused by
regulatory T cell deficiency due to FOXP3 gene mutations. The long-term outcome
can be variable depending on the extent of tissue damage caused by autoimmunity
and infections, the use of immunosuppressive treatment or sequela of bone marrow 
transplantation.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemical staining to analyze cell types infiltrating 
the tissue of affected organs from a classic IPEX patient with a splicing
mutation (c.736-2A>C) in the FOXP3 gene. Expression of transcription factors that
are critical for immune responses including T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and FOXP3 were 
evaluated in various tissue samples. For objective analysis of the distribution
of different cell types in tissues, we used an automated microscope-based image
acquiring system to assess quantitatively the different cell types by
investigating the histopathological changes in the patient's biopsy samples
obtained from the intestine and the kidneys before and after treatment.
RESULTS: The percentages of cells expressing the TH2-associated transcription
factor GATA3 were higher in the IPEX patient before treatment than in controls,
suggesting that TH2-type cells contribute to the tissue inflammation of the gut
and kidneys in IPEX syndrome. Immunosuppressive treatment effectively decreased
the number of effector cells in the kidneys and intestine of the IPEX patient.
CONCLUSION: This study provides quantitative evidence that the inflamed
intestinal and renal tissues of the IPEX patient contain TH2-type immune effector
cells, which decreased in number after immunosuppressive treatment was initiated 
and the clinical symptoms had improved.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26748735  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2015 Oct 15;3(4):455-68. doi: 10.1002/iid3.87. eCollection
2015.

Interleukin-25 initiates Th2 differentiation of human CD4(+) T cells and
influences expression of its own receptor.

Bredo G(1), Storie J(1), Shrestha Palikhe N(1), Davidson C(1), Adams A(1),
Vliagoftis H(1), Cameron L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Group, Department of Medicine University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta Canada. (2)Pulmonary Research Group, Department of
MedicineUniversity of AlbertaEdmontonAlbertaCanada; Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine & DentistryWestern
UniversityLondonOntarioCanada.

Human CRTh2(+) Th2 cells express IL-25 receptor (IL-25R) and IL-25 has been shown
to potentiate production of Th2 cytokines. However, regulation of IL-25R and
whether it participates in Th2 differentiation of human cells have not been
examined. We sought to characterize IL-25R expression on CD4(+) T cells and
determine whether IL-25 plays a role in Th2 differentiation. Naïve human CD4(+) T
cells were activated in the presence of IL-25, IL-4 (Th2 conditions) or both
cytokines to assess their relative influence on Th2 differentiation. For
experiments with differentiated Th2 cells, CRTh2-expressing cells were isolated
from differentiating cultures. IL-25R, GATA3, CRTh2 and Th2 cytokine expression
were assessed by flow cytometry, qRT-PCR and ELISA. Expression of surface IL-25R 
was induced early during Th2 differentiation (2 days). Addition of IL-25 to naïve
CD4(+) T cells revealed that it induces expression of its own receptor, more
strongly than IL-4. IL-25 also increased the proportions of IL-4-, GATA3- and
CRTh2-expressing cells and expression of IL-5 and IL-13. Activation of
differentiated CRTh2(+) Th2 cells through the TCR or by CRTh2 agonist increased
surface expression of IL-25R, though re-expression of CRTh2 following TCR
downregulation was impeded by IL-25. These data suggest that IL-25 may play
various roles in Th2 mediated immunity. We establish here it regulates expression
of its own receptor and can initiate Th2 differentiation, though not as strongly 
as IL-4.

PMCID: PMC4693727
PMID: 26734466  [PubMed]


46. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;101(3):837-40. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3704. Epub 
2016 Jan 5.

A Case of HDR Syndrome and Ichthyosis: Dual Diagnosis by Whole-Genome Sequencing 
of Novel Mutations in GATA3 and STS Genes.

Goodwin G(1), Hawley PP(1), Miller DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics (G.G.), and Division of
Genetics and Genomics (P.P.H., D.T.M.), Children's Hospital of Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115.

CONTEXT: Atypical presentations of complex multisystem disorders may elude
diagnosis based on clinical findings only. Appropriate diagnostic tests may not
be available or available tests may not provide appropriate coverage of relevant 
genomic regions for patients with complex phenotypes. Clinical
whole-exome/-genome sequencing is often considered for complex patients lacking a
definitive diagnosis.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A boy who is now 7 years old presented as a newborn with
congenital ichthyosis. At 6 weeks of age, he presented with failure to thrive and
hypoparathyroidism. At 4 years of age, he was diagnosed with sensorineural
hearing loss. Whole-genome sequencing identified novel mutations in GATA3, which 
causes HDR syndrome (hypoparathyroidism and deafness), and STS, which causes X
-linked congenital ichthyosis.
CONCLUSION: Whole-genome sequencing led to a definitive clinical diagnosis in a
case where no other clinical test was available for GATA3, and no sequencing
panel would have included both genes because they have disparate phenotypes. This
case demonstrates the power of whole-genome (or exome) sequencing for patients
with complex clinical presentations involving endocrine abnormalities.

PMID: 26731259  [PubMed - in process]


47. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Dec 21;9:21-30. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S93305. eCollection
2016.

Dendrobium candidum inhibits MCF-7 cells proliferation by inducing cell cycle
arrest at G2/M phase and regulating key biomarkers.

Sun J(1), Guo Y(1), Fu X(2), Wang Y(1), Liu Y(1), Huo B(1), Sheng J(3), Hu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of
China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic
of China; Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China; National
Engineering Laboratory of AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, People's Republic of China. (3)Yunnan Research Centre for 
Advance Tea Processing, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most frequently occurring cancers in
women. In recent years, Dendrobium candidum has played a part in
antihyperthyroidism and anticancer drugs. This study aims to examine the
antitumor effect of D. candidum on breast cancer.
METHODS: Human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and normal breast epithelial cell
line MCF10A were used to observe the effects of D. candidum treatment on human
breast cancer. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assay was employed to examine the cell proliferation of the MCF-7 and MCF10A
cells. Western blot analysis and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
were used to detect the key molecules and biomarkers in breast cancer pathology. 
Cell cycle was analyzed by using Becton Dickinson FACScan cytofluorometer.
RESULTS: The results indicated that D. candidum significantly decreased cell
viability at different concentrations compared to the control group (P<0.05). D. 
candidum-treated MCF-7 cells in the G2/M phase was significantly increased
compared to the control group (P<0.05). The messenger RNA levels of estrogen
receptor alpha, IGFBP2, IGFBP4, and GATA3 were significantly decreased, and the
messenger RNA and protein levels of ELF5, p53, p21, p18, CDH1, CDH2, and p12 were
significantly increased, compared to the control group (P<0.05). The protein
levels of estrogen receptor alpha, PGR, GATA3, and Ki67 were significantly
decreased and the protein levels of p53 and ELF5 were significantly increased
compared to the control group (P<0.05). The general apoptosis biomarker, Bcl-2,
was significantly decreased and the Bax was significantly increased compared to
the control group (P<0.05). In contrast to that in MCF-7, D. candidum does not
affect cell proliferation at any concentration and any time points in normal
breast epithelial cells, MCF10A cells.
CONCLUSION: D. candidum could decrease the cell viability of MCF-7 cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and regulating the key biomarkers in
breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4694679
PMID: 26730200  [PubMed]


48. J Dairy Sci. 2016 Mar;99(3):2364-71. doi: 10.3168/jds.2015-9449. Epub 2015 Dec
24.

Short communication: Cytokine profiles from blood mononuclear cells of dairy cows
classified with divergent immune response phenotypes.

Martin CE(1), Paibomesai MA(2), Emam SM(3), Gallienne J(3), Hine BC(4),
Thompson-Crispi KA(5), Mallard BA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. (2)Department of Pathobiology,
Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada;
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Guelph, ON, N1G 4Y2,
Canada. (3)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. (4)CSIRO, Animal, Food & Health Sciences,
Armidale, NSW, Australia. (5)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary
College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Center for Genetic
Improvement of Livestock, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Center for Genetic Improvement of Livestock,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W, Canada. Electronic address:
bmallard@ovc.uoguelph.ca.

Genetic selection for enhanced immune response has been shown to decrease disease
occurrence in dairy cattle. Cows can be classified as high (H), average, or low
responders based on antibody-mediated immune response (AMIR), predominated by
type-2 cytokine production, and cell-mediated immune response (CMIR) through
estimated breeding values for these traits. The purpose of this study was to
identify in vitro tests that correlate with in vivo immune response phenotyping
in dairy cattle. Blood mononuclear cells (BMC) isolated from cows classified as
H-AMIR and H-CMIR through estimated breeding values for immune response traits
were stimulated with concanavalin A (ConA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and gene
expression, cytokine production, and cell proliferation was determined at
multiple time points. A repeated measures model, which included the effects of
immune response group, parity, and stage of lactation, was used to compare
differences between immune response phenotype groups. The H-AMIR cows produced
more IL-4 protein than H-CMIR cows at 48h; however, no difference in gene
expression of type-2 transcription factor GATA3 or IL4 was noted. The BMC from
H-CMIR cows had increased production of IFN-<U+03B3> protein at 48, 72, and 96h compared
with H-AMIR animals. Further, H-CMIR cows had increased expression of the IFNG
gene at 16, 24, and 48h post-treatment with ConA, although expression of the
type-1 transcription factor gene TBX21 did not differ between immune response
groups. Although proliferation of BMC increased from 24 to 72h after ConA
stimulation, no differences were found between the immune response groups.
Overall, stimulation of H-AMIR and H-CMIR bovine BMC with ConA resulted in
distinct cytokine production profiles according to genetically defined groups.
These distinct cytokine profiles could be used to define disease resistance
phenotypes in dairy cows according to stimulation in vitro; however, other immune
response phenotypes should be assessed.

Copyright © 2016 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26723120  [PubMed - in process]


49. Mamm Genome. 2016 Apr;27(3-4):99-110. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9618-3. Epub 2015
Dec 31.

Variants in an Hdac9 intronic enhancer plasmid impact Twist1 expression in vitro.

Siekmann TE(1), Gerber MM(2), Toland AE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Program, The Ohio State University College of Medicine,
Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. (2)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics and the Division of Human
Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, 998 Biomedical Research
Tower, 460 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Amanda.toland@osumc.edu.

Skin tumor susceptibility 5 (Skts5) was previously mapped to mouse chromosome 12 
through linkage analysis of skin tumor susceptible Mus musculus (NIH/Ola-S) and
skin tumor resistant outbred Mus spretus (SPRET/Out-R) mice. Hdac9 was identified
as a potential candidate for Skts5 based on conserved non-synonymous sequence
variants and expression analyses. Studies by others identified an enhancer in
human HDAC9 that correlated with TWIST1 expression. We identified 45 sequence
variants between NIH/Ola-S and SPRET/Out-R mice from the orthologous region of
the human HDAC9 enhancer. Variants mapping to intron 18 differentially affected
luciferase expression in vitro. NIH/Ola-S clones showed an approximate 1.7-fold
increased luciferase expression relative to vector alone or the equivalent clones
from SPRET/Out-R-R. Furthermore, cells transfected with a portion of the
NIH/Ola-S intron induced 2.2-fold increases in Twist1 expression, but the same
region from SPRET/Out-R mice resulted in no up-regulation of Twist1. In silico
transcription factor analyses identified multiple transcription factors predicted
to differentially bind NIH/Ola-S and SPRET/Out-R polymorphic sites. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies of two transcription factors, Gata3 and Oct1,
demonstrated differential binding between NIH/Ola-S and SPRET/Out-R plasmids that
corroborated the in silico predictions. Together these studies provide evidence
that the murine orthologous region to a human HDAC9 enhancer also acts as a
transcriptional enhancer for mouse Twist1. As ectopic sequence variants between
NIH/Ola-S and SPRET/Out-R differentially impacted luciferase expression,
correlated with Twist1 expression in vitro, and affected Gata3 and Oct1 binding, 
these variants may explain part of the observed differences in skin tumor
susceptibility at Skts5 between NIH/Ola-S and SPRET/Out-R.

PMCID: PMC4814334 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26721262  [PubMed - in process]


50. Virchows Arch. 2015 Dec 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Negative association between GATA3 and fascin could predict relapse-free and
overall survival in patients with breast cancer.

Min KW(1), Kim DH(2), Do SI(3), Chae SW(3), Kim K(3), Sohn JH(3), Pyo JS(3), Lee 
HJ(3), Kim DH(3), Oh S(4), Choi SH(5), Park YL(6), Park CH(6), Kim EK(7), Kwon
MJ(1), Seo J(1), Moon KM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, 29 Saemunan-ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul, 110-746, Republic of Korea.
idavid.kim@samsung.com. (3)Department of Pathology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 29 Saemunan-ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul,
110-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung
Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Radiology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of Surgery, Kangbuk
Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea. (7)Department of Pathology, Eulji General Hospital, Eulji University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Internal Medicine,
Eulji University Hospital, Eulji University School of Medicine, Daejeon, Republic
of Korea.

GATA3 and fascin proteins are known prognostic markers in several cancers. GATA3 
is a key regulator of mammary gland morphogenesis and luminal cell
differentiation, whereas fascin is a pro-metastatic actin-bundling protein. In
this study, we analyzed and compared the predictive abilities of GATA3 and fascin
for clinical outcomes of patients with breast cancer. The combined expression
pattern based on GATA3-/+ and fascin-/+ was evaluated by immunostaining using a
tissue microarray, and relationships between protein expression and several
clinicopathological parameters were analyzed. GATA3 expression was associated
with good prognostic parameters, but fascin was correlated with poor prognostic
parameters. On comparing GATA3 and fascin, we found an inverse relationship
between fascin and GATA3 expressions. On analysis of combined markers,
GATA3+/fascin- was correlated with improved clinical outcomes compared to
GATA3-/fascin+. Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed significant
differences in relapse-free and overall survival between GATA3+/fascin- and
GATA3-/fascin+. Combined marker analysis of GATA3/fascin showed an inverse
association and improved prognostic information for patients with breast cancer.

PMID: 26719157  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):516-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.129957. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Differentiation and molecular heterogeneity of inhibitory and excitatory neurons 
associated with midbrain dopaminergic nuclei.

Lahti L(1), Haugas M(1), Tikker L(1), Airavaara M(2), Voutilainen MH(2), Anttila 
J(2), Kumar S(1), Inkinen C(1), Salminen M(3), Partanen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56,
Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Department
of Veterinary Biosciences, P.O. Box 66, Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2, FIN-00014
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Biosciences, P.O.
Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
juha.m.partanen@helsinki.fi.

Local inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic neurons are important for
midbrain dopaminergic and hindbrain serotonergic pathways controlling motivation,
mood, and voluntary movements. Such neurons reside both within the dopaminergic
nuclei, and in adjacent brain structures, including the rostromedial and
laterodorsal tegmental nuclei. Compared with the monoaminergic neurons, the
development, heterogeneity, and molecular characteristics of these regulatory
neurons are poorly understood. We show here that different GABAergic and
glutamatergic subgroups associated with the monoaminergic nuclei express specific
transcription factors. These neurons share common origins in the ventrolateral
rhombomere 1, where the postmitotic selector genes Tal1, Gata2 and Gata3 control 
the balance between the generation of inhibitory and excitatory neurons. In the
absence of Tal1, or both Gata2 and Gata3, the GABAergic precursors adopt
glutamatergic fates and populate the glutamatergic nuclei in excessive numbers.
Together, our results uncover developmental regulatory mechanisms, molecular
characteristics, and heterogeneity of central regulators of monoaminergic
circuits.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26718003  [PubMed - in process]


52. J Assoc Physicians India. 2015 Jun;63(6):73-5.

The Syndrome of Familial Hypoparathyroidism, Sensorineural Deafness and Renal
Dysplasia.

Meena RL, Maloo SK, Samar N, Ruhela A, Saini S.

The syndrome of familial hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal
dysplasia (HDR syndrome) is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, caused by
haploinsufficiency of the GATA3 gene in chromosome 10p. Although first described 
years ago, but the disease is considered to be very rare. Patients usually
present with hypocalcemia, tetany, or afebrile convulsions at any age. Hearing
loss is usually bilateral, range from mild to profound impairment. Renal disease 
includes dysplasia, hypoplasia or aplasia.

PMID: 26710407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0145814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145814.
eCollection 2015.

Analysis of Immune Response Markers in Jorge Lobo's Disease Lesions Suggests the 
Occurrence of Mixed T Helper Responses with the Dominance of Regulatory T Cell
Activity.

Azevedo Mde C(1,)(2), Rosa PS(2), Soares CT(2), Fachin LR(2), Baptista IM(3),
Woods WJ(4), Garlet GP(5), Trombone AP(6), Belone Ade F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Doenças Tropicais, Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Departamento de
Patologia, Instituto Lauro de Souza Lima, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Microbiologia, Instituto Lauro de Souza Lima, Bauru, São
Paulo, Brazil. (4)Serviço Especializado em Dermatologia, Hospital das Clínicas do
Acre, Rio Branco, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas,
Faculdade de Odontologia de Bauru, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo,
Brazil. (6)Departamento de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do Sagrado Coração,
Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.

Jorge Lobo's disease (JLD) is a chronic infection that affects the skin and
subcutaneous tissues. Its etiologic agent is the fungus Lacazia loboi. Lesions
are classified as localized, multifocal, or disseminated, depending on their
location. Early diagnosis and the surgical removal of lesions are the best
therapeutic options currently available for JLD. The few studies that evaluate
the immunological response of JLD patients show a predominance of Th2 response,
as well as a high frequency of TGF-ß and IL-10 positive cells in the lesions;
however, the overall immunological status of the lesions in terms of their T cell
phenotype has yet to be determined. Therefore, the objective of this study was to
evaluate the pattern of Th1, Th2, Th17 and regulatory T cell (Treg) markers mRNA 
in JLD patients by means of real-time PCR. Biopsies of JLD lesions (N = 102) were
classified according to their clinical and histopathological features and then
analyzed using real-time PCR in order to determine the expression levels of
TGF-ß1, FoxP3, CTLA4, IKZF2, IL-10, T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, GATA3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13,
IL-33, RORC, IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22 and to compare these levels to those of
healthy control skin (N = 12). The results showed an increased expression of
FoxP3, CTLA4, TGF-ß1, IL-10, T-bet, IL-17F, and IL-17A in lesions, while GATA3
and IL-4 levels were found to be lower in diseased skin than in the control
group. When the clinical forms were compared, TGF-ß1 was found to be highly
expressed in patients with a single localized lesion while IL-5 and IL-17A levels
were higher in patients with multiple/disseminated lesions. These results
demonstrate the occurrence of mixed T helper responses and suggest the dominance 
of regulatory T cell activity, which could inhibit Th-dependent protective
responses to intracellular fungi such as L. loboi. Therefore, Tregs may play a
key role in JLD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4689386
PMID: 26700881  [PubMed - in process]


54. Immunology. 2016 Mar;147(3):355-66. doi: 10.1111/imm.12569.

A peptide tetramer Tk-tPN induces tolerance of cardiac allografting by conversion
of type 1 to type 2 immune responses via the Toll-like receptor 2 signal-promoted
activation of the MCP1 gene.

Li Z(1), Yang N(2), Zhou L(1), Gu P(2), Wang H(3), Zhou Y(1), Zhou P(3), Lu L(1),
Chou KY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Immunology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Transplantation Unit, Shanghai Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai, China.

The plant protein trichosanthin (Tk) and its derived peptide tetramer Tk-tPN have
been shown to stimulate the type 2 immune responses for treating autoimmune
disease. This work explores the possibility of using Tk-tPN as a non-toxic
immunosuppressant to induce transplantation tolerance using the mechanisms by
which T-cell-mediated immune responses are transferred from type 1 to type 2
through innate immunity-related pathways. Immunocytes and cytokine secretions
involved in the mouse cardiac allografting model with Tk-tPN treatment were
characterized. Identification of critical genes and analysis of their functions
through Toll-like receptor (TLR) -initiated signalling and the possible
epigenetic changes were performed. Mean survival times of the cardiac allografts 
were delayed from 7·7 ± 0·3 days (control) to 22·7 ± 3·9 days (P < 0·01) or
79·1 ± 19·2 days (P < 0·0001) when Tk-tPN was introduced into the recipients
alone or together with rapamycin, respectively. The grafting tolerance was
donor-specific. The secretion pattern of the type 1 cytokine/transcription factor
(IL-2(+)  IFN-<U+03B3>(+)  T-bet(+) ), which is responsible for the acute graft
rejection, was shifted to the type 2 factor (IL-4(+)  IL-10(+)  Gata3(+) ),
together with a selective expansion of the IL-4/IL-10-producing CD8(+)  CD28(-)
regulatory T-cell subset. A TLR2-initiated high expression of chemokine gene MCP1
was detectable simultaneously. Epigenetically Tk/Tk-tPN could also acetylate the 
histone H3K9 of MCP1 promoter to skew the immunity towards T helper type 2
responses. Tk/Tk-tPN is therefore capable of down-regulating the type 1
response-dominant rejection of cardiac allografts by evoking type 2 immunity
through the activation of a TLR2-initiated signalling pathway and MCP1 gene to
expand the IL-4/IL-10-secreting CD8(+)  CD28(-) regulatory T cells. Tk-tPN could 
be a promising novel immunosuppressant to induce tolerance in
allotransplantation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4754609 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26694804  [PubMed - in process]


55. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016 Feb 1;591:98-110. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.12.001. Epub
2015 Dec 10.

The anticancer potential of steroidal saponin, dioscin, isolated from wild yam
(Dioscorea villosa) root extract in invasive human breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 in vitro.

Aumsuwan P(1), Khan SI(2), Khan IA(2), Ali Z(3), Avula B(3), Walker LA(4),
Shariat-Madar Z(5), Helferich WG(6), Katzenellenbogen BS(7), Dasmahapatra AK(8).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Product Research, School of Pharmacy, University
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA; Division of Pharmacology, Department
of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi,
University, MS 38677, USA. (2)National Center for Natural Product Research,
School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA;
Division of Pharmacognosy, Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of
Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA. (3)National
Center for Natural Product Research, School of Pharmacy, University of
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA. (4)National Center for Natural Product
Research, School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677,
USA; Division of Pharmacology, Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of
Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA; University of
Mississippi Cancer Institute (Oxford Campus), School of Pharmacy, University of
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA. (5)Division of Pharmacology, Department
of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi,
University, MS 38677, USA. (6)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (7)Department of Molecular and
Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(8)National Center for Natural Product Research, School of Pharmacy, University
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA; Division of Pharmacology, Department
of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi,
University, MS 38677, USA; University of Mississippi Cancer Institute (Oxford
Campus), School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677,
USA. Electronic address: asok@olemiss.edu.

Previously, we observed that wild yam (Dioscorea villosa) root extract (WYRE) was
able to activate GATA3 in human breast cancer cells targeting epigenome. This
study aimed to find out if dioscin (DS), a bioactive compound of WYRE, can
modulate GATA3 functions and cellular invasion in human breast cancer cells.
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated in the absence/presence of various
concentrations of DS and subjected to gene analysis by RT-qPCR, immunoblotting,
and immunocytochemistry. We determined the ability of MDA-MB-231 cells to migrate
into wound area and examined the effects of DS on cellular invasion using
invasion assay. DS reduced cell viability of both cell lines in a concentration
and time-dependent manner. GATA3 expression was enhanced by DS (5.76 µM) in
MDA-MB-231 cells. DS (5.76 µM)-treated MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited the
morphological characteristic of epithelial-like cells; mRNA expression of DNMT3A,
TET2, TET3, ZFPM2 and E-cad were increased while TET1, VIM and MMP9 were
decreased. Cellular invasion of MDA-MB-231 was reduced by 65 ± 5% in the presence
of 5.76 µM DS. Our data suggested that DS-mediated pathway could promote GATA3
expression at transcription and translation levels. We propose that DS has
potential to be used as an anti-invasive agent in breast cancer.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26682631  [PubMed - in process]


56. Clin Transl Immunology. 2015 Nov 6;4(11):e49. doi: 10.1038/cti.2015.30.
eCollection 2015.

Lower expression of GATA3 and T-bet correlates with downregulated IL-10 in severe
falciparum malaria.

Mahanta A(1), Baruah S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Napaam ,
Tezpur, India.

Interleukin (IL)-10, a non-redundant anti-inflammatory cytokine is produced by
different cells and its production involves activation of cell-specific
transcriptional regulatory machinery in response to specific pathogen. We have
previously demonstrated downregulated levels of IL-10 in severe falciparum
malaria. The present study investigated transcriptional regulation of IL-10 in
severe malaria. Comparative expression analysis of cell-specific signalling
proteins and transcription factors for IL-10 production during the stage of
active infection and with resolution of parasitaemia was performed.
Interestingly, T-bet and GATA3, the Th1 and Th2 transcription factors,
respectively, were downregulated in severe malaria with fold change values of
0.59 and 0.86. Increase in the levels of both the factors with resolution of
parasitaemia implicated a role for parasite in depressed levels of these factors.
Further support for probable parasite manipulation of GATA3 was obtained from
negative correlation of GATA3 with parasitaemia. In addition, a role for
interferon-a in suppressing IL-10 transcription was evident from its negative
correlation with GATA3 and IL-10 levels. In summary, IL-10 transcription in Th1
and Th2 is defective and appears to have major contribution to low levels in
severe malaria.

PMCID: PMC4673438
PMID: 26682056  [PubMed]


57. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2015 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovering condition specific topological pattern changes in coexpression
network: an application to HIV1 progression.

Ray S, Bandyopadhyay S.

The natural progression of HIV-1 begins with a short acute retroviral syndrome
which typically transit to chronic and clinical latency stages and subsequently
progresses to a symptomatic, life-threatening immunodeficiency disease known as
AIDS. Microarray analysis based on gene coexpression is widely used to
investigate the coregulation pattern of a group (or cluster) of genes in a
specific phenotype. Moreover, an investigation on the topological patterns across
multiple phenotypes can facilitate the understanding of stage specific infection 
pattern of HIV-1 virus. Here, we develop a novel framework to identify
topological patterns of gene coexpression network and detect changes of modular
structure across different stages of HIV progression. This is achieved by
comparing the topological and intramodular properties of HIV infection modules.
To capture the diversity in modular structure, some topological, correlation
based and eigengene based measures are utilized here. We have applied a rank
aggregation scheme to rank all the modules to provide a good agreement between
these measures. Some novel transcription factors like 'FOXO1','GATA3',
'GFI1','IRF1', 'IRF7', 'MAX', 'STAT1', 'STAT3', 'XBP1' and 'YY1' that emerge from
the modules show significant change in expression pattern over HIV progression
stages. Moreover, we have performed an eigengene based analysis to reveal the
perturbation in modular structure across three stages of HIV-1 progression.

PMID: 26661789  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):29759. doi: 10.1074/jbc.A115.641332.

Wnt/ß-Catenin mediates AICAR effect to increase GATA3 expression and inhibit
adipogenesis.

Wang L, Di LJ.

Erratum for
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19458-68.

PMCID: PMC4706000
PMID: 26657755  [PubMed - in process]


59. Nat Med. 2016 Jan;22(1):97-104. doi: 10.1038/nm.4002. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

Systematic discovery of complex insertions and deletions in human cancers.

Ye K(1,)(2), Wang J(1), Jayasinghe R(1,)(3), Lameijer EW(4), McMichael JF(1),
Ning J(1), McLellan MD(1), Xie M(1,)(3), Cao S(1), Yellapantula V(1,)(3), Huang
KL(1,)(3), Scott A(1,)(3), Foltz S(1,)(3), Niu B(1), Johnson KJ(5), Moed M(4),
Slagboom PE(4), Chen F(3,)(6), Wendl MC(1,)(2,)(7), Ding L(1,)(2,)(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Genetics, Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Washington University in St.
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (4)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. (5)Brown School Master of Public Health Program, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (6)Siteman Cancer Center,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (7)Department of
Mathematics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Complex insertions and deletions (indels) are formed by simultaneously deleting
and inserting DNA fragments of different sizes at a common genomic location. Here
we present a systematic analysis of somatic complex indels in the coding
sequences of samples from over 8,000 cancer cases using Pindel-C. We discovered
285 complex indels in cancer-associated genes (such as PIK3R1, TP53, ARID1A,
GATA3 and KMT2D) in approximately 3.5% of cases analyzed; nearly all instances of
complex indels were overlooked (81.1%) or misannotated (17.6%) in previous
reports of 2,199 samples. In-frame complex indels are enriched in PIK3R1 and
EGFR, whereas frameshifts are prevalent in VHL, GATA3, TP53, ARID1A, PTEN and
ATRX. Furthermore, complex indels display strong tissue specificity (such as VHL 
in kidney cancer samples and GATA3 in breast cancer samples). Finally, structural
analyses support findings of previously missed, but potentially druggable,
mutations in the EGFR, MET and KIT oncogenes. This study indicates the critical
importance of improving complex indel discovery and interpretation in medical
research.

PMID: 26657142  [PubMed - in process]


60. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 10;10(12):e0144521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144521.
eCollection 2015.

Oral Administration of 4-Hydroxy-3-Methoxycinnamaldehyde Attenuates Atopic
Dermatitis by Inhibiting T Cell and Keratinocyte Activation.

Lee HS(1), Choi EJ(2), Choi H(2), Lee KS(1), Kim HR(1), Na BR(1), Kwon MS(1),
Jeong GS(3), Choi HG(4), Choi EY(5), Jun CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Immune Synapse Research Center and Cell Dynamics
Research Center, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic
of Korea. (2)Division of Sport Science, College of Natural Sciences, Konkuk
University, Chungju, Republic of Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung
University, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (4)College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam
University, Gyeongsan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a skin condition caused by an imbalance of distinct
subsets of T helper cells. Previously, we showed that
4-hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamaldehyde (4H3MC) inhibits T cell activation but does not
induce apoptosis. Here, we examined the mechanism underlying the inhibitory
effect of 4H3MC on AD both in vivo and in vitro. We sought to test the
pharmacological effects of 4H3MC using a mouse model of 2,
4-'2,4-dinitrocholorobenzene' (DNCB)- and mite-induced AD. Also, we determined
whether 4H3MC affects T cell differentiation and proliferation. Oral
administration of 4H3MC attenuated the symptoms of DNCB- and mite-induced AD,
including increased ear thickness, serum IgE levels, immune cell infiltration
into inflammatory lesions, and pathogenic cytokine expression in ear tissues. In 
vitro, 4H3MC blocked T cell differentiation into Th1 and Th2 subtypes, as
reflected by suppression of T-bet and GATA3, which are key transcription factors 
involved in T cell differentiation. In addition, 4H3MC downregulated T cell
proliferation during Th1 and Th2 differentiation and keratinocyte activation.
Collectively, these findings suggest that 4H3MC ameliorates AD symptoms by
modulating the functions of effector T cells and keratinocytes.

PMCID: PMC4675532
PMID: 26656486  [PubMed - in process]


61. Biomark Insights. 2015 Nov 30;10:103-12. doi: 10.4137/BMI.S30559. eCollection
2015.

High Expression of Three-Gene Signature Improves Prediction of Relapse-Free
Survival in Estrogen Receptor-Positive and Node-Positive Breast Tumors.

Thakkar A(1), Raj H(2), Ravishankar(2), Muthuvelan B(3), Balakrishnan A(4),
Padigaru M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Piramal Life Sciences Ltd, Nirlon Complex, Goregaon (E), Mumbai, India. ;
Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA. (2)Apollo Speciality
Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. (3)Vellore Institute of Technology
University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. (4)Piramal Life Sciences Ltd, Nirlon
Complex, Goregaon (E), Mumbai, India.

The objective of the present study was to validate prognostic gene signature for 
estrogen receptor alpha-positive (ER03B1+) and lymph node (+) breast cancer for
improved selection of patients for adjuvant therapy. In our previous study, we
identified a group of seven genes (GATA3, NTN4, SLC7A8, ENPP1, MLPH, LAMB2, and
PLAT) that show elevated messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels in ERa (+) breast
cancer patient samples. The prognostic values of these genes were evaluated using
gene expression data from three public data sets of breast cancer patients (n =
395). Analysis of ERa (+) breast cancer cohort (n = 195) showed high expression
of GATA3, NTN4, and MLPH genes significantly associated with longer relapse-free 
survival (RFS). Next cohort of ERa (+) and node (+) samples (n = 109) revealed
high mRNA expression of GATA3, SLC7A8, and MLPH significantly associated with
longer RFS. Multivariate analysis of combined three-gene signature for ERa (+)
cohort, and ERa (+) and node (+) cohorts showed better hazard ratio than
individual genes. The validated three-gene signature sets for ERa (+) cohort, and
ERa (+) and node (+) cohort may have potential clinical utility since they
demonstrated predictive and prognostic ability in three independent public data
sets.

PMCID: PMC4666521
PMID: 26648682  [PubMed]


62. Int J Oncol. 2016 Feb;48(2):493-505. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3278. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Treatment with cyclophosphamide supported by various dendritic cell-based
vaccines induces diversification in CD4+ T cell response against MC38 colon
carcinoma.

Wojas-Turek J(1), Szczygiel A(1), Kicielinska J(1), Rossowska J(1), Piasecki
E(1), Pajtasz-Piasecka E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish
Academy of Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.

The present study shows that an application of cyclophosphamide (CY) supported by
dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccines affected differentiation of the activity of
CD4+ T cell subpopulations accompanied by an alteration in CD8+ cell number.
Vaccines were composed of bone marrow-derived DCs activated with tumor cell
lysate (BM-DC/TAgTNF-a) and/or genetically modified DCs of JAWS II line
(JAWS II/Neo or JAWS II/IL-2 cells). Compared to untreated or CY-treated mice,
the combined treatment of MC38 colon carcinoma-bearing mice resulted in
significant tumor growth inhibition associated with an increase in influx of CD4+
and CD8+ T cells into tumor tissue. Whereas, the division of these cell
population in spleen was not observed. Depending on the nature of DC-based
vaccines and number of their applications, both tumor infiltrating cells and
spleen cells were able to produce various amount of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and IL-10 after
mitogenic ex vivo stimulation. The administration of CY followed by
BM-DC/TAgTNF-a and genetically modified JAWS II cells, increased the percentage
of CD4+T-bet+ and CD4+GATA3+ cells and decreased the percentage of CD4+ROR<U+03B3>t+ and
CD4+FoxP3+ lymphocytes. However, the most intensive response against tumor was
noted after the ternary treatment with CY + BM-DC/TAgTNF-a + JAWS II/IL-2 cells. 
Thus, the administration of various DC-based vaccines was responsible for
generation of the diversified antitumor response. These findings demonstrate that
the determination of the size of particular CD4+ T cell subpopulations may become
a prognostic factor and be the basis for future development of anticancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4725454
PMID: 26648160  [PubMed - in process]


63. Gene Expr. 2015;16(4):163-8. doi: 10.3727/105221615X14399878166113.

GATA3 in Breast Cancer: Tumor Suppressor or Oncogene?

Takaku M(1), Grimm SA, Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of
Environmental Health Science, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

GATA3 is a highly conserved, essential transcription factor expressed in a number
of tissues, including the mammary gland. GATA3 expression is required for normal 
development of the mammary gland where it is estimated to be the most abundant
transcription factor in luminal epithelial cells. In breast cancer, GATA3
expression is highly correlated with the luminal transcriptional program. Recent 
genomic analysis of human breast cancers has revealed high-frequency mutation in 
GATA3 in luminal tumors, suggesting "driver" function(s). Here we discuss
mutation of GATA3 in breast cancer and the potential mechanism(s) by which
mutation may lead to a growth advantage in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4758516
PMID: 26637396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Lab. 2015;61(9):1171-8.

BMP4: a Possible Key Factor in Differentiation of Auditory Neuron-Like Cells from
Bone-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells.

Peng T, Zhu G, Dong Y, Zeng J, Li W, Guo W, Chen Y, Duan M, Hocher B, Xie D.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that BMP4 may play an important part in
the development of auditory neurons (ANs), which are degenerated in sensorineural
hearing loss. However, whether BMP4 can promote sensory fate specification from
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) is unknown so far.
METHODS: MSCs isolated from Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were confirmed by expression
of MSC markers using flow cytometry and adipogenesis/osteogenesis using
differentiation assays. MSCs treated with a complex of neurotrophic factors (BMP4
group and non-BMP4 group) were induced into auditory neuron-like cells, then the 
differences between the two groups were analyzed in morphological observation,
cell growth curve, qRT-PCR, and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Flow cytometric analysis showed that the isolated cells expressed
typical MSC surface markers. After adipogenic and osteogenic induction, the cells
were stained by oil red O and Alizarin Red. The neuronal induced cells were in
the growth plateau and had special forms of neurons. In the presence of BMP4, the
inner ear genes NF-M, Neurog1, GluR4, NeuroD, Calretinin, NeuN, Tau, and GATA3
were up-regulated in MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: MSCs have the capacity to differentiate into auditory neuron-like
cells in vitro. As an effective inducer, BMP4 may play a key role in
transdifferentiation.

PMID: 26634236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Molecules. 2015 Dec 3;20(12):21584-96. doi: 10.3390/molecules201219788.

Oral Administration of Achyranthis radix Extract Prevents TMA-induced Allergic
Contact Dermatitis by Regulating Th2 Cytokine and Chemokine Production in Vivo.

Jung SK(1,)(2), Choi DW(3,)(4), Kwon DA(5), Kim MJ(6), Seong KS(7), Shon
DH(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Nutraceuticals for Metabolic Syndrome, Korea Food Research
Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea. skjung@kfri.re.kr. (2)Food Biotechnology
Program, Korea University of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34113, Korea.
skjung@kfri.re.kr. (3)Research Group of Nutraceuticals for Metabolic Syndrome,
Korea Food Research Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea. choidw19@gmail.com. (4)Food
Biotechnology Program, Korea University of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34113,
Korea. choidw19@gmail.com. (5)Research Group of Nutraceuticals for Metabolic
Syndrome, Korea Food Research Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea.
ksloveda@naver.com. (6)Research Group of Metabolic Mechanism, Korea Food Research
Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea. kmj@kfri.re.kr. (7)Research Group of
Nutraceuticals for Metabolic Syndrome, Korea Food Research Institute, Seongnam
13539, Korea. kiseung@kfri.re.kr. (8)Research Group of Nutraceuticals for
Metabolic Syndrome, Korea Food Research Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea.
dhs95@kfri.re.kr. (9)Food Biotechnology Program, Korea University of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon 34113, Korea. dhs95@kfri.re.kr.

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) remains a major skin disease in many countries,
necessitating the discovery of novel and effective anti-ACD agents. In this
study, we investigated the preventive effects of Achyranthis radix extract (AcRE)
on trimellitic anhydride (TMA)-induced dermatitis and the potential mechanism of 
action involved. Oral administration of AcRE and prednisolone (PS) significantly 
suppressed TMA-induced increases in ear and epidermal thickness, and IgE
expression. In addition, abnormal expression of IL-1ß and TNF-a protein and mRNA 
was also significantly attenuated by oral administration of AcRE. Treatment with 
AcRE also significantly suppressed TMA-induced IL-4 and IL-13 cytokines and mRNA 
expression in vivo. Moreover, AcRE strongly suppressed TMA-induced IL-4 and IL-5 
production in draining lymph nodes, as well as OVA-induced IL-4 and IL-5
expression in primary cultured splenocytes. Interestingly, AcRE suppressed
IL-4-induced STAT6 phosphorylation in both primary cultured splenocytes and HaCaT
cells, and TMA-induced GATA3 mRNA expression ex vivo. AcRE also suppressed
TMA-mediated CCL11 and IL-4-induced CCL26 mRNA expression and infiltration of
CCR3 positive cells. The major compounds from AcRE were identified as gentisic
acid (0.64 ± 0.2 µg/g dry weight of AcRE), protocatechuic acid (2.69 ± 0.1 µg/g
dry weight of AcRE), 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (5.59 ± 0.3 µg/g dry weight of AcRE), 
caffeic acid (4.21 ± 0.1 µg/g dry weight of AcRE), and ferulic acid (14.78 ± 0.4 
± 0.3 µg/g dry weight of AcRE). Taken together, these results suggest that AcRE
has potential for development as an agent to prevent and treat allergic contact
dermatitis.

PMID: 26633349  [PubMed - in process]


66. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Dec 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Histopathology of Placenta Creta: Chorionic Villi Intrusion into Myometrial
Vascular Spaces and Extravillous Trophoblast Proliferation are Frequent and
Specific Findings With Implications on Diagnosis and Pathogenesis.

Parra-Herran C(1), Djordjevic B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital and
Eastern Ontario Regional Laboratory Association, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.

Placenta creta is characterized by invasion of placental villi into the
myometrium in the setting of a dysfunctional or absent decidua. Histopathologic
diagnosis of placenta creta is important, particularly in cases of hysterectomy
because of unanticipated intractable postpartum hemorrhage. Previous studies have
documented a higher amount and depth of myometrial infiltration by the
implantation site intermediate trophoblast compared with controls. In addition,
we have anecdotally observed chorionic villi in myometrial vascular spaces in
specimens with placenta creta. The aim of this study was to explore the
prevalence and specificity of these features. Sixty-one postpartum
hysterectomies, 44 with placenta creta and 17 without were reviewed. Villous
intrusion into vascular spaces was recorded. Using immunohistochemistry for
GATA3, the amount of intermediate trophoblast (number of positive cells in five
40× fields) and depth of trophoblast myometrial infiltration were assessed. Mean 
gestational ages of the creta group (34.4 yr; range, 20-43 yr) and control group 
(35 yr; range, 25-51 yr) were comparable. Presence of chorionic villi in
myometrial vascular spaces was frequent in placenta creta: 31/44 versus 1/17
controls (70.4% vs. 5.8%, P<0.0001). This finding was more common in the percreta
(87.5%) and increta (84%) than in the accreta (27.2%, P=0.0008). Mean depth of
trophoblast myometrial invasion was greater in cretas (47.9%) than in controls
(14.5%, P=0.004). Likewise, mean distance of deepest trophoblast to serosa was
shorter in the cretas (7.3 mm) than in controls (23.8 mm, P<0.0001). These
differences were, however, were attributable to placentas increta and percreta.
When only accretas and controls were compared, the myometrial depth of
trophoblast was similar. The mean intermediate trophoblast cell count in the
placental bed was greater in cretas (664) than in controls (288, P<0.0001). Such 
difference was seen in all creta cases despite the type (accreta 639, increta
676, percreta 661). A trophoblast count of =100 cells/high-power field was seen
in 75.8% of cretas and 11.1% of controls (P=0.0009). For the first time, we
document the finding of chorionic villi intrusion into myometrial vascular
spaces, which is highly specific of placenta creta. In addition, assessment of
the amount of intermediate trophoblast using GATA3 immunohistochemistry can
assist in the diagnosis. We hypothesize that placental invasion in placenta creta
is due, at least partially, to transformation of low-resistance myometrial
vessels leading to subsequent protrusion of villi into their lumens, in the
context of absent decidua.

PMID: 26630223  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


67. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Oct;7(10):1732-41. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.10.18.

High mobility group box 1: a novel mediator of Th2-type response-induced airway
inflammation of acute allergic asthma.

Ma L(1), Zeng J(1), Mo B(1), Wang C(1), Huang J(1), Sun Y(1), Yu Y(1), Liu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Affiliated Hospital of Guilin
Medical University, Guilin 541001, China ; 2 Institute of Respiratory Diseases,
Guilin Medical University, Guilin 541001, China ; 3 Key Laboratory of Respiratory
Diseases of Colleges and Universities Affiliated Education Department of Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, Guilin 541001, China ; 4 Department of Respiratory
Medicine, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011,
China.

BACKGROUND: High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is an inflammatory mediator
involved into the advanced stage of systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS), and is over-expressed in bacterial sepsis and hemorrhagic shock.
Recently, it has been found that the HMGB1 was abnormally expressed in induced
sputum and plasma of asthmatic patients. However, the precise role of HMGB1 in
the acute allergic asthma is unclear. Therefore, we aim to investigate the role
HMGB1 in regulating airway inflammation of acute allergic asthma and its possible
mechanism in this study.
METHODS: Forty-eight BALB/c female mice were randomly divided into four groups:
control group (Control), asthma group (Asthma), HMGB1 group (HMGB1) and
anti-HMGB1 (HMGB1 monoclonal antibody of mice) group (Anti-HMGB1). Acute allergic
asthma mice models were established by ovalbumin (OVA)-challenge. Then, we
measured the levels of HMGB1 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and lung
tissue of mice. Finally, after exogenous HMGB1 and/or anti-HMGB1 administration, 
pulmonary function test, histological analysis, Western blot, cytological
analysis and ELISA assay were performed to explore the effect of HMGB1 in acute
allergic asthma.
RESULTS: The levels of HMGB1 in BALF and lung tissue and the expression of HMGB1 
protein in the lung tissue of asthma group were significantly higher than those
in control group, respectively (P<0.01). Moreover, the HMGB1 group was showed an 
increased mucus secretion and infiltration of eosinophils and neutrophils in the 
airway of asthma mice, and a decrease of pulmonary function, compared to control 
group (P<0.01, respectively). Meanwhile, exogenous HMGB1 could increase the
levels of IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-17, whereas could reduce the IFN-<U+03B3> in the
BALF and lung tissue (P<0.05, respectively). Exogenous HMGB1 could enhance GATA3 
expression of Th2 cells and attenuate the T-bet expression of Th1 cells (P<0.05, 
respectively), which could be abrogated after inhibiting HMGB1.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGB1 could aggravate eosinophilic inflammation in the airway of
acute allergic asthma through inducing a dominance of Th2-type response and
promoting the neutrophilic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4635276
PMID: 26623095  [PubMed]


68. J Laryngol Otol. 2016 Jan;130(1):89-94. doi: 10.1017/S0022215115003096. Epub 2015
Dec 1.

Immune imbalance of regulatory T/type 2 helper cells in the pathogenesis of
allergic rhinitis in children.

Sun R(1), Tang XY(2), Yang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Examination,First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University,Chongqing,China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology,Children's
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,Chongqing,China.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of regulatory T/type 2 helper cell-mediated
immune imbalance in the pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis and examine the
association between clinical severity and regulatory T/type 2 helper
cell-mediated immune imbalance.
METHODS: Levels of interleukins 4 and 5 and transforming growth factor ß1, and
expression of FOXP3 and GATA3 (which are functionally related to regulatory T and
type 2 helper cells, respectively), were evaluated in 46 allergic rhinitis
patients and 42 healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Compared to controls, allergic rhinitis patients showed significantly
higher interleukin 4 and 5 levels, but lower transforming growth factor ß1
levels. Furthermore, FOXP3 messenger RNA expression was lower in allergic
rhinitis patients, while GATA3 messenger RNA and protein expression was
significantly higher. Regulatory T/type 2 helper cell ratio was inversely
correlated with clinical symptom scores.
CONCLUSION: Regulatory T/type 2 helper cell immune imbalance may contribute to
allergic rhinitis development. These findings provide a new insight into disease 
pathogenesis and potential therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 26620633  [PubMed - in process]


69. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2015 Sep-Oct;61(5):474-83. doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.61.05.474.

Somatic mutations in breast and serous ovarian cancer young patients: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Encinas G(1), Maistro S(2), Pasini FS(3), Katayama ML(3), Brentani MM(3), de Bock
GH(4), Folgueira MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Oncology, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, 
FM, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)ICESP, FM, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Department of Epidemiology, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: our aim was to evaluate whether somatic mutations in five genes were
associated with an early age at presentation of breast cancer (BC) or serous
ovarian cancer (SOC).
METHODS: COSMIC database was searched for the five most frequent somatic
mutations in BC and SOC. A systematic review of PubMed was performed. Young age
for BC and SOC patients was set at = 35 and = 40 years, respectively. Age groups 
were also classified in < 30 years and every 10 years thereafter.
RESULTS: twenty six (1,980 patients, 111 younger) and 16 studies (598, 41
younger), were analyzed for BC and SOC, respectively. In BC, PIK3CA wild type
tumor was associated with early onset, not confirmed in binary regression with
estrogen receptor (ER) status. In HER2-negative tumors, there was increased
frequency of PIK3CA somatic mutation in older age groups; in ER-positive tumors, 
there was a trend towards an increased frequency of PIK3CA somatic mutation in
older age groups. TP53 somatic mutation was described in 20% of tumors from both 
younger and older patients; PTEN, CDH1 and GATA3 somatic mutation was
investigated only in 16 patients and PTEN mutation was detected in one of them.
In SOC, TP53 somatic mutation was rather common, detected in more than 50% of
tumors, however, more frequently in older patients.
CONCLUSION: frequency of somatic mutations in specific genes was not associated
with early-onset breast cancer. Although very common in patients with serous
ovarian cancer diagnosed at all ages, TP53 mutation was more frequently detected 
in older women.

PMID: 26603012  [PubMed - in process]


70. Ann Pathol. 2015 Dec;35(6):496-501. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 
Nov 17.

[Metastatic lymph node collision of a prostatic adenocarcinoma and an urothelial 
carcinoma and review of the literature].

[Article in French]

Junca A(1), Frouin E(2), Irani J(3), Fromont G(4), Levillain P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, CHU de Poitiers, 2, rue de
la Milétrie, 86021 Poitiers cedex, France. Electronic address:
audelaure.junca@yahoo.fr. (2)Service d'anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques,
CHU de Poitiers, 2, rue de la Milétrie, 86021 Poitiers cedex, France. (3)Service 
d'urologie, CHU de Poitiers, 86021 Poitiers, France. (4)Service d'anatomie et de 
cytologie pathologiques, CHRU de Bretonneau, 37044 Tours, France.

INTRODUCTION: Tumor collision is the encounter of two tumors from two different
topographical sites. Cases of metastatic lymph node collision are exceptional. We
report the case of a metastatic lymph node collision of an urothelial carcinoma
and a prostatic adenocarcinoma.
OBSERVATION: A 61-year-old man was hospitalized for a right nephroureterectomy
with peri-ureteral lymph node dissection. He was followed since 2004 for
prostatic adenocarcinoma and treated with radical prostatectomy then radiation
therapy 4 years later due to a new increase of PSA. In the follow-up, an
urothelial carcinoma of the lower right ureter was discovered in 2014.
Histological analysis of a peri-ureteral lymph node showed a double metastasis of
urothelial and prostatic origin. The prostatic adenocarcinoma was composed of
acinar and ductal subtypes. Immunohistochemical study including CK7, CK20, PSA,
GATA3, P63 antibodies confirmed the distinct phenotype of the 2 tumors.
DISCUSSION: Metastatic collision of urothelial carcinoma and prostatic
adenocarcinoma has been reported in 4 cases only. Our review of literature shows 
that prostatic adenocarcinoma always precedes the urothelial carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical study, when carried out for distinguishing both tumors,
should include CK7, CK20 and PSA. GATA3, androgen receptor and P63 could be added
in a second time.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 26597142  [PubMed - in process]


71. Am J Dermatopathol. 2015 Dec;37(12):885-91. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000306.

GATA3 Expression in Normal Skin and in Benign and Malignant Epidermal and
Cutaneous Adnexal Neoplasms.

Mertens RB(1), de Peralta-Venturina MN, Balzer BL, Frishberg DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA.

Initial investigations reported GATA3 to be a sensitive and relatively specific
marker for mammary and urothelial carcinomas. Recently, GATA3 expression has been
described in several other epithelial tumors. However, there has been only
limited investigation of GATA3 expression in cutaneous epithelial tumors. The
objective of this study was to examine the immunohistochemical expression of
GATA3 in a wide variety of cutaneous epithelial neoplasms. GATA3 expression was
evaluated in 99 benign and 63 malignant cutaneous epithelial tumors. GATA3 was
consistently and usually strongly expressed in clear cell acanthoma,
trichofolliculoma, trichoepithelioma, trichilemmoma, sebaceous adenoma,
sebaceoma, apocrine hidrocystoma, apocrine tubular papillary adenoma, hidradenoma
papilliferum, and syringocystadenoma papilliferum. Hidradenomas exhibited
variable positive staining. Most poromas, syringomas, chondroid syringomas,
cylindromas, and spiradenomas were negative or only focally and weakly positive. 
Focal staining was present in all pilomatrixomas. Thirteen of 14 basal cell
carcinomas, 21 of 24 squamous carcinomas, and all 6 sebaceous carcinomas
exhibited positive staining. The 1 apocrine carcinoma, both mucinous carcinomas, 
and 2 of 3 microcystic adnexal carcinomas also exhibited positive staining,
whereas the 1 eccrine porocarcinoma and the 1 adenoid cystic carcinoma were
negative. One of 11 Merkel cell carcinomas exhibited focal weak staining. Our
findings demonstrate that GATA3 is expressed in a wide variety of benign and
malignant cutaneous epithelial neoplasms. In addition to carcinomas of breast and
urothelial origin and other more recently described GATA3-positive tumors, the
differential diagnosis of a metastatic tumor of unknown primary origin that
expresses GATA3 should also include a carcinoma of cutaneous epithelial origin.

PMID: 26595821  [PubMed - in process]


72. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2015 Nov 19;11:33. doi: 10.1186/s13223-015-0100-2.
eCollection 2015.

T-cell phenotypes in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps in Japanese
patients.

Baba S(1), Kagoya R(2), Kondo K(2), Suzukawa M(3), Ohta K(3), Yamasoba T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655 Japan 
; Department of Otolaryngology, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
113-8655 Japan. (3)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Department
of Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan ;
National Hospital Organization Tokyo National Hospital, Kiyose, Tokyo Japan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps is characterized by local
inflammation and is categorized into two subtypes in Japan: eosinophilic chronic 
rhinosinusitis, and non-eosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis. The objective of
this study was to investigate the expression of key transcription factors for
Treg and Th1/Th2/Th17 cells, in relation to the mRNA expression of representative
cytokines in these two subtypes of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
METHODS: The expression of forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), T-box transcription factor
(T-bet), GATA3, retinoid acid-related orphan receptor C (RORc), the suppressive
cytokines TGF-ß1 and IL-10, and Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13,
IL-17) were analyzed by means of RT-PCR in eosinophilic polyps. Eosinophilic
polyps were defined as having an eosinophil count of more than 50 per microscopic
field (×400 magnification) using five fields located in the subepithelial area of
the polyps, while the non-eosinophilic polyps and controls did not fulfill this
criteria. The numbers of T cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells and Treg were
histologically counted using sections that were immunostained for CD3, CD4, CD8, 
and FOXP3, respectively.
RESULTS: In eosinophilic polyps, we observed significantly fewer CD4+ T cells and
CD8+ T cells, and lower GATA3, RORc and IL-10 mRNA expression, but a
significantly higher IL-5, and IL-13 mRNA expression compared with controls,
whereas FOXP3 and T-bet mRNA expression were not significantly different compared
with controls. In non-eosinophilic polyps, FOXP3, IL-10, IL-17A, TGFß1 and IFN<U+03B3>
mRNA expression was significantly higher compared with controls, whereas IL-4, 5 
and 13 expression was not significantly different from controls.
CONCLUSION: We showed a reduction of GATA3 and RORc mRNA, low Treg-related
cytokines and elevated Th2 cytokine levels in eosinophilic chronic
rhinosinusitis, whereas we demonstrated the upregulation of Treg cells and
increases of Th1 and Th17 cytokines in non-eosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis in
the Japanese population. The different mRNA expression profiles of Treg and
Th1/Th2/Th17 signature transcription factors and cytokines between eosinophilic
chronic rhinosinusitis and non-eosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis suggests
heterogeneity in the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.

PMCID: PMC4653844
PMID: 26594227  [PubMed]


73. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Nov 18. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.110. [Epub ahead of print]

Interleukin-4 and interferon-<U+03B3> orchestrate an epithelial polarization in the
airways.

Zissler UM(1), Chaker AM(1,)(2), Effner R(1), Ulrich M(1,)(2), Guerth F(1),
Piontek G(2), Dietz K(1), Regn M(3), Knapp B(4), Theis FJ(4,)(5), Heine H(6),
Suttner K(1), Schmidt-Weber CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Allergy & Environment (ZAUM), Technical University of Munich and
Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Germany, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Medical School,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Medical School, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Computational Biology, Technical University of Munich and
Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich,
Germany. (5)Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching, 
Germany. (6)Division of Innate Immunity, Research Center Borstel, Airway Research
Center North (ARCN), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Borstel, Germany.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) are key effector cytokines for the 
differentiation of T helper type 1 and 2 (Th1 and Th2) cells. Both cytokines
induce fate-decisive transcription factors such as GATA3 and TBX21 that
antagonize the polarized development of opposite phenotypes by direct regulation 
of each other's expression along with many other target genes. Although it is
well established that mesenchymal cells directly respond to Th1 and Th2
cytokines, the nature of antagonistic differentiation programs in airway
epithelial cells is only partially understood. In this study, primary normal
human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEs) were exposed to IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3>, or both and
genome-wide transcriptome analysis was performed. The study uncovers an
antagonistic regulation pattern of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> in NHBEs, translating the
Th1/Th2 antagonism directly in epithelial gene regulation. IL-4- and
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced transcription factor hubs form clusters, present in
antagonistically and polarized gene regulation networks. Furthermore, the
IL-4-dependent induction of IL-24 observed in rhinitis patients was downregulated
by IFN-<U+03B3>, and therefore IL-24 represents a potential biomarker of allergic
inflammation and a Th2 polarized condition of the epithelium.Mucosal Immunology
advance online publication, 18 November 2015; doi:10.1038/mi.2015.110.

PMID: 26577568  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 17;10(11):e0143343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143343.
eCollection 2015.

Somatic Mutation Allelic Ratio Test Using ddPCR (SMART-ddPCR): An Accurate Method
for Assessment of Preferential Allelic Imbalance in Tumor DNA.

de Smith AJ(1), Walsh KM(2), Hansen HM(2), Endicott AA(1), Wiencke JK(2), Metayer
C(3), Wiemels JL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America. (2)Division of
Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America. (3)School of 
Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of
America.

The extent to which heritable genetic variants can affect tumor development has
yet to be fully elucidated. Tumor selection of single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) risk alleles, a phenomenon called preferential allelic imbalance (PAI), has
been demonstrated in some cancer types. We developed a novel application of
digital PCR termed Somatic Mutation Allelic Ratio Test using Droplet Digital PCR 
(SMART-ddPCR) for accurate assessment of tumor PAI, and have applied this method 
to test the hypothesis that heritable SNPs associated with childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) may demonstrate tumor PAI. These SNPs are located at
CDKN2A (rs3731217) and IKZF1 (rs4132601), genes frequently lost in ALL, and at
CEBPE (rs2239633), ARID5B (rs7089424), PIP4K2A (rs10764338), and GATA3
(rs3824662), genes located on chromosomes gained in high-hyperdiploid ALL. We
established thresholds of AI using constitutional DNA from SNP heterozygotes, and
subsequently measured allelic copy number in tumor DNA from 19-142 heterozygote
samples per SNP locus. We did not find significant tumor PAI at these loci,
though CDKN2A and IKZF1 SNPs showed a trend towards preferential selection of the
risk allele (p = 0.17 and p = 0.23, respectively). Using a genomic copy number
control ddPCR assay, we investigated somatic copy number alterations (SCNA)
underlying AI at CDKN2A and IKZF1, revealing a complex range of alterations
including homozygous and hemizygous deletions and copy-neutral loss of
heterozygosity, with varying degrees of clonality. Copy number estimates from
ddPCR showed high agreement with those from multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) assays. We demonstrate that SMART-ddPCR is a highly accurate
method for investigation of tumor PAI and for assessment of the somatic
alterations underlying AI. Furthermore, analysis of publicly available data from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas identified 16 recurrent SCNA loci that contain heritable 
cancer risk SNPs associated with a matching tumor type, and which represent
candidate PAI regions warranting further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4648491
PMID: 26575185  [PubMed - in process]


75. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2016 Jan;22(1):46-52. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000224.

Airway inflammation in asthma: key players beyond the Th2 pathway.

KleinJan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The Th2 pathway starts with the binding of IL-4 to the IL-4
receptor followed by the phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 6 and the activation of GATA3. The most important question relates 
to the sources of IL-4 and IL-4 related inflammation. Which cells other than Th2 
cells are responsible for airway inflammation in asthma?
RECENT FINDINGS: Accumulating data indicate that basophils contribute to
endothelium-related IL-4-dependent inflammation. There is also a dendritic
cell-related alternative for the induction of Th2 cells via Notch signalling.
GATA3 deoxyribozyme improves asthma that is not clearly related to T-cells. The
innate immune response in allergy is linked to mast cells, basophils, and the
innate lymphoid cell type 2 (ILC2). ILC2s respond to IL-25, IL-33, thymic stromal
lymphopoietin, and leukotrienes by producing IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. In addition
to all this inflammatory-cell-driven asthma, increasing evidence has emerged
relating to smooth muscle cell activation, the endothelial and epithelial barrier
functions, and improvements in the barrier function. The elevation of
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate because of the use of
phosphodiesterase inhibitors adds to the prevention of epithelial-endothelial
leakage, supports airway smooth muscle relaxation, and is immunosuppressive.
CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY: IL-4 is the predominant Th2 cell cytokine. Many more
cells, including eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and ILC2, contribute to the 
production of IL-4 in the airways. Epithelial cells and endothelial cells lose
barrier function in the context of allergic airway inflammation, and this could
be at least partially remedied by increasing the intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate levels through phosphodiesterase inhibition.

PMID: 26574718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Nov 11;7(313):313ra178. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad2722.

A validated gene regulatory network and GWAS identifies early regulators of T
cell-associated diseases.

Gustafsson M(1), Gawel DR(2), Alfredsson L(3), Baranzini S(4), Björkander J(5),
Blomgran R(6), Hellberg S(7), Eklund D(8), Ernerudh J(9), Kockum I(10),
Konstantinell A(11), Lahesmaa R(12), Lentini A(2), Liljenström HR(2), Mattson
L(2), Matussek A(5), Mellergård J(13), Mendez M(14), Olsson T(10), Pujana MA(15),
Rasool O(12), Serra-Musach J(15), Stenmarker M(5), Tripathi S(12), Viitala M(12),
Wang H(16), Zhang H(2), Nestor CE(2), Benson M(17).

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Individualised Medicine, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Division of Pediatrics, Linköping University, SE-581 83
Linköping, Sweden. Bioinformatics, Department of Physics, Chemistry, and Biology,
Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. mika.gustafsson@liu.se
mikael.benson@liu.se. (2)The Centre for Individualised Medicine, Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Pediatrics, Linköping University,
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. (3)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 77 Solna, Sweden. (4)Department of Neurology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (5)Futurum-Academy for Health and Care,
County Council of Jönköping, SE-551 85 Jönköping, Sweden. (6)Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Microbiology and Molecular
Medicine, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. (7)Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Unit of
Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping,
Sweden. (8)Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Linköping 
University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. (9)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Unit of Autoimmunity and 
Immune Regulation, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. Department 
of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Linköping University, SE-581 83 
Linköping, Sweden. (10)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Karolinska
Institutet and Centrum for Molecular Medicine, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)The Centre for Individualised Medicine, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Division of Pediatrics, Linköping University, SE-581 83
Linköping, Sweden. Department of Medical Biology, The Arctic University of
Norway, NO-9037 Tromsø, Norway. (12)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of
Turku and Åbo Akademi University, FI-20520 Turku, Finland. (13)Department of
Neurology and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping
University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. (14)Laboratorio de Investigación en
Enfermedades Infecciosas, LID, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima
PE-15102, Peru. (15)Program Against Cancer Therapeutic Resistance (ProCURE),
Cancer and Systems Biology Unit, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL,
L'Hospitalet del Llobregat, ES-08908 Barcelona, Spain. (16)The Centre for
Individualised Medicine, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Division of Pediatrics, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden.
Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(17)The Centre for Individualised Medicine, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Division of Pediatrics, Linköping University, SE-581 83
Linköping, Sweden. mika.gustafsson@liu.se mikael.benson@liu.se.

Early regulators of disease may increase understanding of disease mechanisms and 
serve as markers for presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment. However, early
regulators are difficult to identify because patients generally present after
they are symptomatic. We hypothesized that early regulators of T cell-associated 
diseases could be found by identifying upstream transcription factors (TFs) in T 
cell differentiation and by prioritizing hub TFs that were enriched for
disease-associated polymorphisms. A gene regulatory network (GRN) was constructed
by time series profiling of the transcriptomes and methylomes of human CD4(+) T
cells during in vitro differentiation into four helper T cell lineages, in
combination with sequence-based TF binding predictions. The TFs GATA3, MAF, and
MYB were identified as early regulators and validated by ChIP-seq (chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing) and small interfering RNA knockdowns.
Differential mRNA expression of the TFs and their targets in T cell-associated
diseases supports their clinical relevance. To directly test if the TFs were
altered early in disease, T cells from patients with two T cell-mediated
diseases, multiple sclerosis and seasonal allergic rhinitis, were analyzed.
Strikingly, the TFs were differentially expressed during asymptomatic stages of
both diseases, whereas their targets showed altered expression during symptomatic
stages. This analytical strategy to identify early regulators of disease by
combining GRNs with genome-wide association studies may be generally applicable
for functional and clinical studies of early disease development.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26560356  [PubMed - in process]


77. Nature. 2015 Dec 17;528(7582):418-21. doi: 10.1038/nature15540. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Genetic predisposition to neuroblastoma mediated by a LMO1 super-enhancer
polymorphism.

Oldridge DA(1,)(2), Wood AC(3), Weichert-Leahey N(4,)(5), Crimmins I(1), Sussman 
R(1), Winter C(1), McDaniel LD(1), Diamond M(1), Hart LS(1), Zhu S(6), Durbin
AD(4,)(5), Abraham BJ(7), Anders L(7), Tian L(8), Zhang S(9), Wei JS(9), Khan
J(9), Bramlett K(10), Rahman N(11), Capasso M(12,)(13), Iolascon A(12,)(13),
Gerhard DS(14), Guidry Auvil JM(14), Young RA(7), Hakonarson H(8,)(15), Diskin
SJ(1,)(15,)(16), Look AT(4,)(5), Maris JM(1,)(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (2)Medical
Scientist Training Program, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland, Auckland, Auckland Region 1142,
New Zealand. (4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. (5)Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. (7)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
and MIT, Boston, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (8)Center for Applied Genomics,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(9)Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA. (10)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austin, Texas 78744, USA. (11)The
Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK. (12)University of Naples
Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy. (13)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, 80131
Naples, Italy. (14)Office of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (15)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(16)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

Neuroblastoma is a paediatric malignancy that typically arises in early
childhood, and is derived from the developing sympathetic nervous system.
Clinical phenotypes range from localized tumours with excellent outcomes to
widely metastatic disease in which long-term survival is approximately 40%
despite intensive therapy. A previous genome-wide association study identified
common polymorphisms at the LMO1 gene locus that are highly associated with
neuroblastoma susceptibility and oncogenic addiction to LMO1 in the tumour cells.
Here we investigate the causal DNA variant at this locus and the mechanism by
which it leads to neuroblastoma tumorigenesis. We first imputed all possible
genotypes across the LMO1 locus and then mapped highly associated single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) to areas of chromatin accessibility, evolutionary 
conservation and transcription factor binding sites. We show that SNP rs2168101
G>T is the most highly associated variant (combined P<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.47<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-29), odds
ratio 0.65, 95% confidence interval 0.60-0.70), and resides in a super-enhancer
defined by extensive acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 within the first intron 
of LMO1. The ancestral G allele that is associated with tumour formation resides 
in a conserved GATA transcription factor binding motif. We show that the newly
evolved protective TATA allele is associated with decreased total LMO1 expression
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028) in neuroblastoma primary tumours, and ablates GATA3 binding
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). We demonstrate allelic imbalance favouring the G-containing strand 
in tumours heterozygous for this SNP, as demonstrated both by RNA sequencing
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001) and reporter assays (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). These findings indicate that a
recently evolved polymorphism within a super-enhancer element in the first intron
of LMO1 influences neuroblastoma susceptibility through differential GATA
transcription factor binding and direct modulation of LMO1 expression in cis, and
this leads to an oncogenic dependency in tumour cells.

PMCID: PMC4775078
PMID: 26560027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 6. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5742. [Epub ahead of print]

Dysregulation of the TOX-RUNX3 pathway in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Dulmage BO(1), Akilov O(1), Vu JR(1), Falo LD(1), Geskin LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Studies have examined gene expression changes in Sézary syndrome (SS), but
disease pathogenesis remains largely unknown, and diagnosis and treatment are
difficult. TOX is a transcription factor involved in CD4+ T-cell development with
downstream effects on RUNX3, a known tumor suppressor gene. We sought to identify
genes involved in SS disease pathogenesis with the potential to enable diagnosis 
and treatment. We utilized previously reported transcriptome sequencing data to
construct a list of candidate genes, which was narrowed using pathway analysis.
qRT-PCR confirmed TOX upregulation (>7 fold increase) in SS (n = 5), as well as
two established markers, PLS3 and KIRD3DL2. We also evaluated expression of
members of the TOX-RUNX3 pathway and confirmed downregulation of RUNX3 (0.59 fold
decrease) and upregulation of GATA3 (2 fold increase). Moreover, TOX and RUNX3
expression were significantly inversely proportional. Using siRNA to suppress
TOX, we demonstrated that TOX knockdown rescues RUNX3 expression and reduces cell
viability. We evaluated TOX protein expression in paraffin-embedded skin biopsies
with immunohistochemistry, showing nuclear staining of CTCL infiltrates,
suggesting it is a candidate diagnostic biomarker. Further studies validating our
findings and evaluating the TOX-RUNX3 pathway and the role of TOX as a disease
marker and therapeutic target are warranted.

PMID: 26556870  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


79. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Nov 11. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.106. [Epub ahead of print]

The IL-33 receptor (ST2) regulates early IL-13 production in fungus-induced
allergic airway inflammation.

Piehler D(1), Eschke M(1), Schulze B(1), Protschka M(1), Müller U(1), Grahnert
A(1), Richter T(1), Heyen L(1), Köhler G(2), Brombacher F(3), Alber G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology/Molecular Pathogenesis, Center for Biotechnology and
Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Fulda gAG, Fulda, Germany.
(3)International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Cape Town
Component & SAMRC, UCT, IDM, Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa.

Allergic airway inflammation (AAI) in response to environmental antigens is an
increasing medical problem, especially in the Western world. Type 2 interleukins 
(IL) are central in the pathological response but their importance and cellular
source(s) often rely on the particular allergen. Here, we highlight the cellular 
sources and regulation of the prototypic type 2 cytokine, IL-13, during the
establishment of AAI in a fungal infection model using Cryptococcus neoformans.
IL-13 reporter mice revealed a rapid onset of IL-13 competence within innate
lymphoid cells type 2 (ILC2) and IL-33R(+) T helper (Th) cells. ILC2 showed
IL-33-dependent proliferation upon infection and significant IL-13 production. Th
cells essentially required IL-33 to become either GATA3(+) or GATA3(+)/Foxp3(+)
hybrids. GATA3(+) Th cells almost exclusively contributed to IL-13 production but
hybrid GATA3(+)/Foxp3(+) Th cells did not. In addition, alveolar macrophages
upregulated the IL-33R and subsequently acquired a phenotype of alternative
activation (Ym1(+), FIZZ1(+), and arginase-1(+)) linked to type 2 immunity.
Absence of adaptive immunity in rag2(-/-) mice resulted in attenuated AAI,
revealing the need for Th2 cells for full AAI development. Taken together, in
pulmonary cryptococcosis ILC2 and GATA3(+) Th2 cells produce early IL-13 largely 
IL-33R-dependent, thereby promoting goblet cell metaplasia, pulmonary
eosinophilia, and alternative activation of alveolar macrophages.Mucosal
Immunology advance online publication 11 November 2015. doi:10.1038/mi.2015.106.

PMID: 26555705  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


80. Hum Pathol. 2016 Jan;47(1):132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.014. Epub 2015
Sep 30.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the female urethra: a contemporary
clinicopathologic analysis.

Harari SE(1), Cheng L(2), Osunkoya AO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
30322. (2)Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202. (3)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30322; Department of Urology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30322; Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, 30322;
Department of Pathology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Atlanta, GA, 30033.
Electronic address: adeboye.osunkoya@emory.edu.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the female urethra is very rare and may lead
to both diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Although primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma of the prostate and prostatic urethra has been well characterized 
in men, this is the largest clinicopathologic study to date of primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma of the female urethra. A search was made through the files of 2
major academic institutions for cases of confirmed primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma arising from the female urethra. Tumors arising from adjacent
organs were excluded both clinically and pathologically in all cases. Five cases 
were identified. The mean patient age was 67 years (range, 54-74 years). All
patients presented with a polypoid/papillary mass arising from the urethra.
Pathologic stages were as follows: pT4 3 (60%) of 5 cases; pT3 1 (20%) of 5
cases, and pT2 1 (20%) of 5 cases. Immunohistochemical stains for GATA3, p63,
CK7, CK20, CDX2, ER, PAX8, and ß-catenin were performed on all cases.
Immunohistochemical stains were positive in the tumor cells for CDX2 in 4/5 (80%)
cases; focally positive for CK20 in 4/5 (80%) cases; focally positive for CK7 in 
4/5 cases (80%); and negative for p63, GATA3, ER, PAX8 and ß-catenin in all
cases. In the 4 patients with available follow-up data, mean follow-up was 25
months (range, 4-54 months). It is critical for pathologists to be aware of this 
entity in light of potential diagnostic pitfalls and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26552875  [PubMed - in process]


81. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2015 Sep;62(3):275-85. doi: 10.1556/030.62.2015.3.5.

Study of Th1/Th2 balance in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with
alopecia areata.

Sadeghi S(1), Sanati MH(1), Taghizadeh M(2), Mansouri P(3), Jadali Z(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology , Tehran , Iran. (2)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute ,
Karaj , Iran. (3)Skin and Stem Cell Research Center, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences , Tehran , Iran. (4)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran.

Alopecia areata represents an autoimmune pathological process driven primarily by
cellular aberrations contained within the immune system, which activates various 
humoral and cellular elements of the immune response. The aim of this study was
to determine the mRNA expression levels of T-bet and GATA-3 as potential inducers
of T helper (Th)1 and Th2 differentiation, respectively, as well as Th1(IFN-<U+03B3>)
and Th2(IL-4) cytokine mRNA expression in patients with alopecia areata. Using
real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR), the relative amounts of T-bet,
GATA-3, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4 mRNA transcripts were determined in PBMCs from 20 Iranian
patients with alopecia areata and compared with those of 20 healthy control
subjects. In comparison with the normal group, T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA expression
levels were significantly up-regulated in the alopecia areata patients, while
GATA-3 and IL-4 mRNA expression levels were down-regulated. Notably, positive
correlation (P < 0.05) was found between IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet levels in patients and
controls. In addition, significant positive correlations existed between GATA-3
and IL-4 (P < 0.05). These results indicate that a Th1/Th2 imbalance exists in
alopecia areata, and it may be implicated in the pathogenesis of disease.

PMID: 26551570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 1;409(1):139-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.09.022. Epub 2015
Nov 6.

The mouse Foxi3 transcription factor is necessary for the development of
posterior placodes.

Birol O(1), Ohyama T(2), Edlund RK(1), Drakou K(3), Georgiades P(3), Groves
AK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor
Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)USC Caruso Department of Otolaryngology - Head 
& Neck Surgery, Keck Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 1501 San
Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033-4503, USA; Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute,
Keck Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 1501 San Pablo Street,
Los Angeles, CA 90033-4503, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Cyprus, 1 University Avenue, P.O. Box 20537, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus. (4)Program 
in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department
of Neurosc ience, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX
77030, USA. Electronic address: akgroves@bcm.edu.

The inner ear develops from the otic placode, one of the cranial placodes that
arise from a region of ectoderm adjacent to the anterior neural plate called the 
pre-placodal domain. We have identified a Forkhead family transcription factor,
Foxi3, that is expressed in the pre-placodal domain and down-regulated when the
otic placode is induced. We now show that Foxi3 mutant mice do not form otic
placodes as evidenced by expression changes in early molecular markers and the
lack of thickened placodal ectoderm, an otic cup or otocyst. Some preplacodal
genes downstream of Foxi3-Gata3, Six1 and Eya1-are not expressed in the ectoderm 
of Foxi3 mutant mice, and the ectoderm exhibits signs of increased apoptosis. We 
also show that Fgf signals from the hindbrain and cranial mesoderm, which are
necessary for otic placode induction, are received by pre-placodal ectoderm in
Foxi3 mutants, but do not initiate otic induction. Finally, we show that the
epibranchial placodes that develop in close proximity to the otic placode and the
mandibular division of the trigeminal ganglion are missing in Foxi3 mutants. Our 
data suggest that Foxi3 is necessary to prime pre-placodal ectoderm for the
correct interpretation of inductive signals for the otic and epibranchial
placodes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4688051 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26550799  [PubMed - in process]


83. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;137(2):545-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.09.015. 
Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Changes in markers associated with dendritic cells driving the differentiation of
either TH2 cells or regulatory T cells correlate with clinical benefit during
allergen immunotherapy.

Gueguen C(1), Bouley J(1), Moussu H(1), Luce S(1), Duchateau M(2), Chamot-Rooke
J(2), Pallardy M(3), Lombardi V(1), Nony E(1), Baron-Bodo V(1), Mascarell L(1),
Moingeon P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Pharmaceutical Development, Stallergenes, Antony, France.
(2)Unité de Spectrométrie de Masse Structurale et Protéomique, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France. (3)Université Paris-Sud, INSERM UMR 996, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Châtenay-Malabry, France. (4)Research and Pharmaceutical Development,
Stallergenes, Antony, France. Electronic address: pmoingeon@stallergenes.com.

BACKGROUND: Regulatory dendritic cell (DC) markers, such as C1Q, are upregulated 
in PBMCs of patients with grass pollen allergy exhibiting clinical benefit during
allergen immunotherapy (AIT).
OBJECTIVES: We sought to define markers differentially expressed in human
monocyte-derived DCs differentiated toward a proallergic (DCs driving the
differentiation of TH2 cells [DC2s]) phenotype and investigate whether changes in
such markers in the blood correlate with AIT efficacy.
METHODS: Transcriptomes and proteomes of monocyte-derived DCs polarized toward
DCs driving the differentiation of TH1 cells (DC1s), DC2s, or DCs driving the
differentiation of regulatory T cells (DCreg cells) profiles were compared by
using genome-wide cDNA microarrays and label-free quantitative proteomics,
respectively. Markers differentially regulated in DC2s and DCreg cells were
assessed by means of quantitative PCR in PBMCs from 80 patients with grass pollen
allergy before and after 2 or 4 months of sublingual AIT in parallel with
rhinoconjunctivitis symptom scores.
RESULTS: We identified 20 and 26 new genes/proteins overexpressed in DC2s and
DCreg cells, respectively. At an individual patient level, DC2-associated
markers, such as CD141, GATA3, OX40 ligand, and receptor-interacting
serine/threonine-protein kinase 4 (RIPK4), were downregulated after a 4-month
sublingual AIT course concomitantly with an upregulation of DCreg cell-associated
markers, including complement C1q subcomponent subunit A (C1QA), Fc<U+03B3>RIIIA,
ferritin light chain (FTL), and solute carrier organic anion transporter family
member 2B1 (SLCO2B1), in the blood of clinical responders as opposed to
nonresponders. Changes in such markers were better correlated with clinical
benefit than alterations of allergen-specific CD4(+) T-cell or IgG responses.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of 5 markers predominantly expressed by blood DCs (ie,
C1Q and CD141) or shared with lymphoid cells (ie, Fc<U+03B3>RIIIA, GATA3, and RIPK4)
reflecting changes in the balance of regulatory/proallergic responses in
peripheral blood can be used as early as after 2 months to monitor the early
onset of AIT efficacy.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26522402  [PubMed - in process]


84. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Nov;31(11):1537-40, 1543.

[Increased IL-19 level in peripheral blood of patients with allergic rhinitis is 
related with clinical severity].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Hu G(1), Kang H(1), Ke X(1), Hong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the level of interleukin-19 (IL-19) in the peripheral
blood of the patients with allergic rhinitis (AR) and reveal the possible role of
IL-19 in the development of disease.
METHODS: The levels of IL-19 mRNA and protein in the peripheral blood mononuclear
cell (PBMCs) of AR patients and healthy controls were determined by real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and ELISA. The clinical severity in AR group was
evaluated by the Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire (RQLQ) and the
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores. Moreover, PBMCs from the AR group were
stimulated by recombinant IL-19 or PBS, and then the frequency of Th2 cells,
levels of GATA binding protein-3 (GATA-3) mRNA and IL-4 protein in PBMCs were
detected by flow cytometry, qRT-PCR and ELISA, respectively.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the level of IL-19 in the AR group was 
significantly elevated. In addition, RQLQ and VAS scores in the AR group were
also significantly higher than those in the controls, and they were positively
correlated with the levels of IL-19 in the AR group (rmRNA-RQLQ=0.673,
rmRNA-VAS=0.619, protein-RQLQ=0.669, protein-VAS=0.662, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The level of IL-19 in the peripheral blood of AR patients increased
and was related with the clinical severity of AR.

PMID: 26522365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Feb;46(2):307-18. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545875. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

Dynamic regulation of permissive histone modifications and GATA3 binding underpin
acquisition of granzyme A expression by virus-specific CD8(+) T cells.

Nguyen ML(1), Hatton L(1), Li J(1), Olshansky M(1), Kelso A(1,)(2), Russ BE(1),
Turner SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at The
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory; at The Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Numerous studies have focused on the molecular regulation of perforin (PFP) and
granzyme B (GZMB) expression by activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), but
little is known about the molecular factors that underpin granzyme A (GZMA)
expression. In vitro activation of naïve CD8(+) T cells, in the presence of IL-4,
enhanced STAT6-dependent GZMA expression and was associated with GATA3 binding
and enrichment of transcriptionally permissive histone posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) across the Gzma gene locus. While GZMA expression by
effector influenza A virus specific CTLs was also associated with a similar
permissive epigenetic signature, memory CTL lacked enrichment of permissive
histone PTMs at the Gzma locus, although this was restored within recalled
secondary effector CTLs. Importantly, GZMA expression by virus-specific CTLs was 
associated with GATA3 binding at the Gzma locus, and independent of
STAT6-mediated signaling. This suggests regulation of GZMA expression is
underpinned by differentiation-dependent regulation of chromatin composition at
the Gzma locus and that, given GATA3 is key for CTL differentiation in response
to infection, GATA3 expression is regulated by a distinct, IL-4 independent,
signaling pathway. Overall, this study provides insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control transcription of Gzma during virus-induced CD8(+) T-cell 
differentiation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26519105  [PubMed - in process]


86. BMC Endocr Disord. 2015 Oct 30;15:66. doi: 10.1186/s12902-015-0065-7.

A novel loss-of-function mutation of GATA3 (p.R299Q) in a Japanese family with
Hypoparathyroidism, Deafness, and Renal Dysplasia (HDR) syndrome.

Okawa T(1), Yoshida M(2), Usui T(3), Kudou T(4), Iwasaki Y(5), Fukuoka K(6),
Takahashi N(7), Uehara Y(8), Oiso Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Nagoya Ekisaikai Hospital, 4-66
Shounen-cho, Nakagawawa-ku, Nagoya, 454-8502, Japan. tetsujimd@emobile.ne.jp.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Nagoya Ekisaikai Hospital, 4-66
Shounen-cho, Nakagawawa-ku, Nagoya, 454-8502, Japan. yoshidaz@ekisai.or.jp.
(3)Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical
Center, Kyoto, 612-8555, Japan. tusui1220@gmail.com. (4)Laboratory of Protein
Informatics, Research Center for State-of-the-Art Functional Protein Analysis,
Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, 565-0871, Japan.
t-kudou@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp. (5)Health Care Center, Kochi University, Kochi,
780-8520, Japan. iwasakiyasumasa@gmail.com. (6)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Nagoya Ekisaikai Hospital, 4-66 Shounen-cho, Nakagawawa-ku, Nagoya,
454-8502, Japan. kazukifukuoka@nifty.com. (7)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Nagoya Ekisaikai Hospital, 4-66 Shounen-cho, Nakagawawa-ku, Nagoya,
454-8502, Japan. norio_03_02@ybb.ne.jp. (8)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Nagoya Ekisaikai Hospital, 4-66 Shounen-cho, Nakagawawa-ku, Nagoya,
454-8502, Japan. myavp@zm.commufa.jp. (9)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
yutakamd@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome is a
rare autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the zinc finger
transcription factor gene, GATA3. GATA3 has 2 zinc finger domains, which play an 
important role in the increase in target gene transcription activity.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 50-year-old woman and her 27-year-old daughter were followed
up because of hypoparathyroidism. They had bilateral sensorineural deafness.
Abdominal computed tomography scanning revealed renal dysplasia in the mother,
but no renal anomaly in the daughter. Direct sequencing of GATA3 gene revealed a 
novel heterozygous missense mutation at codon 299 (p.R299Q) in exon 4. This
mutation is located at the junction between the 2 zinc fingers. The structure
prediction showed that it caused a conformation change in this junction area,
affecting the spatial position of the zinc fingers. Additionally, a more marked
conformation change was observed in the N-terminal zinc finger region compared to
that in the C-terminal region. Functional analysis of this mutant protein using
an in vitro luciferase reporter assay system confirmed that the mutation
abolished the enhancing effects of wild-type GATA3 on the promoter activity of
the consensus GATA responsive element and that of human PTH gene.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel R299Q mutation in GATA3 in a Japanese family
with HDR syndrome. We confirmed that R299Q is a loss-of-function mutation, due to
the extensive conformational change in the zinc fingers of GATA3.

PMCID: PMC4627412
PMID: 26514990  [PubMed - in process]


87. Int J Surg Pathol. 2016 Apr;24(2):153-8. doi: 10.1177/1066896915611489. Epub 2015
Oct 27.

Mesonephric Adenocarcinoma of the Uterine Corpus: A Case Report and Diagnostic
Pitfall.

Kim SS(1), Nam JH(2), Kim GE(2), Choi YD(2), Choi C(2), Park CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju City, Republic of Korea
succeedsoon@hanmail.net. (2)Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju
City, Republic of Korea.

Mesonephric adenocarcinoma is a rare tumor type that is usually found in areas
where the Wolffian duct was present during the fetal period. We report a case of 
mesonephric adenocarcinoma of the uterine corpus in a 66-year-old woman who
presented with vaginal bleeding. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed a
2.7-cm-sized irregular thickening and enhancement of the uterine body. The
diagnosis following endometrial curettage biopsy was endometrioid adenocarcinoma,
and the patient underwent a total hysterectomy with bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy. The tumor was composed of small tubular and ductal
components, and a retiform appearance was also observed in the deeper areas. The 
tumor cells were immunopositive for cytokeratin, vimentin, CD10 with a luminal
staining pattern, PAX2, and PAX8, and immunonegative for estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor, which was consistent with tumor of mesonephric origin.
Mesonephric neoplasms reveal relatively low-grade nuclear feature, characteristic
immunoprofiles (immunonegative for ER and PR, and immunopositive for CD10, PAX2, 
PAX8, and GATA3), and unique tumor location (myometrium), whereas Müllerian
neoplasms such as endometrial adenocarcinoma show various morphology,
immunopositivity for ER and PR, and primarily endometrial location. As described 
above, an integration of the clinical features, morphologic characteristics, and 
immunohistochemical profiles is needed to make a diagnosis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26510860  [PubMed - in process]


88. Genetics. 2015 Dec;201(4):1341-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180125. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

A Gene Regulatory Program in Human Breast Cancer.

Li R(1), Campos J(2), Iida J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963 The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609 renhua.li10@gmail.com. (2)Windber Research
Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963.

Molecular heterogeneity in human breast cancer has challenged diagnosis,
prognosis, and clinical treatment. It is well known that molecular subtypes of
breast tumors are associated with significant differences in prognosis and
survival. Assuming that the differences are attributed to subtype-specific
pathways, we then suspect that there might be gene regulatory mechanisms that
modulate the behavior of the pathways and their interactions. In this study, we
proposed an integrated methodology, including machine learning and information
theory, to explore the mechanisms. Using existing data from three large cohorts
of human breast cancer populations, we have identified an ensemble of 16 master
regulator genes (or MR16) that can discriminate breast tumor samples into four
major subtypes. Evidence from gene expression across the three cohorts has
consistently indicated that the MR16 can be divided into two groups that
demonstrate subtype-specific gene expression patterns. For example, group 1 MRs, 
including ESR1, FOXA1, and GATA3, are overexpressed in luminal A and luminal B
subtypes, but lowly expressed in HER2-enriched and basal-like subtypes. In
contrast, group 2 MRs, including FOXM1, EZH2, MYBL2, and ZNF695, display an
opposite pattern. Furthermore, evidence from mutual information modeling has
congruently indicated that the two groups of MRs either up- or down-regulate
cancer driver-related genes in opposite directions. Furthermore, integration of
somatic mutations with pathway changes leads to identification of canonical
genomic alternations in a subtype-specific fashion. Taken together, these studies
have implicated a gene regulatory program for breast tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4676531 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510790  [PubMed - in process]


89. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Nov;144(5):756-63. doi: 10.1309/AJCP5MMR1FJVVTPK.

GATA3 expression in advanced breast cancer: prognostic value and organ-specific
relapse.

McCleskey BC(1), Penedo TL(1), Zhang K(2), Hameed O(1), Siegal GP(1), Wei S(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and. (2)Department of
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
(3)From the Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and swei@uab.edu.

OBJECTIVES: GATA3 is a transcription factor regulating luminal cell
differentiation in the mammary glands and has been implicated in the luminal
types of breast carcinoma. The prognostic significance of GATA3 in breast cancer 
remains controversial.
METHODS: In this study, we assessed the prognostic value of the molecule in a
subset of 62 advanced breast cancers and 10 control breast cancers (no metastasis
after follow-up).
RESULTS: GATA3 expression levels in luminal tumors of advanced stage were
significantly higher than that of the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) subtype and triple-negative carcinomas, as expected, but were similar to
those of the luminal controls. Furthermore, 88% of nonluminal tumors showed
variable GATA3 expression, for which the HER2 subtype had significantly higher
GATA3 expression than that of the triple-negative carcinomas. Interestingly,
GATA3 levels were significantly lower in carcinomas with lung relapse compared to
those with metastatic recurrence to other organs, thus reflecting the findings in
animal models. No significant difference was observed between tumors with bone
relapse and those metastasized to nonskeletal sites. Moreover, high GATA3
expression was significantly associated with favorable relapse-free survival and 
overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that GATA3 may not act solely as a luminal
differentiation marker, and further uncovering the molecular pathways by which
GATA3 regulates the downstream targets will be crucial to our understanding of
breast cancer dissemination.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 26486740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Histopathology. 2015 Oct 20. doi: 10.1111/his.12895. [Epub ahead of print]

Hormone receptor negative, TTF1 positive uterine and ovarian adenocarcinomas:
report of a series of mesonephric-like adenocarcinomas.

McFarland M(1), Quick CM(2), McCluggage WG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, AR, USA.

AIMS: To report a series of uterine corpus (n=7) and ovarian (n=5) neoplasms
which we believe probably represent mesonephric adenocarcinomas based on their
characteristic morphology and immunophenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: All neoplasms exhibited a relatively constant and
characteristic morphological appearance with an admixture of architectural
patterns with small glands or tubules, some containing luminal eosinophilic
colloid-like material, typically predominating. Solid and papillary architectures
were also often present. The nuclear features were characteristic with atypical
angulated clear vesicular nuclei which often exhibited overlapping. All the
tumours were "flat" negative with oestrogen receptor and progesterone receptor
and all except one exhibited nuclear staining with TTF1, which was often diffuse.
All tumours exhibited "wild-type" staining with p53. CD10, calretinin and GATA3
were positive in a variable proportion of the neoplasms.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe these neoplasms to represent mesonephric adenocarcinomas 
which have only rarely been reported to arise in the uterine corpus and never in 
the ovary. We recommend they be termed mesonephric-like adenocarcinomas until
their histogenesis is firmly established. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26484981  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Dec 1;93(5):1118-26. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.08.034. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Recovery Profiles of T-Cell Subsets Following Low-Dose Total Body Irradiation and
Improvement With Cinnamon.

Zheng X(1), Guo Y(2), Wang L(3), Zhang H(2), Wang S(4), Wang L(2), An L(1), Zhou 
X(2), Li X(2), Yao C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional Chinese Medicine
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Jinan, China; School of Medicine and Life Science, University of Jinan-Shandong
Academy of Medical Science, Jinan, China. (2)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology 
and Traditional Chinese Medicine Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine,
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, China. (3)Second Affiliated Hospital
of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China. (4)Shandong
University, Jinan, China. (5)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional 
Chinese Medicine Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Jinan, China. Electronic address: yaocf9941@163.com.

PURPOSE: Inefficient T-cell reconstitution from x-ray-induced immune damage
reduces antitumor response. To understand the profile of T-cell reconstitution
after irradiation will overcome the barrier of antitumor immunity. This study
aimed to identify the recovery profile of T-cell subsets following x-ray
irradiation and to highlight the role of cinnamon on efficient T-cell restoration
postexposure in the antitumor response.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: CD3(+), CD8(+), and CD4(+) T cells and Th1, Th2, Th17, and
regulatory T (Treg) cells were evaluated at different time points after single
low-dose total body irradiation (SLTBI) with or without cinnamon treatments.
T-bet, GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and Foxp3 signaling specific for Th1, Th2, Th17, and Treg
were also analyzed by RT-PCR assay. The effects of cinnamon on efficient T-cell
subset reconstitution was confirmed in a lung melanoma model in irradiated mice.
RESULTS: Reconstitution of CD4(+) T cells was delayed more than that of CD8(+) T 
cells in T-cell restoration after SLTBI. The production of IFN<U+03B3> by Th1 or Tc1
cells was sharply decreased and was accompanied by reduced T-bet mRNA, even when 
total T-cell numbers had recovered; the frequencies of Th17 and Treg cells and
their specific transcription factors (ROR<U+03B3>t and Foxp3, respectively) were
obviously increased. Irradiation-induced inefficient T-cell reconstitution
impaired the antitumor capacities in the lung melanoma model. Pretreatment with
cinnamon in irradiated mice accelerated the generation of Th1 and reduced the
differentiation of Treg cells by activating T-bet and limiting transcriptions of 
Foxp3. Improvement resulting from cinnamon pretreatment on the efficient T-cell
recovery profile from SLTBI promoted antitumor immunity in the lung melanoma
model.
CONCLUSIONS: T-cell reconstitution from SLTBI was characterized by impaired Th1
and elevated Th17 and Treg cells. Cinnamon effectively improved the imbalance of 
T-cell subsets by promoting the proliferation of Th1 and by suppressing
expansions of Th17 and Tregs. The role of cinnamon in efficient T-cell
reconstitution from SLTBI is effective in antitumor immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26475064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):40112-26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5556.

Aberrant expression of homeobox gene SIX1 in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C(1), Kaufmann M(1), Drexler HG(1), MacLeod RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

In Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) we recently identified deregulated expression of
homeobox genes MSX1 and OTX2 which are physiologically involved in development of
the embryonal neural plate border region. Here, we examined in HL homeobox gene
SIX1 an additional regulator of this embryonal region mediating differentiation
of placodal precursors. SIX1 was aberrantly activated in 12 % of HL patient
samples in silico, indicating a pathological role in a subset of this B-cell
malignancy. In addition, SIX1 expression was detected in HL cell lines which were
used as models to reveal upstream factors and target genes of this basic
developmental regulator. We detected increased copy numbers of the SIX1 locus at 
chromosome 14q23 correlating with enhanced expression while chromosomal
translocations were absent. Moreover, comparative expression profiling data and
pertinent gene modulation experiments indicated that the WNT-signalling pathway
and transcription factor MEF2C regulate SIX1 expression. Genes encoding the
transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, MSX1 and SPIB - all basic lymphoid regulators
- were identified as targets of SIX1 in HL. In addition, cofactors EYA1 and TLE4,
respectively, contrastingly mediated activation and suppression of SIX1 target
gene expression. Thus, the protein domain interfaces may represent therapeutic
targets in SIX1-positive HL subsets. Collectively, our data reveal a gene
regulatory network with SIX1 centrally deregulating lymphoid differentiation and 
support concordance of lymphopoiesis/lymphomagenesis and developmental processes 
in the neural plate border region.

PMCID: PMC4741883
PMID: 26473286  [PubMed - in process]


93. Hum Immunol. 2016 Jan;77(1):71-5. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.10.007. Epub 2015
Oct 21.

Epigenetic characteristics in inflammatory candidate genes in aggressive
periodontitis.

Schulz S(1), Immel UD(2), Just L(3), Schaller HG(4), Gläser C(5), Reichert S(4).

Author information: 
(1)University School of Dental Medicine, Department of Operative Dentistry and
Periodontology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. Electronic
address: susanne.schulz@medizin.uni-halle.de. (2)Institute of Legal Medicine,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. (3)Clinic for Oral and
Maxillofacial Plastic Surgery, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg,
Germany. (4)University School of Dental Medicine, Department of Operative
Dentistry and Periodontology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics and Medical Biology, Martin-Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease triggered by the host
immune response. Epigenetic modifications also affect the immune response. We
assessed CpG methylation in 22 inflammatory candidate genes (ATF2, CCL25, CXCL14,
CXCL3, CXCL5, CXCL6, FADD, GATA3, IL10RA, IL12A, IL12B, IL13, IL13RA1, IL15,
IL17C, IL17RA, IL4R, IL6R, IL6ST, IL7, INHA, and TYK2) with respect to the
occurrence of aggressive periodontitis (AgP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this study 15 AgP patients (53.3% males, 41.4±10.5years)
and 10 controls (40.0% males, 36.9±17.5years) were included. The methylation
patterns of gingival biopsies were quantified using EpiTect® Methyl Signature PCR
Array Human Inflammatory Response.
RESULTS: In gingival biopsies taken from patients with AgP, CpG methylation of
CCL25 (1.73% vs. 2.59%, p=0.015) and IL17C (6.89% vs. 19.27%, p=0.002) was
significantly reduced as compared with periodontally healthy tissues.
DISCUSSION: We showed for the first time a differential methylation pattern for
CCL25 and IL17C in periodontitis. CCL25 plays an important role in T-cell
development, whereas IL17C regulates innate epithelial immune responses. The
decrease in CpG methylation is presumably accompanied by an increase in gene
expression. This could lead to a greater availability of CCL25 and interleukin
17C and support periodontal loss of attachment.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26472015  [PubMed - in process]


94. BMC Med. 2015 Oct 15;13:266. doi: 10.1186/s12916-015-0504-3.

Genomic aberrations in young and elderly  breast cancer patients.

Azim HA Jr(1), Nguyen B(2), Brohée S(3), Zoppoli G(4), Sotiriou C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Institut Jules Bordet,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Boulevard de Waterloo, 121, Brussels, Belgium.
hatem.azim@bordet.be. (2)Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory,
Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Boulevard de Waterloo, 121,
Brussels, Belgium. bastien.nguyen@bordet.be. (3)Breast Cancer Translational
Research Laboratory, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Boulevard de Waterloo, 121, Brussels, Belgium. sylvain.brohee@bordet.be.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova and IRCCS AOU San
Martino - IST, Genoa, Italy. gabriele.zoppoli@unige.it. (5)Breast Cancer
Translational Research Laboratory, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Boulevard de Waterloo, 121, Brussels, Belgium.
christos.sotiriou@bordet.be.

BACKGROUND: Age at breast cancer diagnosis is a known prognostic factor.
Previously, several groups including ours have shown that young age at diagnosis 
is associated with higher prevalence of basal-like tumors and aggressive tumor
phenotypes. Yet the impact of age at diagnosis on the genomic landscape of breast
cancer remains unclear. In this study, we examined the pattern of somatic
mutations, chromosomal copy number variations (CNVs) and transcriptomic profiles 
in young and elderly breast cancer patients.
METHODS: Analyses were performed on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.
Patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis, classified as normal-like by PAM50
or had missing clinical information were excluded. Young patients were defined as
=45 years of age, while elderly patients were those =70 years of age at breast
cancer diagnosis. The remaining patients were classified as "intermediate". We
evaluated the association between age at diagnosis and somatic mutations, CNV and
gene expression in a logistic regression model adjusting for tumor size, nodal
status, histology and breast cancer subtype. All analyses were corrected for
multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach.
RESULTS: In this study, 125, 486 and 169 patients were =45, 46-69 and =70 years
of age, respectively. Older patients had more somatic mutations (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>44 versus 35
versus 31; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009) and more CNVs, especially in ductal tumors (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02).
Eleven mutations were independently associated with age at diagnosis, of which
only GATA3 was associated with young age (15.2% versus 8.2% versus 9%;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003). Only two CNV events were independently associated with age, with more
chr18p losses in older patients and more chr6q27 deletions in younger ones.
Younger age at diagnosis was associated with higher expression of gene signatures
related to proliferation, stem cell features and endocrine resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Age adds a layer of biological complexity beyond breast cancer
molecular subtypes, classic pathological and clinical variables, worthy of
further consideration in future drug development as we seek to refine therapeutic
strategies in the era of personalized medicine.

PMCID: PMC4606505
PMID: 26467651  [PubMed - in process]


95. Cancer Cytopathol. 2015 Oct;123(10):576-81. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21574.

Young investigator challenge: The utility of GATA3 immunohistochemistry in the
evaluation of metastatic breast carcinomas in malignant effusions.

Lew M(1), Pang JC(1), Jing X(1), Fields KL(1), Roh MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

BACKGROUND: It is not uncommon to encounter challenges in the immunohistochemical
confirmation of metastatic breast cancer given the limited sensitivities of
mammaglobin and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15/BRST-2) and the
significant proportion of triple-negative breast carcinomas (ie, tumors that are 
negative for estrogen receptor [ER], and progesterone receptor [PgR], and human
epidermal growth factor 2 [HER2]). GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) has emerged as 
a potentially useful immunohistochemical adjunct during the evaluation of
metastatic breast carcinomas in cytology specimens. The objective of the current 
study was to examine GATA3 expression in the context of malignant effusions
secondary to both mammary and extramammary malignancies.
METHODS: In total, 306 malignant effusions (from 62 metastatic breast carcinomas 
and 244 extramammary malignancies) were examined using GATA3
immunohistochemistry. Effusions with metastatic breast carcinoma were also
examined using immunohistochemistry for additional breast markers (ER, PgR, HER2,
mammaglobin, and GCDFP-15/BRST-2).
RESULTS: GATA3 immunohistochemistry highlighted the tumor cells in 58 of the 62
samples (93.5%) from patients with metastatic breast carcinoma, which was higher 
than the observed sensitivity of immunohistochemistry for ER (63.8%), PgR
(41.4%), HER2 (15.5%), mammaglobin (22.4%), and GCDFP-15/BRST-2 (5.2%). GATA3
expression also was observed in a subset of malignant effusions secondary to
extramammary primaries, specifically, in 28 of 244 specimens (11.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: GATA3 is a highly sensitive marker for the detection of metastatic
breast carcinomas in effusion specimens. However, this marker is not entirely
specific for malignancies of breast origin. Thus, GATA3 should be used in
conjunction with additional immunohistochemical markers during the cytologic
evaluation of malignant effusions.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26465236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Apr;69(4):307-12. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203144. Epub
2015 Oct 13.

Differential diagnosis of bladder versus colorectal adenocarcinoma: keratin 7 and
GATA3 positivity in nuclear ß-catenin-negative glandular tumours defines
adenocarcinoma of the bladder.

Broede A(1), Oll M(1), Maurer A(1), Siegert S(2), Stoerkel S(3), Golz R(3),
Schwamborn K(4), Veeck J(1), Knuechel R(1), Gaisa NT(1); German study group of
bladder cancers.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Institute 
of Pathology, Munich-North, Munich, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, HELIOS
Clinic Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, Technical
University Munich, Munich, Germany.

AIMS: This study evaluates immunohistochemical markers for the differential
diagnosis of primary bladder adenocarcinoma (BAC) from secondarily involving
colorectal adenocarcinoma (CAC). Additional staining of putative precursor
lesions (cystitis cystica et glandularis (CC) and intestinal metaplasia (IM))
supports insights into metaplastic cell development and aberrant differentiation 
in tumours.
METHODS: Tissue microarray sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues 
from clinically verified 11 BAC, 11 CAC, 18 invasive urothelial carcinomas (UCs),
22 normal urothelium samples, 25 CC and 15 IM were stained for keratin 7, 5/6,
5/14 and 20, ß-catenin, e-cadherin, cadherin 17, cdx2, uroplakin II and III,
CD10, androgen receptor (AR), S100P, MUC2, MUC5AC and GATA3 expression. Data were
analysed using Kruskal-Wallis/Dunn's multiple comparison test and Fisher's exact 
test.
RESULTS: Significant difference (p<0.05) between all three tumour groups was
observed for keratin 7 only. Further significant difference between BAC and CAC
was found for GATA3 and nuclear ß-catenin staining. BAC-positive/CAC-negative
markers without significance were: p63, keratin 5/6, 5/14, uroplakins II/III and 
AR. CC showed a urothelial phenotype (p63+, GATA3+, S100P+, uroplakin+ in single 
cells) with initial signs of intestinal differentiation (single cells cdx2+ or
cadherin 17+). IM displayed a full intestinal phenotype (p63-, all urothelial
markers-, cdx2/MUC2/MUC5AC+, cadherin17+).
CONCLUSIONS: Differential diagnosis of BAC and CAC remains difficult, but
positive staining for keratin 7 in nuclear ß-catenin-negative tumours argues for 
BAC. Additional markers like GATA3 and p63 may be added, as positivity in some
cases may be helpful. However, for reliable histological diagnosis, knowledge of 
comprehensive clinical data is still essential.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26463756  [PubMed - in process]


97. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Dec;55(4):293-303. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.07.006.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Characterization of hematopoietic GATA transcription factor expression in mouse
and human dendritic cells.

Scheenstra MR(1), Salunkhe V(1), De Cuyper IM(1), Hoogenboezem M(2), Li E(1),
Kuijpers TW(3), van den Berg TK(1), Gutiérrez L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sanquin Research and
Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin
Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of
Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: l.gutierrez@sanquin.nl.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are key initiators and regulators of the immune response.
The development of the DC lineage and their subsets requires an orchestrated
regulation of their transcriptional program. Gata1, a transcription factor
expressed in several hematopoietic cell lineages, has been recently reported to
be required for mouse DC development and function. In humans, GATA1 is involved
in the lineage separation between monocyte-derived DCs and Langerhans cells (LC) 
and loss of GATA1 results in differentiation arrest at the monocyte stage. The
hematopoietic GATA factors (i.e. Gata1, Gata2, Gata3) are known to regulate each 
other's expression and to function consecutively throughout lineage commitment
(so-called GATA switch). In humans, mutations in GATA2 are causative of MonoMAC
disease, a human immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by loss of DCs,
monocytes, B and NK cells. However, additional data on the expression of
hematopoietic GATA factors in the DC lineage is missing. In this study, we have
characterized the expression of hematopoietic GATA factors in murine and human
DCs and their expression dynamics upon TLR stimulation. We found that all
hematopoietic GATA factors are expressed in DCs, but identified species-specific 
differences in the relative expression of each GATA factor, and how their
expression fluctuates upon stimulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26460250  [PubMed - in process]


98. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Nov;39(11):1468-78. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000509.

Nonchoriocarcinomatous Trophoblastic Tumors of the Testis: The Widening Spectrum 
of Trophoblastic Neoplasia.

Idrees MT(1), Kao CS, Epstein JI, Ulbright TM.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN Department of Pathology and Urology and Oncology, The
Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD.

Tumors of trophoblastic derivation other than choriocarcinoma are very rare in
the testis but have been reported on occasion in association with other germ cell
tumors. Their morphologic spectrum is analogous to the trophoblastic tumors of
the female genital tract including epithelioid trophoblastic tumor (ETT) and
placental site trophoblastic tumor (PSTT). Herein we report our experience with 8
cases of trophoblastic tumors of testicular origin that lacked the features of
choriocarcinoma; these included 4 ETTs, 1 PSTT, 1 unclassified trophoblastic
tumor (UTT), 1 partially regressed choriocarcinoma with a monophasic morphology, 
and 1 hybrid tumor showing a mixture of adenocarcinoma and a UTT. All tumors
occurred in young men 19 to 43 years old. Five arose de novo within the testis (2
ETTs, 1 UTT, 1 regressing choriocarcinoma, and the hybrid tumor) as a component
of mixed germ cell tumors, and 3 (2 ETTs and 1 PSTT) were found in metastatic
sites after chemotherapy. The trophoblastic component was minor (5% to 10%) in 6 
tumors but was 95% of 1 metastatic tumor (ETT) and 50% of the hybrid tumor. Other
germ cell tumor elements were identified in all cases, most commonly teratoma.
The ETTs consisted of nodules and nests of squamoid trophoblast cells showing
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, frequent apoptotic cells, extracellular
fibrinoid material, and positivity for p63 and negativity for human placental
lactogen (HPL). The PSTT showed sheets of discohesive, pleomorphic, mononucleated
trophoblast cells that invaded blood vessels with fibrinoid change and were p63
negative and HPL positive. The UTT showed a spectrum of small and large
trophoblast cells, some multinucleated but lacking distinct syncytiotrophoblasts,
and was patchily positive for both p63 and HPL. The hybrid tumor had ETT-like and
adenocarcinomatous areas that coexpressed inhibin and GATA3 but were negative for
p63 and HPL, leading to classification of the trophoblastic component as UTT.
Seven of the patients were alive and well on follow-up (8 to 96 mo; median, 39
mo), whereas the patient with the hybrid tumor died of liver metastases at 2
years. Our study verifies that trophoblastic neoplasms often having the features 
of nonchoriocarcinomatous gestational trophoblastic tumors may arise from the
testis, occur either in the untreated primary tumor or in metastases after
chemotherapy, and should be distinguished from choriocarcinoma given what appears
to be a less aggressive clinical course.

PMID: 26457351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):35978-90. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5427.

MiR-573 inhibits prostate cancer metastasis by regulating epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition.

Wang L(1), Song G(2), Tan W(3), Qi M(3), Zhang L(3), Chan J(4), Yu J(5), Han
J(1), Han B(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Medicinal Biotechnology, Key Laboratory for Rare &
Uncommon Diseases of Shandong Province, Shandong Academy of Medicinal Sciences,
Jinan, China. (2)Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Jinan, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Medical
School, Jinan, China. (4)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. 
(6)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan, China.

The metastastic cascade is a complex process that is regulated at multiple levels
in prostate cancer (PCa). Recent evidence suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) are
involved in PCa metastasis and hold great promise as therapeutic targets. In this
study, we found that miR-573 expression is significantly lower in metastatic
tissues than matched primary PCa. Its downregulation is correlated with high
Gleason score and cancer-related mortality of PCa patients (P = 0.041,
Kaplan-Meier analysis). Through gain- and loss-of function experiments, we
demonstrated that miR-573 inhibits PCa cell migration, invasion and
TGF-ß1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vitro and lung
metastasis in vivo. Mechanistically, miR573 directly targets the fibroblast
growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene. Knockdown of FGFR1 phenocopies the effects
of miR-573 expression on PCa cell invasion, whereas overexpression of FGFR1
partially attenuates the functions of miR-573. Consequently, miR-573 modulates
the activation of FGFR1-downstream signaling in response to fibroblast growth
factor 2 (FGF2). Importantly, we showed that GATA3 directly increases miR-573
expression, and thus down-regulates FGFR1 expression, EMT and invasion of PCa
cells in a miR-573-dependent manner, supporting the involvement of GATA3, miR-573
and FGFR1 in controlling the EMT process during PCa metastasis. Altogether, our
findings demonstrate a novel mechanism by which miR-573 modulates EMT and
metastasis of PCa cells, and suggest miR-573 as a potential biomarker and/or
therapeutic target for PCa management.

PMID: 26451614  [PubMed - in process]


100. Cell. 2015 Oct 8;163(2):506-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.033.

Comprehensive Molecular Portraits of Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer.

Ciriello G(1), Gatza ML(2), Beck AH(3), Wilkerson MD(4), Rhie SK(5), Pastore
A(6), Zhang H(7), McLellan M(8), Yau C(9), Kandoth C(10), Bowlby R(11), Shen
H(12), Hayat S(6), Fieldhouse R(6), Lester SC(3), Tse GM(13), Factor RE(14),
Collins LC(3), Allison KH(15), Chen YY(16), Jensen K(17), Johnson NB(3),
Oesterreich S(18), Mills GB(19), Cherniack AD(7), Robertson G(11), Benz C(9),
Sander C(6), Laird PW(12), Hoadley KA(20), King TA(21); TCGA Research Network,
Perou CM(22).

Collaborators: Akbani R, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barr T, Beck A, Benz
C, Benz S, Berrios M, Beroukhim R, Bodenheimer T, Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Bowen J,
Bowlby R, Brooks D, Cherniack AD, Chin L, Cho J, Chudamani S, Ciriello G,
Davidsen T, Demchok JA, Dennison JB, Ding L, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S,
Gabriel SB, Gao J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gatza ML, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Getz G,
Gibson WJ, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hoadley KA, Holbrook A, Holt RA, Hoyle AP, Hu H, 
Huang M, Hutter CM, Hwang ES, Jefferys SR, Jones SJ, Ju Z, Kim J, Lai PH, Laird
PW, Lawrence MS, Leraas KM, Lichtenberg TM, Lin P, Ling S, Liu J, Liu W, Lolla L,
Lu Y, Ma Y, Maglinte DT, Mardis E, Marks J, Marra MA, McAllister C, McLellan M,
Meng S, Meyerson M, Mills GB, Moore RA, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Naresh R,
Noble MS, Oesterreich S, Olopade O, Parker JS, Perou CM, Pihl T, Saksena G,
Schumacher SE, Shaw KR, Ramirez NC, Rathmell WK, Rhie SK, Roach J, Robertson AG, 
Saksena G, Sander C, Schein JE, Schultz N, Shen H, Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J,
Shelley CS, Shriver C, Simons JV, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Sougnez C, Sun C,
Tarnuzzer R, Tiezzi DG, Van Den Berg DJ, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Z, Weinstein JN,
Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wilson R, Wise L, Wiznerowicz M, Wu J, Wu Y, Yang 
L, Yau C, Zack TI, Zenklusen JC, Zhang H, Zhang J, Zmuda E.

Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most prevalent histologic subtype 
of invasive breast cancer. Here, we comprehensively profiled 817 breast tumors,
including 127 ILC, 490 ductal (IDC), and 88 mixed IDC/ILC. Besides E-cadherin
loss, the best known ILC genetic hallmark, we identified mutations targeting
PTEN, TBX3, and FOXA1 as ILC enriched features. PTEN loss associated with
increased AKT phosphorylation, which was highest in ILC among all breast cancer
subtypes. Spatially clustered FOXA1 mutations correlated with increased FOXA1
expression and activity. Conversely, GATA3 mutations and high expression
characterized luminal A IDC, suggesting differential modulation of ER activity in
ILC and IDC. Proliferation and immune-related signatures determined three ILC
transcriptional subtypes associated with survival differences. Mixed IDC/ILC
cases were molecularly classified as ILC-like and IDC-like revealing no true
hybrid features. This multidimensional molecular atlas sheds new light on the
genetic bases of ILC and provides potential clinical options.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4603750 [Available on 2016-10-08]
PMID: 26451490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2015 Oct 6;4:28. doi: 10.1186/s40164-015-0024-z. eCollection
2015.

GATA family transcriptional factors: emerging suspects in hematologic disorders.

Gao J(1), Chen YH(1), Peterson LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
251 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611 USA.

GATA transcription factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that regulate
transcription during development and cell differentiation. The three important
GATA transcription factors GATA1, GATA2 and GATA3 play essential roles in the
development and maintenance of hematopoietic systems. GATA1 is required for the
erythroid and megakaryocytic commitment during hematopoiesis. GATA2 is crucial
for the proliferation and survival of early hematopoietic cells, and is also
involved in lineage specific transcriptional regulation as the dynamic partner of
GATA1. GATA3 plays an essential role in T lymphoid cell development and immune
regulation. As a result, mutations in genes encoding the GATA transcription
factors or alteration in the protein expression level or their function have been
linked to a variety of human hematologic disorders. In this review, we summarized
the current knowledge regarding the disrupted biologic function of GATA in
various hematologic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4594744
PMID: 26445707  [PubMed]


102. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1304-15. doi: 10.1038/ng.3415. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Integrated molecular analysis of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Kataoka K(1), Nagata Y(1), Kitanaka A(2), Shiraishi Y(3), Shimamura T(4),
Yasunaga J(5), Totoki Y(6), Chiba K(3), Sato-Otsubo A(1), Nagae G(7), Ishii R(8),
Muto S(9), Kotani S(1), Watatani Y(1), Takeda J(1), Sanada M(1,)(10), Tanaka
H(3), Suzuki H(1), Sato Y(1), Shiozawa Y(1), Yoshizato T(1), Yoshida K(1),
Makishima H(1), Iwanaga M(11), Ma G(5), Nosaka K(12), Hishizawa M(13), Itonaga
H(14), Imaizumi Y(15), Munakata W(16), Ogasawara H(17), Sato T(17), Sasai K(17), 
Muramoto K(17), Penova M(18), Kawaguchi T(18), Nakamura H(6), Hama N(6), Shide
K(2), Kubuki Y(2), Hidaka T(2), Kameda T(2), Nakamaki T(19), Ishiyama K(20),
Miyawaki S(21), Yoon SS(22), Tobinai K(16), Miyazaki Y(15), Takaori-Kondo A(13), 
Matsuda F(18), Takeuchi K(23), Nureki O(8), Aburatani H(7), Watanabe T(9),
Shibata T(6,)(24), Matsuoka M(5), Miyano S(3), Shimoda K(2), Ogawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan. (3)Laboratory of
DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Systems Biology, Center for
Neurological Disease and Cancer, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University, 
Nagoya, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus Research,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (6)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer
Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Genome Science Division, Research
Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (8)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (9)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Advanced Diagnosis, Clinical
Research Center, Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan. (11)Department of Frontier
Life Science, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science,
Nagasaki, Japan. (12)Department of Hematology, Kumamoto University School of
Medicine, Kumamoto, Japan. (13)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (14)Department of Hematology,
Sasebo City General Hospital, Sasebo, Japan. (15)Department of Hematology, Atomic
Bomb Disease and Hibakusya Medicine Unit, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan. (16)Department of Hematology, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (17)KAN Research Institute, Inc., Kobe, Japan. (18)Center
for Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. (19)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Showa University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (20)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa, Japan. (21)Division of Hematology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (22)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (23)Pathology Project for Molecular Targets, Cancer
Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (24)Laboratory 
of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1226-7.

Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is a peripheral T cell neoplasm of largely
unknown genetic basis, associated with human T cell leukemia virus type-1
(HTLV-1) infection. Here we describe an integrated molecular study in which we
performed whole-genome, exome, transcriptome and targeted resequencing, as well
as array-based copy number and methylation analyses, in a total of 426 ATL cases.
The identified alterations overlap significantly with the HTLV-1 Tax interactome 
and are highly enriched for T cell receptor-NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, T cell trafficking
and other T cell-related pathways as well as immunosurveillance. Other notable
features include a predominance of activating mutations (in PLCG1, PRKCB, CARD11,
VAV1, IRF4, FYN, CCR4 and CCR7) and gene fusions (CTLA4-CD28 and ICOS-CD28). We
also discovered frequent intragenic deletions involving IKZF2, CARD11 and TP73
and mutations in GATA3, HNRNPA2B1, GPR183, CSNK2A1, CSNK2B and CSNK1A1. Our
findings not only provide unique insights into key molecules in T cell signaling 
but will also guide the development of new diagnostics and therapeutics in this
intractable tumor.

PMID: 26437031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2015 Dec 15;168(3-4):203-10. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2015.09.009. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Local and systemic inflammatory and immunologic reactions to cyathostomin
larvicidal therapy in horses.

Nielsen MK(1), Loynachan AT(2), Jacobsen S(3), Stewart JC(4), Reinemeyer CR(5),
Horohov DW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Maxwell H. Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. Electronic address:
martin.nielsen@uky.edu. (2)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of
Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (3)Department of 
Large Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Taastrup, Denmark. (4)Maxwell H.
Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (5)East Tennessee Clinical Research, Inc.,
Rockwood, TN, USA.

Encysted cyathostomin larvae are ubiquitous in grazing horses. Arrested
development occurs in this population and can lead to an accumulation of encysted
larvae. Large numbers of tissue larvae place the horse at risk for developing
larval cyathostominosis. This disease complex is caused by mass emergence of
these larvae and is characterized by a generalized acute typhlocolitis and
manifests itself as a profuse protein-losing watery diarrhea with a reported
case-fatality rate of about 50%. Two anthelmintic formulations have a label claim
for larvicidal therapy of these encysted stages; moxidectin and a five-day
regimen of fenbendazole. There is limited knowledge about inflammatory and
immunologic reactions to larvicidal therapy. This study was designed to evaluate 
blood acute phase reactants as well as gene expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, both locally in the large intestinal walls and systemically. Further, 
mucosal tissue samples were evaluated histopathologically as well as analyzed for
gene expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, cluster of
differentiation (CD) cell surface proteins, and select transcription factors.
Eighteen juvenile horses with naturally acquired cyathostomin infections were
randomly assigned to three treatment groups; one group served as untreated
controls (Group 1), one received a five-day regimen of fenbendazole (10mg/kg)
(Group 2), and one group received moxidectin (0.4mg/kg) (Group 3). Horses were
treated on day 0 and euthanatized on days 18-20. Serum and whole blood samples
were collected on days 0, 5, and 18. All horses underwent necropsy with
collection of tissue samples from the ventral colon and cecum. Acute phase
reactants measured included serum amyloid A, iron and fibrinogen, and the
cytokines evaluated included interferon <U+03B3>, tumor necrosis factor a, transforming 
growth factor (TGF)-ß, and interleukins 1ß, 4, 5, 6, and 10. Transcription
factors evaluated were FoxP3, GATA3 and tBet, and CD markers included CD163,
CD3z, CD4, CD40, and CD8b. Histopathology revealed an inflammatory reaction with 
higher levels of lymphocytes, T cells, B cells, eosinophils and fibrous tissue in
the moxidectin-treated group compared to controls or horses treated with
fenbendazole. No apparent systemic reactions were observed. Expression of IL-5
and TGF-ß in intestinal tissues was significantly lower in Group 3 compared to
Group 1. This study revealed a subtle inflammatory reaction to moxidectin, which 
is unlikely to cause clinical issues.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26429413  [PubMed - in process]


104. Hum Pathol. 2015 Dec;46(12):1829-35. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.07.023. Epub
2015 Aug 12.

Significantly increased PELP1 protein expression in primary and metastatic
triple-negative breast carcinoma: comparison with GATA3 expression and PELP1's
potential role in triple-negative breast carcinoma.

Dang DN(1), Raj G(2), Sarode V(1), Molberg KH(1), Vadlamudi RK(3), Peng Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9073. (2)Department of Urology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 
75390-9073. (3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229. (4)Department of Pathology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9073. Electronic address:
yan.peng@utsouthwestern.edu.

PELP1 is a novel coregulator of nuclear hormone receptors and is implicated in
playing a role in driving breast cancer and enhancing metastatic potential. The
PELP1 protein expression and potential role of PELP1 in triple-negative breast
carcinoma (TNBC) have not been well characterized. We investigated PELP1
expression by immunohistochemistry in primary and metastatic triple-negative
tumors in human tissues and compared its expression with GATA-binding protein 3
(GATA3), a novel diagnostic marker for TNBC. We examined the expression of PELP1 
and GATA3 in 70 primary TNBC cases and found that PELP1 had a significantly
higher frequency of expression compared to GATA3 (96% versus 46%; P < .0001). The
mean extent score of expression of PELP1 was also significantly higher than
GATA3's expression (3.87 ± 0.07 versus 0.91 ± 0.15; P < .0001). PELP1 had
stronger staining intensity than GATA3. Furthermore, PELP1 immunoreactivity was
consistently maintained in paired primary and metastatic TNBC cases (100%). The
frequency of PELP1 expression (100%) in metastatic triple-negative tumors was
higher than that of GATA3 (40%) in the same tumors (P < .0001). These findings
indicate that PELP1 is a much more sensitive marker than GATA3 for TNBCs. PELP1
may have diagnostic utility for metastatic TNBC in appropriate settings, such as 
history of primary TNBC in cases where the primary is negative for GATA3,
mammaglobin, and GCDFP-15. The diffuse and strong nuclear immunoreactivity of
PELP1 in most cases suggests that PELP1 may be a molecular target for the
treatment of TNBC. We hope that this study will provide insights into the role of
PELP1 in TNBC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26428280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31569-92. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5035.

Decoding c-Myc networks of cell cycle and apoptosis regulated genes in a
transgenic mouse model of papillary lung adenocarcinomas.

Ciribilli Y(1), Singh P(2), Spanel R(2,)(3), Inga A(1), Borlak J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, 38123
Mattarello, Italy. (2)Centre for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hannover Medical
School, 30625 Hannover, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, 41747 Viersen,
Germany.

The c-Myc gene codes for a basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription
factor protein and is reported to be frequently over-expressed in human cancers. 
Given that c-Myc plays an essential role in neoplastic transformation we wished
to define its activity in lung cancer and therefore studied its targeted
expression to respiratory epithelium in a transgenic mouse disease model. Using
histological well-defined tumors, transcriptome analysis identified novel c-Myc
responsive cell cycle and apoptosis genes that were validated as direct c-Myc
targets using EMSA, Western blotting, gene reporter and ChIP assays.Through
computational analyses c-Myc cooperating transcription factors emerged for
repressed and up-regulated genes in cancer samples, namely Klf7, Gata3, Sox18,
p53 and Elf5 and Cebpa, respectively. Conversely, at promoters of genes regulated
in transgenic but non-carcinomatous lung tissue enriched binding sites for c-Myc,
Hbp1, Hif1 were observed. Bioinformatic analysis of tumor transcriptomic data
revealed regulatory gene networks and highlighted mortalin and moesin as master
regulators while gene reporter and ChIP assays in the H1299 lung cancer cell line
as well as cross-examination of published ChIP-sequence data of 7 human and 2
mouse cell lines provided strong evidence for the identified genes to be c-Myc
targets. The clinical significance of findings was established by evaluating
expression of orthologous proteins in human lung cancer. Taken collectively, a
molecular circuit for c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation was identified and 
the network analysis broadened the perspective for molecularly targeted
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4741625
PMID: 26427040  [PubMed - in process]


106. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jan;40(1):27-35. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000524.

Carcinoma of the Uterine Cervix Involving the Genitourinary Tract: A Potential
Diagnostic Dilemma.

Schwartz LE(1), Khani F, Bishop JA, Vang R, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Gynecology and Obstetrics Urology §Oncology, The
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

Uterine cervical carcinoma secondarily involving the genitourinary tract is
rarely documented histologically. These tumors present a unique diagnostic
challenge as they can appear morphologically similar to urothelial carcinoma as
well as primary squamous cell carcinoma and primary adenocarcinoma of the
bladder. Genitourinary consult cases at the Johns Hopkins Hospital from 1984 to
the present were searched for cases in which the differential diagnosis was
primary bladder carcinoma versus secondary involvement by cervical carcinoma. We 
identified 10 cases that met these criteria and evaluated them by
immunohistochemistry for p16 and GATA3 and in situ hybridization for human
papillomavirus (HPV). Six cases were received with a gynecologic history. Four
cases had been misdiagnosed as urothelial carcinoma, and 1 case was favored to be
cystitis cystica et glandularis by the submitting institutions. Morphologically, 
the majority of cases showed basaloid nests of tumor cells infiltrating muscle
bundles, with several having foci that mimicked urothelial carcinoma in situ. Six
tumors were found to be diffusely positive with p16, 1 tumor was patchy, 1 was
weak, and 2 were negative. GATA3 staining was negative in 6 cases, and 4 showed
weak to strong positivity. Eight cases were positive for high-risk HPV (6 were
positive for HPV 16, and 1 was positive for HPV 18). In the 2 cases that were
negative for HPV by in situ hybridization, characteristic morphologic features of
HPV-unrelated type of endocervical adenocarcinoma were present. On the basis of
our findings we advocate a multifaceted approach, combining morphologic
evaluation with ancillary studies including immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization in the evaluation of genitourinary specimens for secondary
involvement by cervical carcinoma. Furthermore, gynecologic clinical history is
absolutely critical and most important to the evaluation and diagnosis of these
specimens, as these ancillary studies are not completely sensitive or specific.

PMID: 26426382  [PubMed - in process]


107. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 1;5:14615. doi: 10.1038/srep14615.

MiR-125a-5p Decreases the Sensitivity of Treg cells Toward IL-6-Mediated
Conversion by Inhibiting IL-6R and STAT3 Expression.

Li D(1), Kong C(1,)(2), Tsun A(1), Chen C(1), Song H(3), Shi G(3), Pan
W(4,)(5,)(6), Dai D(4,)(5), Shen N(4,)(5,)(7), Li B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology &Immunology, Unit of Molecular
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Bio-energy Crops, College of Life Science, Shanghai University,
Shanghai 200444, China. (3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (5)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of
Health Sciences and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (6)Department of Genetics, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (7)Division of Rheumatology and the
Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology (CAGE), Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The transcription factor FOXP3 is essential for the differentiation and function 
of regulatory T cells (Treg). It is established that the transcription factor
GATA-3 is induced in Treg cells under inflammatory conditions. GATA-3 stabilizes 
FOXP3 levels to avoid the differentiation of Treg cells into inflammatory-like T 
cells. The IL-6 signal pathway influences the sensitivity of Treg cells towards
instability. The mechanism of GATA-3 in regulating FOXP3 and its relation to the 
IL-6 pathway remains unclear. Here we report how miR-125a-5p plays an important
role in regulating the conversion of Treg cells by IL-6. miR-125a-5p expression
is low in Treg cells under steady state conditions and can be induced by GATA-3
to inhibit the expression of IL-6R and STAT3. This finding reveals a
GATA3/miR-125a-5p/IL-6R and STAT3/FOXP3 regulatory pathway, which determines how 
Treg cells respond to inflammatory IL-6-rich conditions.

PMCID: PMC4589732
PMID: 26424054  [PubMed - in process]


108. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Oct;139(10):1253-7. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2015-0190-RA.

Morphologic Mimics of Invasive Lobular Carcinoma.

Ishikawa MK(1), Pinsky RW, Smith LB, Jorns JM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathology (Drs Ishikawa, Smith, and Jorns) and
Radiology (Dr Pinsky), University of Michigan Hospital and Health Systems, Ann
Arbor.

Invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast is a relatively common diagnosis.
However, other carcinomatous as well as noncarcinomatous neoplasms, either
primary or metastatic to the breast, may mimic invasive lobular carcinoma. As
treatment may differ, establishing the correct diagnosis is paramount to
providing the appropriate care for these patients. This review outlines important
mimics of invasive lobular carcinoma and the key clinicopathologic and
immunohistochemical features as well as additional studies helpful in
establishing their diagnoses.

PMID: 26414470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):543-56. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.006. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

Extensive Nuclear Reprogramming Underlies Lineage Conversion into Functional
Trophoblast Stem-like Cells.

Benchetrit H(1), Herman S(1), van Wietmarschen N(2), Wu T(3), Makedonski K(1),
Maoz N(1), Yom Tov N(1), Stave D(1), Lasry R(1), Zayat V(1), Xiao A(3), Lansdorp 
PM(4), Sebban S(1), Buganim Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Institute for
Medical Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem 91120, Israel. (2)European Research Institute for the Biology of
Ageing, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Antonius Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen 9713, the Netherlands. (3)Yale Stem Cell
Center and Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen
9713, the Netherlands; Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech),
Novaya str. 100, Skolkovo Moscow Region 143025, Russia. (5)Department of
Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Institute for Medical Research
Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel. Electronic address: yossibug@ekmd.huji.ac.il.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):499-500.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) undergo extensive nuclear reprogramming
and are generally indistinguishable from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in their
functional capacity and transcriptome and DNA methylation profiles. However,
direct conversion of cells from one lineage to another often yields incompletely 
reprogrammed, functionally compromised cells, raising the question of whether
pluripotency is required to achieve a high degree of nuclear reprogramming. Here,
we show that transient expression of Gata3, Eomes, and Tfap2c in mouse
fibroblasts induces stable, transgene-independent trophoblast stem-like cells
(iTSCs). iTSCs possess transcriptional profiles highly similar to
blastocyst-derived TSCs, with comparable methylation and H3K27ac patterns and
genome-wide H2A.X deposition. iTSCs generate trophoectodermal lineages upon
differentiation, form hemorrhagic lesions, and contribute to developing placentas
in chimera assays, indicating a high degree of nuclear reprogramming, with no
evidence of passage through a transient pluripotent state. Together, these data
demonstrate that extensive nuclear reprogramming can be achieved independently of
pluripotency.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26412562  [PubMed - in process]


110. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):557-68. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.005. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

Direct Induction of Trophoblast Stem Cells from Murine Fibroblasts.

Kubaczka C(1), Senner CE(2), Cierlitza M(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(3), Kuckenberg P(1),
Peitz M(4), Hemberger M(2), Schorle H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany. (2)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK; Centre for Trophoblast
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (3)Group of
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, 20014 San Sebastian, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
48013 Bilbao, Spain. (4)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain 
Center, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany. (5)Department of
Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, 
Germany. Electronic address: hubert.schorle@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):499-500.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) arise from the first cell fate decision in the
developing embryo and generate extra-embryonic lineages, giving rise to the fetal
portion of the placenta. Mouse embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages are
strictly separated by a distinct epigenetic barrier, which is not fully overcome 
following expression of TSC-determining factors in embryonic stem cells. Here, we
show that transient expression of Tfap2c, Gata3, Eomes, and Ets2 is sufficient to
reprogram mouse embryonic fibroblasts and post-natal tail-tip-derived fibroblasts
into induced TSCs (iTSCs) and surmount the epigenetic barrier separating somatic 
from extra-embryonic lineages. iTSCs share nearly identical morphological
characteristics, gene expression profiles, and DNA methylation patterns with
blastocyst-derived TSCs. Furthermore, iTSCs display transgene-independent
self-renewal, differentiate along extra-embryonic lineages, and chimerize host
placentas following blastocyst injection. These findings provide insights into
the transcription factor networks governing TSC identity and opportunities for
studying the epigenetic barriers underlying embryonic and extra-embryonic lineage
segregation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26412560  [PubMed - in process]


111. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt B:78-90. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.08.009. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

A survey of disease connections for CD4+ T cell master genes and their directly
linked genes.

Li W(1), Espinal-Enríquez J(2), Simpfendorfer KR(3), Hernández-Lemus E(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY,
USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (2)Computational Genomics
Department, National Institute of Genomic Medicine, México, D.F., Mexico;
Complexity in Systems Biology, Center for Complexity Sciences, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico. (3)The Robert S. Boas Center
for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research,
North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Genome-wide association studies and other genetic analyses have identified a
large number of genes and variants implicating a variety of disease etiological
mechanisms. It is imperative for the study of human diseases to put these genetic
findings into a coherent functional context. Here we use system biology tools to 
examine disease connections of five master genes for CD4+ T cell subtypes (TBX21,
GATA3, RORC, BCL6, and FOXP3). We compiled a list of genes functionally
interacting (protein-protein interaction, or by acting in the same pathway) with 
the master genes, then we surveyed the disease connections, either by
experimental evidence or by genetic association. Embryonic lethal genes (also
known as essential genes) are over-represented in master genes and their
interacting genes (55% versus 40% in other genes). Transcription factors are
significantly enriched among genes interacting with the master genes (63% versus 
10% in other genes). Predicted haploinsufficiency is a feature of most these
genes. Disease-connected genes are enriched in this list of genes: 42% of these
genes have a disease connection according to Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM) (versus 23% in other genes), and 74% are associated with some diseases or 
phenotype in a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) (versus 43% in other genes). 
Seemingly, not all of the diseases connected to genes surveyed were immune
related, which may indicate pleiotropic functions of the master regulator genes
and associated genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411796  [PubMed - in process]


112. Minerva Endocrinol. 2016 Mar;41(1):28-36. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Disturbed Th1 and Th2 balance in patients with Graves' disease.

Eshaghkhani Y(1), Sanati MH, Nakhjavani M, Safari R, Khajavi A, Ataei M, Jadali
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran - zjadali@razi.tums.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS: Graves' disease (GD) is a common autoimmune disorder that
is primarily driven by malfunction of T lymphocytes, which influences the
production of antibodies reacting with cellular and tissue components of the
thyroid gland. The aim of this study was to determine the level of mRNA
expression for the genes encoding T-bet and GATA3, as the master regulators of
the T helper (Th)1 and Th2 differentiation, respectively together with Th1
(IFN-<U+03B3>) and Th2(IL-4) cytokine mRNA expression. Relative quantification of T-bet,
GATA3, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 transcripts in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs)
was conducted by real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Serum levels of
IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 were also determined by Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
In comparison with the normal group, T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA expression levels were 
significantly up-regulated in the GD patients, while GATA3 and IL-4 mRNA
expression levels were downregulated. In addition, a marked decrease in plasma
IL-4 levels was observed in the GD group. IFN-<U+03B3> levels were also higher in
patients in comparison to the controls. Furthermore, a clear correlation between 
increased IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA expression and IFN-<U+03B3> (P<0.05) was revealed. These results
indicate that a Th1/Th2 imbalance exists in GD, and it may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of disease.

PMID: 26393316  [PubMed - in process]


113. Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 15;29(18):1930-41. doi: 10.1101/gad.265025.115.

A monoallelic-to-biallelic T-cell transcriptional switch regulates GATA3
abundance.

Ku CJ(1), Lim KC(1), Kalantry S(2), Maillard I(3), Engel JD(1), Hosoya T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA; (2)Department of Human Genetics,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA;
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA; Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA; Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Protein abundance must be precisely regulated throughout life, and nowhere is the
stringency of this requirement more evident than during T-cell development: A
twofold increase in the abundance of transcription factor GATA3 results in thymic
lymphoma, while reduced GATA3 leads to diminished T-cell production. GATA3
haploinsufficiency also causes human HDR (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
dysplasia) syndrome, often accompanied by immunodeficiency. Here we show that
loss of one Gata3 allele leads to diminished expansion (and compromised
development) of immature T cells as well as aberrant induction of myeloid
transcription factor PU.1. This effect is at least in part mediated
transcriptionally: We discovered that Gata3 is monoallelically expressed in a
parent of origin-independent manner in hematopoietic stem cells and early T-cell 
progenitors. Curiously, half of the developing cells switch to biallelic Gata3
transcription abruptly at midthymopoiesis. We show that the
monoallelic-to-biallelic transcriptional switch is stably maintained and
therefore is not a stochastic phenomenon. This unique mechanism, if adopted by
other regulatory genes, may provide new biological insights into the rather
prevalent phenomenon of monoallelic expression of autosomal genes as well as into
the variably penetrant pathophysiological spectrum of phenotypes observed in many
human syndromes that are due to haploinsufficiency of the affected gene.

© 2015 Ku et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4579350
PMID: 26385963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jul 15;8(7):10875-84. eCollection 2015.

Differential expression of T cell-related genes in AMI and SA stages of coronary 
artery disease.

Yan W(1), Wang L(1), Jiang J(1), Xu W(1), Gong Z(1), Duan Q(1), Li C(1), Song
H(1), Che L(1), Shen Y(1), Zhou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine Shanghai 200065, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify differentially expressed T cells-related genes in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and compare their differences in T cell
activation and subset functions in different stages of coronary atherosclerosis
disease (CAD).
METHODS: 20 patients with acute myocardial infarction patients (AMI), 20 patients
with stable angina pectoris (SA) and 20 healthy volunteers were recruited into
the study. Whole human genome microarray analysis was used to detect the
expression of T cell related genes among three groups.
RESULTS: mRNA expression of 68 genes involved in T cell was detected. 1) Antigen 
recognition: in the AMI patients 12 genes were down-regulated and 9 were
significantly down-regulated among all 13 genes, compared with those of the SA
and the control group, respectively. 2) Co-stimulators and regulators of T cell
activation: among 16 genes in the AMI patients, 15 genes were lower and 8 were
significantly lower than the other two groups. 3) T cell subsets, CTL: all 11
genes in the AMI patients were down-regulated, particularly GZMM and CASP8 were
significantly down-regulated compared with the SA patients and controls. Th1/Th2:
in the AMI patients, gene expressions including IL1 and IL18 were significantly
higher, whereas GATA3 mRNA was significantly lower than those in other two
groups. Th17/Treg: in the AMI group, RORC and CCR6 mRNAs were significantly
down-regulated compared with the control group, while CD25 and CD127 expressions 
were significantly lower than SA group. There was no difference in T cell related
genes between the SA patients and the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: In the AMI patients, the mRNA expression of T cell antigen
recognition, activation and subset functions was imbalanced or decreased,
indicating the dysfunction of cellular immunity in patients with AMI. Then
improving T cell mediated cellular immunity may be considered as a potential
target for medical interventions in the patients with AMI.

PMCID: PMC4565264
PMID: 26379881  [PubMed]


115. N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1176-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1507755#SA1.

Allergen Responses Modified by a GATA3 DNAzyme.

Caramori G, Chung KF, Barnes PJ.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1177.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):1987-95.

PMID: 26376148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1177. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1507755.

Allergen Responses Modified by a GATA3 DNAzyme.

Buhl R, Garn H, Renz H.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):1987-95.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1176-7.

PMID: 26376147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 11;10(9):e0137699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137699.
eCollection 2015.

PU.1 Suppresses Th2 Cytokine Expression via Silencing of GATA3 Transcription in
Dendritic Cells.

Yashiro T(1), Kubo M(2), Ogawa H(3), Okumura K(3), Nishiyama C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, Department of Biological
Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo
University of Science, 6-3-1 Niijuku, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-8585, Japan;
Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Cytokine Regulation,
Integrative Medical Science (IMS), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Kanagawa, Japan;
Division of Molecular Pathology, Research Institute for Biomedical Science, Tokyo
University of Science, 2669 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba, 278-0022, Japan. (3)Atopy
Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

The transcription factor PU.1 is predominantly expressed in dendritic cells (DCs)
and is essential for DC differentiation. Although there are several reports that 
PU.1 positively regulates the expression of DC-specific genes, whether PU.1 also 
has a suppressive effect on DCs is largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that PU.1
suppresses the expression of Th2 cytokines including IL-13 and IL-5 in bone
marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs), through repression of the expression of GATA3, which 
is a master regulator of Th2 differentiations. When PU.1 siRNA was introduced
into BMDCs, LPS-induced expression of IL-13 and IL-5 was increased along with
upregulation of the constitutive expression of GATA2 and GATA3. The additional
introduction of GATA3 siRNA but not of GATA2 siRNA abrogated PU.1 siRNA-mediated 
upregulation of IL-13 and IL-5. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that
PU.1 bound to Gata3 proximal promoter region, which is more dominant than the
distal promoter in driving GATA3 transcription in DCs. The degree of histone
acetylation at the Gata3 promoter was decreased in PU.1 siRNA-introduced DCs,
suggesting the involvement of PU.1 in chromatin modification of the Gata3
promoter. Treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A, 
increased the degree of histone H3 acetylation at the Gata3 promoter and induced 
the subsequent expression of GATA3. Experiments using HDAC inhibitors and siRNAs 
showed that HDAC3 suppressed GATA3 expression. The recruitment of HDAC3 to the
Gata3 promoter was decreased by PU.1 knockdown. LPS-induced IL-13 expression was 
dramatically reduced in BMDCs generated from mice lacking the conserved GATA3
response element, termed CGRE, which is an essential site for the binding of
GATA3 on the Il-13 promoter. The degree of H3K4me3 at CGRE was significantly
increased in PU.1 siRNA-transfected stimulated DCs. Our results indicate that
PU.1 plays pivotal roles in DC development and function, serving not only as a
transcriptional activator but also as a repressor.

PMCID: PMC4567381
PMID: 26361334  [PubMed - in process]


118. J Exp Bot. 2015 Dec;66(22):7075-87. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv409. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

HANABA TARANU regulates the shoot apical meristem and leaf development in
cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.).

Ding L(1), Yan S(1), Jiang L(1), Liu M(1), Zhang J(1), Zhao J(1), Zhao W(1), Han 
YY(2), Wang Q(1), Zhang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vegetable Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Growth and
Developmental Regulation for Protected Vegetable Crops, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100193, China. (2)Department of Plant Science and Technology,
Beijing University of Agriculture, Beijing, 102206, China. (3)Department of
Vegetable Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Growth and Developmental Regulation
for Protected Vegetable Crops, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China zhxiaolan@cau.edu.cn.

The shoot apical meristem (SAM) is essential for continuous organogenesis in
higher plants, while the leaf is the primary source organ and the leaf shape
directly affects the efficiency of photosynthesis. HANABA TARANU (HAN) encodes a 
GATA3-type transcription factor that functions in floral organ development, SAM
organization, and embryo development in Arabidopsis, but is involved in
suppressing bract outgrowth and promoting branching in grass species. Here the
function of the HAN homologue CsHAN1 was characterized in cucumber, an important 
vegetable with great agricultural and economic value. CsHAN1 is predominantly
expressed at the junction of the SAM and the stem, and can partially rescue the
han-2 floral organ phenotype in Arabidopsis. Overexpression and RNAi of CsHAN1
transgenic cucumber resulted in retarded growth early after embryogenesis and
produced highly lobed leaves. Further, it was found that CsHAN1 may regulate SAM 
development through regulating the WUSCHEL (WUS) and SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM)
pathways, and mediate leaf development through a complicated gene regulatory
network in cucumber.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4765787
PMID: 26320238  [PubMed - in process]


119. Curr Opin Immunol. 2015 Dec;37:6-10. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.08.001. Epub 2015
Aug 27.

Effector T cell differentiation: are master regulators of effector T cells still 
the masters?

Wang C(1), Collins M(1), Kuchroo VK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Evergrande Center for Immunological Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Evergrande Center for Immunological Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic 
address: vkuchroo@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

Effector CD4 T cell lineages have been implicated as potent inducers of
autoimmune diseases. Tbet, Gata3 and Rorgt are master transcriptional regulators 
of Th1, Th2 and Th17 lineages respectively and promote the distinct expression of
signature cytokines. Significant progress has been made in understanding the
transcriptional network that drives CD4 T cell differentiation, revealing novel
points of regulation mediated by transcription factors, cell surface receptors,
cytokines and chemokines. Epigenetic modifications and metabolic mediators define
the transcriptional landscape in which master transcription factors operate and
collaborate with a network of transcriptional modifiers to guide lineage
specification, plasticity and function.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26319196  [PubMed - in process]


120. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Aug 25. [Epub ahead of print]

The Utility of GATA3 in the Diagnosis of Urothelial Carcinomas With Variant
Morphologic Patterns.

Verduin L(1), Mentrikoski MJ, Heitz CT, Wick MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA.

The transcription factor GATA3 is a recently described biomarker that is highly
expressed in bladder and breast carcinomas. Although it has shown sensitivity as 
a marker of primary bladder carcinomas with purely urothelial differentiation,
the ability of GATA3 to label primary bladder carcinomas with variant morphologic
patterns has been incompletely assessed to date. The current study was designed
to determine whether GATA3 staining is retained in "unconventional" bladder
carcinomas. Eighty-eight cases of primary bladder cancers were retrieved from the
authors' institutional archive, and they included the following histomorphologic 
types: 6 small cell carcinomas, 12 sarcomatoid carcinomas, 17 adenocarcinomas
(both primary and urothelial variants with glandular differentiation), 24
micropapillary carcinomas, and 27 squamous cell carcinomas (both primary and
urothelial variants with squamous differentiation). A tissue microarray was
constructed and automated immunostaining for GATA3 (Clone L50-823, Biocare
Medical, Concord, CA) was performed using standard technique. Among the 5
variants of unconventional bladder carcinoma, only the micropapillary and
sarcomatoid forms exhibited consistent and strong immunolabeling for GATA3.
Hence, the sensitivity of this determinant is diminished in several histologic
forms of primary bladder carcinoma. That fact will affect the interpretation of
GATA3 stains in the context of possible metastasis from primary bladder
carcinomas with variant morphologic patterns, as well as their distinction from
secondary bladder involvement by tumors of nonurothelial origin.

PMID: 26317312  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


121. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1393-404. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3136. Epub 2015 Aug
27.

Multifaceted roles of 5'-regulatory region of the cancer associated gene B4GALT1 
and its comparison with the gene family.

Al-Obaide MA(1), Alobydi H(2), Abdelsalam AG(3), Zhang R(4), Srivenugopal KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA. (2)Biomedica, LLC, Sterling
Heights, MI, USA. (3)Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, College
of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. (4)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

ß1,4-Galactosylransferases are a family of enzymes encoded by seven B4GALT genes 
and are involved in the development of anticancer drug resistance and metastasis.
Among these genes, the B4GALT1 shows significant variations in the transcript
origination sites in different cell types/tissues and encodes an interesting
dually partitioning ß-1, 4-galactosyltransferase protein. We identified at 5'-end
of B4GALT1 a 1.454 kb sequence forming a transcription regulatory region,
referred to by us as the TR1-PE1, had all characteristics of a bidirectional
promoter directing the transcription of B4GALT1 in a divergent manner along with 
its long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) antisense counterpart B4GALT1-AS1. The TR1-PE1
showed unique dinucleotide base-stacking energy values specific to transcription 
factor binding sites (TFBSs), INR and BRE, and harbored CpG Island (CGI) that
showed GC skew with potential for R-loop formation at the transcription starting 
sites (TSSs). The 5'-regulatory axis of B4GALT1 also included five more novel
TFBSs for CTCF, GLI1, TCF7L2, GATA3 and SOX5, in addition to unique (TG)18
repeats in conjunction with 22 nucleotide TG-associated sequence (TGAS). The five
lncRNA B4GALT1-AS1 transcripts showed significant complementarity with B4GALT1
mRNA. In contrast, the rest of B4GALT genes showed fewer lncRNAs, and all lacked 
the (TG)18 and TGAS. Our results are strongly supported by the FANTOM5 study
which showed tissue-specific variations in transcript origination sites for this 
gene. We suggest that the unique expression patterns for the B4GALT1 in normal
and malignant tissues are controlled by a differential usage of 5'-B4GALT1
regulatory units along with a post-transcriptional regulation by the antisense
RNA, which in turn govern the cell-matrix interactions, neoplastic progression,
anticancer drug sensitivity, and could be utilized in personalized therapy.

PMID: 26315939  [PubMed - in process]


122. Med Res Rev. 2015 Nov;35(6):1300-15. doi: 10.1002/med.21362. Epub 2015 Aug 27.

The Significance and Therapeutic Potential of GATA3 Expression and Mutation in
Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review.

Du F(1), Yuan P(1), Wang T(2), Zhao J(1), Zhao Z(3), Luo Y(1), Xu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China. (2)Tumor Marker
Research Center, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100191, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100191, China.

GATA3 is a critical transcription factor in the development of various human
systems. The notion that GATA3 expression is required for the differentiation and
maintenance of normal breast tissue has been well established. Recently, GATA3 is
found to actively participate in the multistep process leading breast cancer
pathogenesis, including tumorigenesis, tumor differentiation, epithelial
mesenchymal transition, and metastasis through regulation of various target
genes. On the other hand, several studies have raised questions and highlighted
the role of GATA3-low or GATA3-negative cells during the malignant development of
breast cancer. In addition to gene expression, GATA3 mutations provide another
dimension of complexity. As one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast
cancer, GATA3 mutations may have an effect on DNA-binding ability, protein
production, and transactivation activity. Recognition of the multiple function of
GATA3 in breast cancer will serve to deepen our understanding of the nature of
this disease and develop novel therapeutic approaches.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26313026  [PubMed - in process]


123. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):3150-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545713. Epub 2015 Sep 
21.

Transcription factor co-occupied regions in the murine genome constitute
T-helper-cell subtype-specific enhancers.

Fang Z(1), Hecklau K(1), Gross F(2), Bachmann I(3), Venzke M(1), Karl M(1),
Schuchhardt J(3), Radbruch A(1,)(4), Herzel H(2), Baumgrass R(1).

Author information: 
(1)German Rheumatism Research Center (DRFZ), A Leibniz Institute, Berlin,
Germany. (2)Institute for Theoretical Biology, Charité and Humboldt University
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (3)MicroDiscovery GmbH, Berlin, Germany. (4)Charité,
Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):2998-3001.

Transcription factors (TFs) regulate cell-type-specific gene expression programs 
by combinatorial binding to cis-genomic elements, particularly enhancers,
subsequently leading to the recruitment of cofactors, and the general
transcriptional machinery to target genes. Using data integration of genome-wide 
TF binding profiles, we defined regions with combinatorial binding of
lineage-specific master TFs (T-BET, GATA3, and ROR-<U+03B3>t) and STATs (STAT1 and
STAT4, STAT6, and STAT3) in murine T helper (Th) 1, Th2, and Th17 cells,
respectively. Stringently excluding promoter regions, we revealed precise genomic
elements which were preferentially associated with the enhancer marks p300 and
H3K4me1. Furthermore, closely adjacent TF co-occupied regions constituted larger 
enhancer domains in the respective Th-cell subset (177 in Th1, 141 in Th2, and
266 in Th17 cells) with characteristics of so-called super-enhancers.
Importantly, 89% of these super-enhancer regions were Th-cell subtype-specific.
Genes associated with super-enhancers, including relevant Th-cell genes (such as 
Ifng in Th1, Il13 in Th2, and Il17a in Th17 cells), showed strong transcriptional
activity. Altogether, the discovered catalog of enhancers provides information
about crucial Th-cell subtype-specific regulatory hubs, which will be useful for 
revealing cell-type-specific gene regulation processes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26300430  [PubMed - in process]


124. Biol Res. 2015 Aug 22;48:47. doi: 10.1186/s40659-015-0038-3.

Integrated analyses of copy number variations and gene differential expression in
lung squamous-cell carcinoma.

Yang Z(1,)(2), Zhuan B(3), Yan Y(4), Jiang S(5), Wang T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang
Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China. zhaoyyd@163.com. (2)Department of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia People's Hospital, Yinchuan, 750011, China.
zhaoyyd@163.com. (3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia
People's Hospital, Yinchuan, 750011, China. bingzhuanan@126.com. (4)Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Ningxia People's Hospital, Yinchuan,
750011, China. yingyanand@yeah.net. (5)Department of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China.
siminjjj@126.com. (6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030, China. taowangtts@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Although numerous efforts have been made, the pathogenesis underlying
lung squamous-cell carcinoma (SCC) remains unclear. This study aimed to identify 
the CNV-driven genes by an integrated analysis of both the gene differential
expression and copy number variation (CNV).
RESULTS: A higher burden of the CNVs was found in 10-50 kb length. The 16
CNV-driven genes mainly located in chr 1 and chr 3 were enriched in immune
response [e.g. complement factor H (CFH) and Fc fragment of IgG, low affinity
IIIa, receptor (FCGR3A)], starch and sucrose metabolism [e.g. amylase alpha 2A
(AMY2A)]. Furthermore, 38 TFs were screened for the 9 CNV-driven genes and then
the regulatory network was constructed, in which the GATA-binding factor 1, 2,
and 3 (GATA1, GATA2, GATA3) jointly regulated the expression of TP63.
CONCLUSIONS: The above CNV-driven genes might be potential contributors to the
development of lung SCC.

PMCID: PMC4546326
PMID: 26297502  [PubMed - in process]


125. Cytokine. 2015 Dec;76(2):409-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.08.004. Epub 2015 Aug
14.

Anti-inflammatory effects of interleukin-35 in acquired aplastic anemia.

Yu W(1), Ge M(1), Lu S(1), Shi J(1), Li X(1), Zhang J(1), Wang M(1), Huang J(1), 
Shao Y(1), Huang Z(1), Zhang J(1), Nie N(1), Zheng Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology &
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, PR China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, 288 
Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, PR China. Electronic address:
zheng_yizhou@hotmail.com.

Interleukin (IL)-35 is a novel regulatory cytokine primarily produced by
regulatory T cells. Accumulating evidence has established that IL-35 plays an
important role in the regulation of immune homeostasis, but little is known
regarding the function of IL-35 in acquired aplastic anemia (AA). The aim of the 
present study was to investigate the expression of IL-35 and its effects on T
cell response in AA. Our study demonstrated that significantly decreased plasma
levels of IL-35 in AA were closely correlated with disease severity. In vitro
stimulation experiment further confirmed the anti-inflammatory effects of IL-35, 
including suppressing the proliferation of CD4(+) and CD8(+) effector T cells,
inhibiting the secretion of interferon-<U+03B3>, tumor necrosis factor-a and IL-17 and
promoting the production of transforming growth factor-ß by peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from patients with AA. Furthermore, we established that IL-35
inhibited the differentiation of type 1 T cells and T helper 17 cells but
promoted the differentiation of type 2 T cells. Accordingly, the expression of
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t was inhibited while the expression of GATA3 was induced after
IL-35 treatment. In summary, our findings suggested that decreased IL-35 might
contribute to the loss of immune-tolerance and be critically involved in the
pathogenesis of AA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26282938  [PubMed - in process]


126. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;137(2):627-629.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.06.041. Epub 2015 Aug 15.

GATA3 haploinsufficiency does not block allergic sensitization or atopic disease.

Lawrence MG(1), Leiding JW(2), Lyons JJ(3), Hsu AP(4), Nelson CC(3), Jones N(5), 
Fitzgerald A(4), Chien WW(6), Workman L(1), Platts-Mills TA(1), Brewer C(7),
Gafni RI(8), Stone KD(3), Milner JD(3), Holland SM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Asthma and Allergic Diseases Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Va. (2)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of
Health (NIH), Bethesda, Md; Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of South Florida, St Petersburg, Fla.
(3)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Md.
(4)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Md.
(5)Clinical Research Directorate/CMRP, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc, National 
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Md. (6)Division of Intramural
Research, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH, 
Bethesda, Md; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md. (7)Division of Intramural Research, National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, Md.
(8)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, Md.
(9)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Md.
Electronic address: smh@nih.gov.

PMCID: PMC4747849 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26282285  [PubMed - in process]


127. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Sep;144(3):444-51. doi: 10.1309/AJCPC7FA3IHYPEPF.

Evaluating the utility of trefoil factor 1 as a mammary-specific immunostain
compared and in conjunction with GATA-3 and mammaglobin in the distinction
between carcinoma of breast and lung.

Wells JM(1), Ginter PS(1), Liu Y(1), Chen Z(2), Narula N(1), Shin SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and. (2)Healthcare
Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. (3)From the
Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and sjshin@med.cornell.edu.

OBJECTIVES: The distinction between metastatic breast carcinomas (BCs) and
primary lung carcinomas (PLCs) can be difficult. This study tested the utility of
trefoil factor 1 (TFF1) for this purpose and compared it with mammaglobin and
GATA protein binding 3 (GATA-3).
METHODS: Tissue microarrays containing 365 BCs and 338 PLCs were stained with
TFF1, mammaglobin, and GATA-3, and an H-score was calculated. Sensitivity,
specificity, and accuracy were calculated, and logistical regression analysis was
performed.
RESULTS: Accuracy of correctly classifying the tumor type was 81.9%, 71.3%, and
64.0% for GATA-3, mammaglobin, and TFF1, respectively. Odds ratios for selecting 
BCs were 25.69, 93.15, and 4.17, respectively, with P values less than .001. With
a single exception, the best immunopanel included GATA-3 and mammaglobin in all
comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: TFF1 demonstrated breast specificity but was inferior to mammaglobin
and GATA-3. Therefore, its routine clinical use may not be justified. TFF1 showed
little benefit when added to an immunopanel.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 26276775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;39(9):1282-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000505.

GATA3 immunohistochemistry expression in histologic subtypes of primary breast
carcinoma and metastatic breast carcinoma cytology.

Deftereos G(1), Sanguino Ramirez AM, Silverman JF, Krishnamurti U.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Allegheny General Hospital, Allegheny Health
Network, Pittsburgh, PA Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA.

GATA3 plays a role in cell proliferation and differentiation in many tissues,
including breast, and it has been suggested that GATA3 expression correlates with
ER expression. However, little is known on GATA3 expression in various subtypes
of breast carcinoma, its utilization in cytology, and on how GATA3 performs in
comparison with GCDFP-15 and mammaglobin. Eighty-four histology cases of breast
carcinoma of various subtypes, including 28 triple-negative breast carcinomas,
along with 20 cytology cases of metastatic breast carcinoma and 12 cytology cases
of ER-positive metastatic gynecologic malignancies, were stained for GATA3,
GCDFP-15, and mammaglobin. In non-triple-negative breast carcinomas (n=56), GATA3
showed 100% sensitivity, higher than GCDFP-15 (42.8%; P<0.0001) and mammaglobin
(58.9%; P<0.0001), whereas staining patterns were similar for all the histologic 
subtypes examined. Staining scores were determined by multiplying the percentage 
of cancer cells staining with an intensity score of 1+, 2+, or 3+ (range, 0 to
300). In non-triple-negative carcinomas, GATA3 showed a mean score of 273.7,
higher than GCDFP-15 (107.5; P<0.0001) and mammaglobin (147.7; P<0.0001). In
triple-negative breast carcinomas (n=28), GATA3 showed a sensitivity of 60.7%,
greater than GCDFP-15 (17.9%; P=0.0022) and mammaglobin (7.1%; P<0.0001). These
results were consistent irrespective of the subtype examined. In breast carcinoma
cytology cases, 100% stained with GATA3, higher than GCDFP-15 (20%; P<0.0001) and
mammaglobin (45%; P<0.0001). None of the metastatic endometrial or ovarian
carcinomas were positive for GATA3. Although GATA3 expression correlates with ER 
expression in breast, no correlation is observed in gynecologic malignancies.
Thus, in working up ER-positive metastatic malignancies GATA3 demonstrates
specificity for breast.

PMID: 26274030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Int Med Res. 2015 Oct;43(5):718-24. doi: 10.1177/0300060515591065. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Identification of a novel de novo GATA3 mutation in a patient with HDR syndrome.

Chen L(1), Chen B(1), Leng W(1), Lui X(1), Wu Q(1), Ouyang X(2), Liang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)Section of Digestive Disease, Department
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China ziwenliang99@163.com.

We describe the case of a 21-year-old male with hypocalcaemia,
hyperphosphataemia, recurrent limb twitch, deafness, proteinuria, increased serum
creatinine and urea nitrogen levels, and shrinkage of both kidneys. Brain
computed tomography showed intracranial calcifications. The patient was diagnosed
with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia (HDR)
syndrome. DNA sequence analysis of the GATA3 gene showed a novel de novo
mutation, c. 529dupC (p. Arg177profs*126), in exon 2, resulting in a frameshift
mutation with a premature stop codon after a new 126 amino acid sequence. We
provide further evidence that HDR syndrome is caused by haploinsufficiency of
GATA3.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26268891  [PubMed - in process]


130. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Dec;23(8):662-6. doi: 10.1177/1066896915599060. Epub 2015
Aug 10.

Low-Grade, Nonintestinal Nonsalivary Sinonasal Adenocarcinoma Associated With an 
Exophytic Schneiderian Papilloma: A Case Report.

Blumberg JM(1), Escobar-Stein J(2), Vining EM(3), Prasad ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
jeff.blumberg@gmail.com. (2)Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia. (3)Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Sinonasal adenocarcinoma is a rare tumor of the head and neck accounting for 10% 
to 20% of all primary malignancies of the nose and paranasal sinuses. There
tumors are classified as salivary, intestinal and nonintestinal, nonsalivary.
Low-grade nonintestinal nonsalivary are rare tumors whose diagnosis is
essentially that of exclusion. Here we present the first case of one such tumor
associated with an exophyic Schneiderian papilloma. A 71-year-old retired
aerospace engineer presented with a 1-year history of severe nasal obstruction.
Endoscopy and compted tomography imaging demonstrated a polypoid lesion occupying
his entire right nasal cavity extending into and filling the nasopharynx. Biopsy 
suggested adenocarcinoma, at least in situ and the patient subsequently underwent
complete resection. Pathologic evaluation demonstrated polypoid tumor consistent 
with a low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma with micropapillary architecture
associated with a small amount of residual exophytic Schneiderian papilloma.
Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse expression of CK7, CK 5/6, and S100 protein
in tumor cells. Expression of p63 was seen in basal cells only. Tumor cells did
not show expression of CK20, CDX2 (intestinal markers), mammaglobin, GATA3
(salivary markers), PAX8, WT1, nor estrogen, progesterone, or androgen receptors 
confirming its nonintestinal nonsalivary differentiation.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26261100  [PubMed - in process]


131. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;75(18):3980-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0506. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

A Molecular Portrait of High-Grade Ductal Carcinoma In Situ.

Abba MC(1), Gong T(2), Lu Y(2), Lee J(2), Zhong Y(2), Lacunza E(1), Butti M(1),
Takata Y(2), Gaddis S(2), Shen J(2), Estecio MR(3), Sahin AA(4), Aldaz CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)CINIBA, School of Medical Sciences, National University of La Plata, La Plata,
Argentina. (2)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville,
Texas. (3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas.
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas. maaldaz@mdanderson.org.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive precursor lesion to invasive
breast carcinoma. We still have no understanding on why only some DCIS lesions
evolve to invasive cancer whereas others appear not to do so during the life span
of the patient. Here, we performed full exome (tumor vs. matching normal),
transcriptome, and methylome analysis of 30 pure high-grade DCIS (HG-DCIS) and 10
normal breast epithelial samples. Sixty-two percent of HG-DCIS cases displayed
mutations affecting cancer driver genes or potential drivers. Mutations were
observed affecting PIK3CA (21% of cases), TP53 (17%), GATA3 (7%), MLL3 (7%) and
single cases of mutations affecting CDH1, MAP2K4, TBX3, NF1, ATM, and ARID1A.
Significantly, 83% of lesions displayed numerous large chromosomal copy number
alterations, suggesting they might precede selection of cancer driver mutations. 
Integrated pathway-based modeling analysis of RNA-seq data allowed us to identify
two DCIS subgroups (DCIS-C1 and DCIS-C2) based on their tumor-intrinsic subtypes,
proliferative, immune scores, and in the activity of specific signaling pathways.
The more aggressive DCIS-C1 (highly proliferative, basal-like, or ERBB2(+))
displayed signatures characteristic of activated Treg cells
(CD4(+)/CD25(+)/FOXP3(+)) and CTLA4(+)/CD86(+) complexes indicative of a
tumor-associated immunosuppressive phenotype. Strikingly, all lesions showed
evidence of TP53 pathway inactivation. Similarly, ncRNA and methylation profiles 
reproduce changes observed postinvasion. Among the most significant findings, we 
observed upregulation of lncRNA HOTAIR in DCIS-C1 lesions and hypermethylation of
HOXA5 and SOX genes. We conclude that most HG-DCIS lesions, in spite of
representing a preinvasive stage of tumor progression, displayed molecular
profiles indistinguishable from invasive breast cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4768486 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26249178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Oct;45(10):2766-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545635. Epub 2015 Aug
31.

ICOS regulates the pool of group 2 innate lymphoid cells under homeostatic and
inflammatory conditions in mice.

Paclik D(1), Stehle C(1), Lahmann A(2), Hutloff A(2,)(3), Romagnani C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum, Leibniz-Gemeinschaft,
Berlin, Germany. (2)Chronic Immune Reactions, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum,
Leibniz-Gemeinschaft, Berlin, Germany. (3)Molecular Immunology, Robert Koch
Institute, Berlin, Germany.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) are innate effectors playing an important
role in the defense against helminthic infections and in the pathogenesis of
allergic inflammation. Cytokines have been identified as the major stimuli
driving ILC2 activation and expansion. Conversely, it is unclear whether
costimulatory molecules contribute to regulation of ILC2 functions. ILC2s display
high expression of inducible T-cell costimulator (ICOS), which belongs to the
CD28 superfamily, and which has been shown to control late effector T-cell
functions, and is of utmost importance for the humoral immune response. However, 
the biological function of ICOS expression on ILC2s is unknown. Here, we show
that ICOS signaling in mice regulates ILC2 homeostasis independently of T cells
and B cells, by promoting proliferation and accumulation of mature ILC2s in lung 
and intestine. In a model of IL-33-induced airway inflammation, ICOS controls
ILC2 activation and eosinophil infiltration in the lung. Our data identify a role
of ICOS in innate immunity and indicate that not only cytokines, but also
costimulatory pathways such as those involving ICOS, can contribute to regulate
the ILC2 pool. Thus, ICOS costimulation blockade, which is currently under
clinical evaluation for inhibiting the humoral immune response, could also target
innate inflammatory circuits.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26249010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Oct;19(5):314-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.07.002.
Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Urothelial Carcinoma with shadow cell, lipid cell and sebaceous (skin adnexal)
differentiation: Clinicopathological and immunohistochemical study of 10 cases.

Behzatoglu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istanbul Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey. Electronic address: kbehzatoglu@hotmail.com.

We discuss the histological and immunohistochemical features of 6 cases of
urothelial carcinomas of lipid cell variant and 4 cases with shadow cell
differentiation, one of which showed additionally sebaceous differentiation, one 
of which shows additional sebaceous differentiation, from our archive cases from 
the last 15 years. Conventional urothelial carcinoma (UC) was seen in all lipid
cell variant cases, and micropapillary carcinoma was seen in 3. The ratio of the 
lipid cell component was between 10% and 40% in these 6 cases. Typical histologic
features of the lipid cell variant include lipoblast-like cells with a notched
nuclear appearance, abundant vacuoles, an eccentric nucleus, and pagetoid spread 
in some areas. GATA3 and pancytokeratin AE1/AE3 immunohistochemical staining were
positive in all cases. Adipophilin was positive in various degrees in 5 of the 6 
lipid cell variant cases but was also positive in the case with sebaceous
differentiation. a-methylacyl-CoA racemase was positive in the lipid cell areas
and negative or focal weakly positive in the conventional UC areas in 4 of the 6 
cases. Vimentin, S-100 protein, and PAX8 were negative in the lipid cell
component. Follow-up information was available for all cases with follow-up
ranging from 6 to 84 months (mean, 34 months). Four patients died of the disease.
One pT4 patient who had been followed up for 6 months lives with the disease,
whereas another is disease free. In conclusion, the lipid cell variant is a rare 
UC variant that usually presents at an advanced stage, and tumor cells are
histologically similar to lipoblasts, resemble sebaceous differentiation, and
show positive immunohistochemical staining with adipophilin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26235883  [PubMed - in process]


134. Protein Sci. 2015 Oct;24(10):1649-59. doi: 10.1002/pro.2760. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

GATA1 directly mediates interactions with closely spaced pseudopalindromic but
not distantly spaced double GATA sites on DNA.

Wilkinson-White L(1), Lester KL(1), Ripin N(1), Jacques DA(1), Mitchell Guss
J(1), Matthews JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, 2042, Australia.

The transcription factor GATA1 helps regulate the expression of thousands of
genes involved in blood development, by binding to single or double GATA sites on
DNA. An important part of gene activation is chromatin looping, the bringing
together of DNA elements that lie up to many thousands of basepairs apart in the 
genome. It was recently suggested, based on studies of the closely related
protein GATA3, that GATA-mediated looping may involve interactions of each of two
zinc fingers (ZF) with distantly spaced DNA elements. Here we present a structure
of the GATA1 ZF region bound to pseudopalindromic double GATA site DNA, which is 
structurally equivalent to a recently-solved GATA3-DNA complex. However,
extensive analysis of GATA1-DNA binding indicates that although the N-terminal ZF
(NF) can modulate GATA1-DNA binding, under physiological conditions the NF binds 
DNA so poorly that it cannot play a direct role in DNA-looping. Rather, the
ability of the NF to stabilize transcriptional complexes through protein-protein 
interactions, and thereby recruit looping factors such as Ldb1, provides a more
compelling model for GATA-mediated looping.

© 2015 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC4594664 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26234528  [PubMed - in process]


135. Immunity. 2015 Aug 18;43(2):354-68. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 
Jul 28.

Transcription Factor Bcl11b Controls Identity and Function of Mature Type 2
Innate Lymphoid Cells.

Califano D(1), Cho JJ(2), Uddin MN(2), Lorentsen KJ(2), Yang Q(3), Bhandoola
A(4), Li H(5), Avram D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New
Scotland Avenue, MC-165, Albany, NY 12208, USA. (2)Center for Immunology and
Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New Scotland Avenue, MC-165, Albany,
NY 12208, USA; Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, 1600 Southwest Archer Road, MSB, Gainesville, FL 32610-0225, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)T-Cell Biology and
Development Section, Laboratory of Genome Integrity, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Wadsworth Center, New
York State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12208, USA. (6)Center for Immunology 
and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New Scotland Avenue, MC-165,
Albany, NY 12208, USA; Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, 1600 Southwest Archer Road, MSB, Gainesville, FL 32610-0225, USA.
Electronic address: dorina.avram@medicine.ufl.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Aug 18;43(2):220-2.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) promote anti-helminth responses and
contribute to allergies. Here, we report that Bcl11b, previously considered a
T-cell-specific transcription factor, acted directly upstream of the key ILC2
transcription factor Gfi1 to maintain its expression in mature ILC2s.
Consequently, Bcl11b(-/-) ILC2s downregulated Gata3 and downstream genes,
including Il1rl1 (encoding IL-33 receptor), and upregulated Rorc and type 3 ILC
(ILC3) genes. Additionally, independent of Gfi1, Bcl11b directly repressed
expression of the gene encoding the ILC3 transcription factor Ahr, further
contributing to silencing of ILC3 genes in ILC2s. Thus, Bcl11b(-/-) ILC2s lost
their functions and gained ILC3 functions, and although they expanded in response
to the protease allergen papain, they produced ILC3 but not ILC2 cytokines and
caused increased airway infiltration of neutrophils instead of eosinophils. Our
results demonstrate that Bcl11b is more than just a T-cell-only transcription
factor and establish that Bcl11b sustains mature ILC2 genetic and functional
programs and lineage fidelity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4657441 [Available on 2016-08-18]
PMID: 26231117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Immunol Invest. 2015;44(6):566-77.

IL-35 Is Involved in the Pathogenesis of Guillain-Barré Syndrome Through Its
Influence on the Function of CD4+ T Cells.

Liu H(1), Zhang W, Tian FF, Kun A, Zhou WB, Xiao B, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University ,
Changsha, Hunan , PR China .

CD4+ T cells and many cytokines play critical roles in the pathogenesis of
Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS), an immune-mediated inflammatory disease. However, 
the role of IL-35, a novel member of the IL-12 cytokine family, in this kind of
disease has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we investigated the
functional changes of CD4+ T cells from GBS patients with IL-35 treatment in
vitro. This study involved 21 GBS patients and an equal number of healthy
controls (HCs). The results indicated that the average concentration of IL-35 in 
the plasma of GBS patients was lower than that of healthy controls (HCs).
Increased levels of STAT1, STAT3 and STAT4 proteins and T-bet, ROR <U+03B3>t, IFN-<U+03B3> and 
IL-17A mRNA were observed in CD4+ T cells from GBS patients. In contrast, the
levels of STAT5 and STAT6 proteins and GATA3, Foxp3, IL-4 and TGF-ß1 mRNAs were
decreased in GBS patients in comparison with those of HCs. In addition, treatment
of CD4+ T cells from GBS patients with IL-35 upregulated IL-35, STAT5 and STAT6
protein and T-bet, GATA3, Foxp3, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-17A and TGF-ß1 mRNA while
inhibited levels of STAT3 and STAT4 protein and ROR<U+03B3>t and IL-17A mRNA. These
results indicate that IL-35 might play a potential role in GBS pathogenesis.
Further studies are required in order to evaluate its role in GBS.

PMID: 26225474  [PubMed - in process]


137. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 May 15;8(5):7029-38. eCollection 2015.

Distinct role of Tim-3 in systemic lupus erythematosus and clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma.

Zheng H(1), Guo X(2), Tian Q(1), Li H(1), Zhu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University Qingdao.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University
Qingdao.

Tim-3 is considered as one of the T-cell immunoglobulin mucin (TIM) gene family
members, which contributes to the activating or silencing genes, but the
mechanism of Tim-3 function in mediating SLE or tumor metastasis has not been
well explored. Here, we reported Tim-3 was high expressed in the peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with SLE, detected by RT-PCR,
significantly, GATA-3 mRNA expression also increased in patients with SLE,
compared with the healthy control groups. The bioinformatics used to detect the
TCGA database indicated the abnormal expression of Tim-3 was involved in several 
different cancer types. Further, the higher expression of Tim-3 in kidney renal
clear cell carcinoma TCGA database indicated it was a marker for worse 5-year
survival. The high expression of Tim-3 in different ccRCC cell lines was detected
in both RNA level and protein level. Further, two kinds of relative Tim-3 siRNAs 
in ccRCC cell lines inhibit cell migration and invasion in vitro, However, the
inhibition could be partially rescued by the additional GATA3 knockdown. Further,
the down regulation in the RNA and protein levels of GATA3, and the negative
correlation between Tim-3 and GATA3 implied that suppression of downstream GATA3 
was an important mechanism by which Tim-3 triggered metastasis in ccRCC cell
lines. Together, our experiments reveal the role for Tim-3 in facilitating SLE or
invasive potential of ccRCC cells by either activating GATA3 or inhibiting GATA3,
suggesting that Tim-3 might be a potential therapeutic target for treating SLE or
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4509185
PMID: 26221240  [PubMed]


138. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17016-30.

Deletion of Smad3 improves cardiac allograft rejection in mice.

Wang YY(1,)(2), Jiang H(1), Wang YC(1,)(2), Huang XR(2,)(3), Pan J(2,)(4), Yang
C(2), Shou ZF(1), Xiang SL(1), Chen DJ(1), Lan HY(2,)(3), Chen JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Disease Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (2)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Sciences, and Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (3)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Combined
Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health, State Key Laboratory for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Division of Hepatobiliary and
Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

T cells play a critical role in acute allograft rejection. TGF-ß/Smad3 signaling 
is a key pathway in regulating T cell development. We report here that Smad3 is a
key transcriptional factor of TGF-ß signaling that differentially regulates T
cell immune responses in a mouse model of cardiac allograft rejection in which
donor hearts from BALB/c mice were transplanted into Smad3 knockout (KO) and wild
type (WT) mice. Results showed that the cardiac allograft survival was prolonged 
in Smad3 KO recipients. This allograft protection was associated with a
significant inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, TNF-a, and MCP-1) and
infiltration of neutrophils, CD3+ T cells, and F4/80+ macrophages. Importantly,
deletion of Smad3 markedly suppressed T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> while enhancing GATA3 and
IL-4 expression, resulting in a shift from the Th1 to Th2 immune responses.
Furthermore, mice lacking Smad3 were also protected from the Th17-mediated
cardiac injury, although the regulatory T cell (Treg) response was also
suppressed. In conclusion, Smad3 is an immune regulator in T cell-mediated
cardiac allograft rejection. Loss of Smad3 results in a shift from Th1 to Th2 but
suppressing Th17 immune responses. Thus, modulation of TGF-ß/Smad3 signaling may 
be a novel therapy for acute allograft rejection.

PMCID: PMC4627288
PMID: 26219259  [PubMed - in process]


139. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jul 6;14(3):7463-8. doi: 10.4238/2015.July.3.22.

Boswellic acid attenuates asthma phenotype by downregulation of GATA3 via
nhibition of PSTAT6.

Zhou X(1), Cai JG(2), Zhu WW(1), Zhao HY(1), Wang K(3), Zhang XF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jinan Central Hospital, Jinan, China. (2)Department 
of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, China
jgcai966@163.com. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan
Hospital, Jinan, China.

To study the role of boswellic acid in reducing asthma phenotype severity and the
relationship between the expression of pSTAT6 and GATA3, thirty-six mice were
randomly divided into normal control group, asthma group, and boswellic acid
group (treatment group). The asthma model was established through an
intraperitoneal injection of sensitization liquid (0.15 mL aluminum hydroxide gel
at 88.67 mg/mL and 0.05 mg ovalbumin). pSTAT6 and GATA3 expression levels in
peripheral blood were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and Western blot analysis. pSTAT6 and GATA3 gene expressions in the asthmatic
group were significantly higher than in the normal control group; they were
markedly lower in the treatment group than the asthma group, and there was no
significant difference when compared with the normal control group. The pSTAT6
expressions in the asthma, control and treatment groups were 2.256 ± 0.125, 0.524
± 0.210, and 0.897 ± 0.134 at gray level, respectively. The GATA3 expressions in 
the asthma, control, and treatment groups were 3.521 ± 0.631, 0.435 ± 0.136, and 
0.743 ± 0.149 at gray level, respectively. pSTAT6 and GATA3 expression levels
were similar in the treatment and control groups. GATA3 expression had a positive
correlation with pSTAT6 expression. Boswellic acid may improve asthma symptoms by
inhibiting pSTAT6 expression, which consequently reduces GATA3 expression.

PMID: 26214425  [PubMed - in process]


140. Histopathology. 2016 Mar;68(4):533-40. doi: 10.1111/his.12785. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Pleomorphic giant cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder: an extreme form of
tumour de-differentiation.

Samaratunga H(1,)(2), Delahunt B(1,)(3), Egevad L(4), Adamson M(1), Hussey D(5), 
Malone G(6), Hoyle K(7), Nathan T(8), Kerle D(9), Ferguson P(3), Nacey JN(10).

Author information: 
(1)Aquesta Pathology, Brisbane, Qld, Australia. (2)University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Qld, Australia. (3)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine,
Wellington School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Wellington, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Brisbane Private Hospital, Brisbane, Qld, Australia. (6)Greenslopes Hospital, 
Brisbane, Qld, Australia. (7)Sunshine Coast Private Hospital, Buderim, Qld,
Australia. (8)Sunshine Coast University Private Hospital, Birtinya, Qld,
Australia. (9)St Vincent's Private Hospital, Lismore, NSW, Australia.
(10)Department of Surgery and Anaesthesia, Wellington School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Wellington, New Zealand.

AIMS: Vesical pleomorphic giant cell carcinoma (PGCC) is a variant of urothelial 
carcinoma (UC) characterized by highly pleomorphic tumour with giant cells. Fewer
than 10 cases have been reported, and our aim was to determine the clinical and
pathological features of a series of tumours from a specialized uropathology
laboratory.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirteen cases of PGCC of the bladder were identified. There
were nine males and four females, ranging in age from 53 to 92 years (mean
72 years). Associated conventional high-grade UC was seen in eight cases, while
three cases also had micropapillary UC and one plasmacytoid UC. UC in situ (CIS) 
was present in five cases and occasional bizarre cells were seen in both UC and
CIS. The proportion of PGCC present varied from 40% to 100% of tumour.
Immunostaining performed on 10 cases showed uniform positivity for CK 8/18 and
AE1/AE3, while most tumours were positive for CK7, CK20, uroplakin III and GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3). ß-human chorionic gonadotrophin (ß-hCG) was negative. 
Of 10 patients with follow-up, five died within 1 year and four are alive with
tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of PGCC with UC and an overlap in immunoexpression
suggests that PGCC represents an extreme form of UC de-differentiation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26211928  [PubMed - in process]


141. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 16;5:12113. doi: 10.1038/srep12113.

Zbtb16 (PLZF) is stably suppressed and not inducible in non-innate T cells via T 
cell receptor-mediated signaling.

Zhang S(1), Laouar A(2), Denzin LK(3), Sant'Angelo DB(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA [2] Child Health Institute of New Jersey,
Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. (2)1]
Department of Surgery, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick,
NJ 08901, USA [2] Child Health Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. (3)1] Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick,
NJ 08901, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA [3] Child Health Institute of New Jersey,
Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

The transcription factor PLZF (promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger; zbtb16) is
essential for nearly all of the unique characteristics of NKT cells including
their rapid and potent response to antigen. In the immune system, zbtb16
expression is only found in innate cells. Conventional T cells that ectopically
express PLZF spontaneously acquire an activated, effector phenotype. Activation
induced expression of lineage defining transcription factors such as T-bet,
FoxP3, ROR<U+03B3>t, GATA3 and others is essential for naïve T cell differentiation into
effector T cells. In this study, we used sensitive genetic-based approaches to
assess the induction of PLZF expression in non-innate T cells by T cell receptor 
(TCR)-mediated activation. Surprisingly, we found that PLZF was stably repressed 
in non-innate T cells and that TCR-mediated signaling was not sufficient to
induce PLZF in conventional T cells. The inactivated state of PLZF was stably
maintained in mature T cells, even under inflammatory conditions imposed by
bacterial infection. Collectively, our data show that, in contrast to multiple
recent reports, PLZF expression is highly specific to innate T cells and cannot
be induced in conventional T cells via TCR-mediated activation or inflammatory
challenge.

PMCID: PMC4503983
PMID: 26178856  [PubMed - in process]


142. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 15;195(4):1744-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401740. Epub 2015
Jul 13.

IL-4 Downregulates IL-1ß and IL-6 and Induces GATA3 in Psoriatic Epidermal Cells:
Route of Action of a Th2 Cytokine.

Onderdijk AJ(1), Baerveldt EM(2), Kurek D(3), Kant M(2), Florencia EF(2), Debets 
R(4), Prens EP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands; a.onderdijk@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands; (3)Department of Cell
Biology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the
Netherlands; and. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Clinical improvement of psoriasis induced by IL-4 treatment has been ascribed to 
changes in dermal inflammatory cells, such as activation of Th2 cells and
tolerization of dendritic cells by suppressing IL-23 production. The pathologic
epidermal alterations in psoriatic lesional skin include increased epidermal
expression of IL-1ß, IL-6, S100A7, and human ß-defensin 2 (hBD2) and a
downregulated expression of the epidermal transcription factor GATA3. Effects of 
IL-4 on the epidermal compartment of psoriasis lesions were not previously
investigated. Therefore, we investigated whether IL-4 directly affects
abovementioned psoriatic markers in the epidermal compartment. We cultured
freshly isolated psoriatic epidermal cells, whole psoriatic and healthy skin
biopsies, human keratinocytes and Langerhans cells with IL-4. The secretion of
IL-1ß and IL-6 by psoriatic epidermal cells was inhibited by IL-4 via
transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms, respectively. In normal skin,
IL-4 inhibited IL-1ß- and IL-17A-induced hBD2 expression in vitro. In addition,
IL-4 reduced the protein expression of hBD2 in psoriatic skin biopsies and
induced phospho-STAT6 protein. Epidermal GATA3 mRNA and protein were
significantly upregulated by IL-4 in epidermal cells and keratinocytes. Our data 
argue that IL-4 improves psoriasis not only via modification/induction of Th2
cells and type II dendritic cells, but also via direct inhibition of inflammatory
cytokines in resident IL-4R-expressing epidermal cells and thereby alters the
psoriatic skin phenotype toward a healthy skin phenotype.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26170379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Transl Med. 2015 Jul 14;13:225. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0583-0.

PARP inhibition by olaparib or gene knockout blocks asthma-like manifestation in 
mice by modulating CD4(+) T cell function.

Ghonim MA(1,)(2), Pyakurel K(3), Ibba SV(4), Al-Khami AA(5,)(6), Wang J(7),
Rodriguez P(8), Rady HF(9), El-Bahrawy AH(10), Lammi MR(11), Mansy MS(12),
Al-Ghareeb K(13), Ramsay A(14), Ochoa A(15), Naura AS(16,)(17), Boulares AH(18).

Author information: 
(1)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. 
mghoni@lsuhsc.edu. (2)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. mghoni@lsuhsc.edu. (3)The Stanley
Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. kpyaku@lsuhsc.edu.
(4)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. 
sibba@lsuhsc.edu. (5)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. aalkh@lsuhsc.edu. (6)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science,
Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. aalkh@lsuhsc.edu. (7)The Stanley Scott Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. jwang4@lsuhsc.edu. (8)The Stanley
Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
prodri1@lsuhsc.edu. (9)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.
hrady@lsuhsc.edu. (10)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. alipharma2006@yahoo.com. (11)Pulmonary and Critical Care Section,
School of Medicine, Louisiana State University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
mlammi@lsuhsc.edu. (12)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. moselhysalah@gmail.com.
(13)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar
University, Cairo, Egypt. kamelalghareeb2000@gmail.com. (14)Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA. aramsay@lsuhsc.edu. (15)The Stanley Scott 
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. aochoa@lsuhsc.edu. (16)The 
Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
anaura@pu.ac.in. (17)Department of Biochemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh,
India. anaura@pu.ac.in. (18)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. hboulr@lsuhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: An important portion of asthmatics do not respond to current
therapies. Thus, the need for new therapeutic drugs is urgent. We have
demonstrated a critical role for PARP in experimental asthma. Olaparib, a PARP
inhibitor, was recently introduced in clinical trials against cancer. The
objective of the present study was to examine the efficacy of olaparib in
blocking established allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness similar
to those observed in human asthma in animal models of the disease.
METHODS: We used ovalbumin (OVA)-based mouse models of asthma and primary CD4(+) 
T cells. C57BL/6J WT or PARP-1(-/-) mice were subjected to OVA sensitization
followed by a single or multiple challenges to aerosolized OVA or left
unchallenged. WT mice were administered, i.p., 1 mg/kg, 5 or 10 mg/kg of olaparib
or saline 30 min after each OVA challenge.
RESULTS: Administration of olaparib in mice 30 min post-challenge promoted a
robust reduction in airway eosinophilia, mucus production and hyperresponsiveness
even after repeated challenges with ovalbumin. The protective effects of olaparib
were linked to a suppression of Th2 cytokines eotaxin, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13,
and M-CSF, and ovalbumin-specific IgE with an increase in the Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>.
These traits were associated with a decrease in splenic CD4(+) T cells and
concomitant increase in T-regulatory cells. The aforementioned traits conferred
by olaparib administration were consistent with those observed in OVA-challenged 
PARP-1(-/-) mice. Adoptive transfer of Th2-skewed OT-II-WT CD4(+) T cells
reversed the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10, the chemokine GM-CSF, the Th1
cytokines IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3>, and ovalbumin-specific IgE production in
ovalbumin-challenged PARP-1(-/-)mice suggesting a role for PARP-1 in CD4(+) T but
not B cells. In ex vivo studies, PARP inhibition by olaparib or PARP-1 gene
knockout markedly reduced CD3/CD28-stimulated gata-3 and il4 expression in
Th2-skewed CD4(+) T cells while causing a moderate elevation in t-bet and ifn-<U+03B3>
expression in Th1-skewed CD4(+) T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show the potential of PARP inhibition as a viable
therapeutic strategy and olaparib as a likely candidate to be tested in human
asthma clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4501284
PMID: 26169874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;152(3):519-31. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3492-2. 
Epub 2015 Jul 10.

TFAP2C expression in breast cancer: correlation with overall survival beyond 10
years of initial diagnosis.

Perkins SM(1), Bales C, Vladislav T, Althouse S, Miller KD, Sandusky G, Badve S, 
Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Recurrence and death in a significant number of patients with ERa-positive breast
cancer occurs 10-20 years after diagnosis. Prognostic markers for late events
have been more elusive. TFAP2C (AP2<U+03B3>) regulates the expression of ERa, the ERa
pioneer factors FOXA1 and GATA3, and controls ERa-dependent transcription. The
purpose of this investigation is to determine the long-term prognostic value of
TFAP2C. A tissue microarray (TMA) consisting of breast tumors from 451 patients
with median follow-up time of 10.3 years was created and tested for the
expression of TFAP2C by immunohistochemistry. Wilcoxon Rank-Sum and
Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to determine if TFAP2C H-scores correlate with
other tumor markers. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to
determine whether TFAP2C H-scores and other tumor markers were related to overall
and disease-free survival in univariate and multivariable models. TFPAC2
overexpression did not impact overall survival during the first 10 years after
diagnosis, but was associated with a shorter survival after 10 years (HR 3.40, 95
% CI 1.58, 7.30; p value = 0.002). This late divergence persisted in ER-positive 
(HR 2.86, 95 % CI 1.29, 6.36; p value = 0.01) and endocrine therapy-positive
subgroups (HR 4.19, 95 % CI 1.72, 10.23; p value = 0.002). For the ER+ and
endocrine therapy subgroup, the HR was 3.82 (95 % CI 1.53, 9.50; p value =
0.004). TFAP2C H-scores were not correlated with other tumor markers or related
to disease-free survival. In this hypothesis-generating study, we show that
higher TFAP2C scores correlate with poor overall survival after 10 years of
diagnosis in ERa-positive and endocrine therapy-treated subgroups.

PMID: 26160249  [PubMed - in process]


145. Dev Genes Evol. 2015 Jul;225(4):253-7. doi: 10.1007/s00427-015-0511-6. Epub 2015 
Jul 11.

A GATA2/3 gene potentially involved in larval shell formation of the Pacific
oyster Crassostrea gigas.

Liu G(1), Huan P, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao, 266071, China.

Shells are one of the most notable features of the majority of mollusks. In
addition, the shell is also considered a key characteristic during molluscan
evolution and development. However, although the morphological changes during
larval shell formation have been well described, the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, we focused on the potential
involvement of a GATA gene in shell formation because GATA genes are often
downstream genes of BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) signaling pathways, which
have been suggested to participate in molluscan shell formation. In the Pacific
oyster Crassostrea gigas, we observed that the expression of a GATA2/3 homolog
(cgi-gata2/3) was clearly restricted to the edge of the shell field in early
larval stages (trochophore and D-veliger). This expression pattern supports the
notion that cgi-gata2/3 gene plays conserved roles in bilaterian ectodermal
development. It is possible that cgi-gata2/3 is one shell-formation gene under
the regulation of BMP signaling pathways. In addition, cgi-gata2/3 was also
detected in the ventral side of embryos. The expression of cgi-gata2/3 away from 
the shell field may be involved in hematopoiesis. Our results provide fundamental
support for studies into the molecular mechanisms of larval shell formation and
the functions of molluscan GATA genes.

PMID: 26159670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Oct;39(10):1411-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000471.

GATA3 Is a Sensitive and Specific Marker of Benign and Malignant Mesonephric
Lesions in the Lower Female Genital Tract.

Howitt BE(1), Emori MM, Drapkin R, Gaspar C, Barletta JA, Nucci MR, McCluggage
WG, Oliva E, Hirsch MS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana Farber Cancer Institute <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA §Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care
Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

GATA3 is a transcription factor critical for embryogenesis, development, and cell
differentiation. Recent studies have suggested that GATA3 is a sensitive and
relatively specific biomarker for urothelial and breast carcinomas, with most
Müllerian carcinomas being negative. We investigated GATA3 expression in
mesonephric/Wolffian remnants and tumors in the female genital tract. A western
blot was performed to assess specificity for the GATA3 antibody. GATA3
immunohistochemistry was performed on 59 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
mesonephric samples, including 17 mesonephric remnants (MR; 11 cervical and 6
fallopian tube), 15 mesonephric hyperplasias, 21 mesonephric carcinomas, and 6
female adnexal tumors of probable Wolffian origin. Thirty conventional
endocervical adenocarcinomas (ENDO-CA), 9 gastric-type cervical adenocarcinomas, 
and 165 endometrial adenocarcinomas (EM-CA) were also evaluated. GATA3 nuclear
intensity and extent of staining was evaluated. The western blot revealed GATA3
expression in seminal vesicle and cell lines derived from breast and urothelial
carcinomas, but not in other cell lines including ovarian, cervical, and
endometrial cancers. All cervical MRs and mesonephric hyperplasias, 5/6 (83%)
fallopian tube MRs, and 20/21 (95%) mesonephric carcinomas were GATA3 positive,
although with great variability in both intensity (weak to strong) and extent (1+
to 3+) of staining. Only 1/6 (17%) female adnexal tumors of probable Wolffian
origin showed weak multifocal staining. One of 30 (3%) usual-type ENDO-CAs and
3/165 EM-CAs exhibited weak-moderate GATA3 immunoreactivity; all gastric-type
cervical adenocarcinomas were negative. GATA3 is a highly sensitive and specific 
marker for mesonephric lesions in the lower genital tract; however, its utility
in the upper genital tract may be more limited. In addition, GATA3 can aid in
distinguishing lower genital mesonephric lesions from usual-type and gastric-type
ENDO-CAs and uterine EM-CAs.

PMID: 26135559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5121-8. eCollection 2015.

ANP/NPRA signaling preferentially mediates Th2 responses in favor of pathological
processes during the course of acute allergic asthma.

Ma L(1), Zeng J(1), Mo B(1), Wang C(1), Sun Y(1), Zhang M(2), Liu S(3), Xiang
X(4), Wang CY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical 
University Guilin 541001, China ; Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Guilin
Medical University Guilin 541001, China ; Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases 
of Colleges and Universities Affiliated Education Department of Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region Guilin 541001, China. (2)The Center for Biomedical Research,
Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan 430030,
China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University Changsha 410011, China. (4)Institute of Emergency
Medicine and Rare Diseases, Central South University Changsha 410011, China ;
Department of Emergency Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University Changsha 410011, China. (5)Institute of Emergency Medicine and Rare
Diseases, Central South University Changsha 410011, China ; Department of
Emergency Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University
Changsha 410011, China ; The Center for Biomedical Research, Tongji Hospital,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan 430030, China.

Although atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) has been well recognized for its role
in the regulation of volume-pressure homeostasis in cardiovascular system, its
impact on respiratory system, particularly on the pathogenesis of acute allergic 
asthma, is yet to be elucidated. In the present report, we induced mice with OVA 
for onset of acute allergic asthma along with the administration of recombinant
ANP or A71915 (an antagonist for ANP/natriuretic peptide receptor A, NPRA). It
was noted that treatment of mice with ANP significantly promoted inflammatory
infiltration in the airway and the production of inflammatory cytokines in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and lung homogenates, and the number of
inflammatory cells in the BALF was significantly higher as compared with that of 
PBS treated asthmatic mice. Moreover, blockade of ANP/NPRA signaling by A71915
almost completely attenuated the effect of ANP administration. Mechanistic
studies revealed that ANP repressed the expression of Th1 transcription factor
T-bet, but enhanced Th2 transcription GATA3 expression. Together, our data
provided feasible evidence suggesting that ANP/NPRA signaling predominantly
induces a Th2-type response in favor of pathological processes during the course 
of acute allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC4483987
PMID: 26131085  [PubMed]


148. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1273-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500531. Epub 2015
Jun 26.

Spred1, a Suppressor of the Ras-ERK Pathway, Negatively Regulates Expansion and
Function of Group 2 Innate Lymphoid Cells.

Suzuki M(1), Morita R(1), Hirata Y(1), Shichita T(2), Yoshimura A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan; and. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan; Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 102-0075, Japan. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio
University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Japan Science 
and Technology Agency, CREST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan; and
yoshimura@a6.keio.jp.

Cytokines from group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) have been implicated in
acute allergic responses, such as papain-induced lung inflammation. However, the 
means of homeostatic regulation of ILC2s have not been established. In this
study, we demonstrated that Spred1, a negative regulator of the Ras-ERK pathway, 
plays an important role in the proliferation and apoptosis of ILC2s and in
cytokine secretion from ILC2s. Intranasal administration of papain stimulated
IL-5 and IL-13 production in the lung, which was enhanced when Spred1 was
deleted. In vitro, Spred1(-/-) ILC2s proliferated faster than wild type ILC2s did
and produced higher levels of cytokines in response to IL-33. On the contrary, a 
MEK inhibitor suppressed ILC2 proliferation and cytokine production. Spred1
deficiency resulted in stabilization of GATA3, which has been shown to play
essential roles in the maintenance and cytokine production of ILC2. These data
suggest that Spred1 negatively regulates ILC2 development and functions through
the suppression of the Ras-ERK pathway.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26116510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19458-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.641332. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Wnt/ß-Catenin Mediates AICAR Effect to Increase GATA3 Expression and Inhibit
Adipogenesis.

Wang L(1), Di LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Metabolomics Core, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau,
Macau SAR (Special Administrative Region), China and. (2)the Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China lijundi@umac.mo.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):29759.

A better understanding of the mechanism and manipulation of the tightly regulated
cellular differentiation process of adipogenesis may contribute to a reduction in
obesity and diabetes. Multiple transcription factors and signaling pathways are
involved in the regulation of adipogenesis. Here, we report that the
AMP-activated protein kinase activator, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleoside (AICAR) can activate AMPK in preadipocytes and thus increase the
expression of GATA3, an anti-adipogenic factor. However, AICAR-increased GATA3 is
mediated by the stimulation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in preadipocytes.
Mechanistically, AICAR-activated AMPK inhibits GSK3ß through a phosphorylation
process that stabilizes ß-catenin. This stabilized ß-catenin then translocates
into nucleus where it interacts with T-cell factors (TCF), leading to the
increased ß-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity that induces GATA3 expression.
In addition, AICAR also relieves the repressing effect of the C-terminal-binding 
protein (CtBP) co-repressor by diverting CtBP away from the ß-catenin·TCF complex
at the GATA3 promoter. The anti-adipogenic effect of GATA3 and AICAR is
consistently attenuated by the disruption of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
Furthermore, GATA3 suppresses key adipogenic regulators by binding to the
promoters of these regulators, such as the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) gene, and the disruption of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling reduces
the GATA3 binding at the PPAR<U+03B3> promoter. In differentiated adipocytes, GATA3
expression inhibition is facilitated by the down-regulation of ß-catenin levels, 
the reduction in ß-catenin binding, and the increase in CtBP binding at the GATA3
promoter. Our findings shed light on the molecular mechanism of adipogenesis by
suggesting that different regulation pathways and adipogenic regulators
collectively modulate adipocyte differentiation through cross-talk.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4528110 [Available on 2016-08-07]
PMID: 26109067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Sep;21(9):711-22. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav036. Epub 2015 Jun 
24.

WNT3 and membrane-associated ß-catenin regulate trophectoderm lineage
differentiation in human blastocysts.

Krivega M(1), Essahib W(2), Van de Velde H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Reproduction and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium
krivega@gmail.com mkrivega@vub.ac.be. (2)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium. (3)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium Centre for Reproductive Medicine (CRG), 
UZ Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, Brussels 1090, Belgium.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling has been described as a crucial regulator of embryonic
stem cells and embryogenesis. However, little is known on its role during human
preimplantation embryo development, besides the RNA expression of its multiple
players. In this study, we performed ß-catenin loss- and gain-of-function studies
on human preimplantation embryos by adding either Cardamonin or GSK3 inhibitor,
1-Azakenpaullone, to the embryo culture medium from the cleavage until blastocyst
stages (Days 3-5/6). ß-Catenin was displayed in the cortical region underneath
the membrane during all stages, but it only showed nuclear localization at
cleavage stages after stabilization with 1-Azakenpaullone. We did not observe any
effects on the inner cell mass markers NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2 and SALL4 in these
functional experiments. However, both ß-catenin degradation and stabilization
caused inhibition of the trophectoderm (TE) fate, illustrated by KRT18 and GATA3 
RNA, and CDX2 protein expression. Based on the TE-specific WNT3 protein
expression in blastocysts, we postulated that this protein may be an upstream
regulator for the observed membrane ß-catenin function. The addition of either
WNT3 or 1-Azakenpaullone to the culture medium promoted EOMES expression specific
for trophoblast development. In both studies, the canonical WNT pathway target
gene, TCF1, was not affected. Therefore, we conclude that WNT3 and
membrane-associated ß-catenin promote progenitor trophoblast development in human
blastocysts. These results have important implications in assisted reproduction
and stem cell biology.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26108805  [PubMed - in process]


151. F1000Res. 2015 Apr 24;4:99. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.6388.1. eCollection 2015.

Linking patient outcome to high throughput protein expression data identifies
novel regulators of colorectal adenocarcinoma aggressiveness.

French CL(1), Ye F(2), Revetta F(3), Zhang B(4), Coffey RJ(5), Washington MK(3), 
Deane NG(6), Beauchamp RD(7), Weaver AM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Center for Quantitative Sciences,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology,Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (4)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Center for Quantitative Sciences,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ;
Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (5)Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN, 37232, USA ; Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (6)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (7)Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. (8)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Department of
Pathology,Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA ; Vanderbilt 
Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

A key question in cancer systems biology is how to use molecular data to predict 
the biological behavior of tumors from individual patients. While genomics data
have been heavily used, protein signaling data are more directly connected to
biological phenotype and might predict cancer phenotypes such as invasion,
metastasis, and patient survival. In this study, we mined publicly available data
for colorectal adenocarcinoma from the Cancer Genome Atlas and identified protein
expression and signaling changes that are statistically associated with patient
outcome. Our analysis identified a number of known and potentially new regulators
of colorectal cancer. High levels of insulin growth factor binding protein 2
(IGFBP2) were associated with both recurrence and death, and this was validated
by immunohistochemical staining of a tissue microarray for a secondary patient
dataset. Interestingly, GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) was the protein most
frequently associated with death in our analysis, and GATA3 expression was
significantly decreased in tumor samples from stage I-II deceased patients.
Experimental studies using engineered colon cancer cell lines show that exogenous
expression of GATA3 decreases three-dimensional colony growth and invasiveness of
colon cancer cells but does not affect two-dimensional proliferation. These
findings suggest that protein data are useful for biomarker discovery and
identify GATA3 as a regulator of colorectal cancer  aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC4457132
PMID: 26097693  [PubMed]


152. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0129401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129401.
eCollection 2015.

scFv from Antibody That Mimics gp43 Modulates the Cellular and Humoral Immune
Responses during Experimental Paracoccidioidomycosis.

Jannuzzi GP(1), Tavares AH(2), Kaihami GH(3), de Almeida JR(1), de Almeida SR(1),
Ferreira KS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Química, Instituto
de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Departamento de
Ciências Biológicas do Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e
Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil.

Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), caused by Paracoccidioides species is a prevalent
systemic and progressive mycosis that occurs in Latin America. It is caused by
Paracoccidioides species. Immunization with dendritic cells transfected with a
plasmid encoding the scFv (pMAC/PS-scFv) that mimics the main antigen of P.
brasiliensis (gp43) confers protection in experimental PCM. DCs link innate and
adaptive immunity by recognizing invading pathogens and selecting the type of
effector T cell to mediate the immune response. Here, we showed that
DC-pMAC/PS-scFv induces the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Moreover, our
results demonstrated that BALB/c mice infected with P. brasiliensis and treated
with DC-pMAC/PS-scFv showed the induction of specific IgG production against gp43
and IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 and IL-4 cytokines. Analysis of regional lymph nodes revealed
increases in the expression of clec7a, myd88, tlr2, gata3 and tbx21, which are
involved in the immune response. Taken together, our results indicate that the
scFv modulates the humoral and cellular immune responses and presents epitopes to
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC4474724
PMID: 26091522  [PubMed - in process]


153. Biol Reprod. 2015 Aug;93(2):31. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.126474. Epub 2015 Jun
10.

Reduced Gene Dosage of Tfap2c Impairs Trophoblast Lineage Differentiation and
Alters Maternal Blood Spaces in the Mouse Placenta.

Kaiser S(1), Koch Y(1), Kühnel E(1), Sharma N(2), Gellhaus A(1), Kuckenberg P(2),
Schorle H(2), Winterhager E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Department of Developmental Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany elke.winterhager@uk-essen.de.

Tfap2c is required for placental development and trophoblast stem cell
maintenance. Deletion of Tfap2c results in early embryonic loss because of
failure in placental development. We evaluated the effect of reduced Tfap2c
expression on fetal outcome and placental development. Sixty percent of the
heterozygous mice were lost directly after birth. Labyrinthine differentiation
was impaired, as indicated by enhanced proliferation and inclusions of
cobblestone-shaped cell clusters characterized by expression of Tfap2c and
glycogen stores. Moreover, expression of marker genes such as Cdx2, Eomes, Gata3,
and Ascl2 are decreased in the spongiotrophoblast and indicate a lowered stem
cell potential. On Day 18.5 postcoitum, the labyrinth layer of Tfap2c(+/-)
placentas exhibited massive hemorrhages in the maternal blood spaces; these
hemorrhages might have contributed to the significantly reduced number of
live-born pups. These morphological alterations were accompanied by a shift
toward sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells as the cell subpopulation lining the
maternal sinusoids and toward reduction in expression of the prolactin gene
family member Prl2c2, a finding characteristic of the spiral arteries lining
trophoblast cells. The trophoblast stem cells heterozygous for Tfap2c exhibited a
reduction in the expression level of stem cell markers and in their proliferation
and differentiation capacity but did not exhibit changes in marker genes of the
trophoblast giant cell lineage. Taken together, these findings indicate that a
reduction in the gene dosage of placental Tfap2c leads to morphological changes
in the labyrinth at midgestation and in the maternal blood spaces during late
pregnancy.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26063869  [PubMed - in process]


154. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jun;31(6):721-4, 729.

[Effect of ß2GPI immunization on mouse T helper cell subset differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

He C(1), Zhou H(1), Xie H(1), Xie Y(1), Kong X(1), Cheng S(1), Yu Y(1), Xia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the mechanism of beta2 glycoprotein I (ß2GPI)-caused T
helper cell subset differentiation and anti-ß2GPI antibody (aß2GPI Ab) production
in mice.
METHODS: The healthy BALB/c mice were randomly divided into two groups: normal
saline (NS) group and ß2GPI group. The mice were immunized i.v. with either human
ß2GPI or equal amount of NS for a total of two or four times at 2-week intervals.
The titer of aß2GPI Ab in mice serum was evaluated by indirect ELISA. The
expressions of GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), interleukin 4 (IL-4), T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet), interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and Foxp3 mRNAs in mouse
splenic cells were detected by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR), and the
percentage of GATA3+ or Foxp3+ cells in lymphocytes of mouse spleen was detected 
by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The high titer (1:100,000) of aß2GPI Ab was detected in mouse serum
following the two times of immunization with ß2GPI. The expressions of Th2
specific markers GATA3 and IL-4 mRNAs and the percentage of GATA3+ cells in
lymphocytes were higher than those of NS treated group. After four times of
immunization with ß2GPI, the titer of aß2GPI Ab in mouse serum was elevated to a 
higher level (>1:100,000). The expressions of GATA3, Th1 specific markers T-bet
and IFN-<U+03B3>, and regulatory T cell (Treg) specific marker Foxp3 mRNAs in mouse
spleen cells, but no significant change was found in IL-4 mRNA expression.
Furthermore, the percentage of GATA3+ cells in mouse spleen increased, while the 
percentage of Foxp3+ cells decreased.
CONCLUSION: ß2GPI immunization could induce Th2 cell bias polarization and Th1
cell and Treg suppression in mice, which might contribute to the production of
aß2GPI Ab.

PMID: 26062409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cytokine. 2015 Sep;75(1):14-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.05.010. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

T helper 2 (Th2) cell differentiation, type 2 innate lymphoid cell (ILC2)
development and regulation of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13 production.

Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Immunoregulation Unit, Laboratory of Immunology,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov.

Interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, the signature cytokines that are produced
during type 2 immune responses, are critical for protective immunity against
infections of extracellular parasites and are responsible for asthma and many
other allergic inflammatory diseases. Although many immune cell types within the 
myeloid lineage compartment including basophils, eosinophils and mast cells are
capable of producing at least one of these cytokines, the production of these
"type 2 immune response-related" cytokines by lymphoid lineages, CD4 T helper 2
(Th2) cells and type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) in particular, are the
central events during type 2 immune responses. In this review, I will focus on
the signaling pathways and key molecules that determine the differentiation of
naïve CD4 T cells into Th2 cells, and how the expression of Th2 cytokines,
especially IL-4 and IL-13, is regulated in Th2 cells. The similarities and
differences in the differentiation of Th2 cells, IL-4-producing T follicular
helper (Tfh) cells and ILC2s as well as their relationships will also be
discussed.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4532589 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26044597  [PubMed - in process]


156. Cancer Cell. 2015 Jun 8;27(6):822-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.04.011. Epub 2015
May 28.

Dysfunction of the Reciprocal Feedback Loop between GATA3- and ZEB2-Nucleated
Repression Programs Contributes to Breast Cancer Metastasis.

Si W(1), Huang W(2), Zheng Y(2), Yang Y(2), Liu X(1), Shan L(2), Zhou X(2), Wang 
Y(2), Su D(2), Gao J(2), Yan R(1), Han X(1), Li W(1), He L(1), Shi L(2), Xuan
C(2), Liang J(1), Sun L(1), Wang Y(3), Shang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and
Cell Function, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. (2)2011 Collaborative
Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China. (3)2011 Collaborative Innovation
Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical
Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China. Electronic address: yanwang@tmu.edu.cn. (4)Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), 
Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell
Function, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China; 2011 Collaborative Innovation
Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical
Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China. Electronic address: yshang@hsc.pku.edu.cn.

How loss-of-function of GATA3 contributes to the development of breast cancer is 
poorly understood. Here, we report that GATA3 nucleates a transcription
repression program composed of G9A and MTA3-, but not MTA1- or MTA2-, constituted
NuRD complex. Genome-wide analysis of the GATA3/G9A/NuRD(MTA3) targets identified
a cohort of genes including ZEB2 that are critically involved in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cell invasion. We demonstrate that the
GATA3/G9A/NuRD(MTA3) complex inhibits the invasive potential of breast cancer
cells in vitro and suppresses breast cancer metastasis in vivo. Strikingly, the
expression of GATA3, G9A, and MTA3 is concurrently downregulated during breast
cancer progression, leading to an elevated expression of ZEB2, which, in turn,
represses the expression of G9A and MTA3 through the recruitment of
G9A/NuRD(MTA1).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26028330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Aug;98(2):185-94. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3RU0315-099R. Epub 2015
May 29.

Interferon at the crossroads of allergy and viral infections.

Gonzales-van Horn SR(1), Farrar JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA david.farrar@utsouthwestern.edu.

IFN-a/ß was first described as a potent inhibitor of viral replication, but it is
now appreciated that IFN signaling plays a pleiotropic role in regulating
peripheral T cell functions. Recently, IFN-a/ß was shown to block human Th2
development by suppressing the transcription factor GATA3. This effect is
consistent with the role for IFN-a/ß in suppressing allergic inflammatory
processes by blocking granulocyte activation and IL-4-mediated B cell isotype
switching to IgE. With the consideration of recent studies demonstrating a defect
in IFN-a/ß secretion in DCs and epithelial cells from individuals with severe
atopic diseases, there is an apparent reciprocal negative regulatory loop in
atopic individuals, whereby the lack of IFN-a/ß secretion by innate cells
contributes to the development of allergic Th2 cells. Is it possible to overcome 
these events by treating with IFN-a/ß or by inducing its secretion in vivo? In
support of this approach, case studies have documented the therapeutic potential 
of IFN-a/ß in treating steroid-resistant allergic asthma and other atopic
diseases. Additionally, individuals with asthma who are infected with HCV and
respond to IFN therapy showed a reduction in symptoms and severity of asthma
attacks. These findings support a model, whereby allergic and antiviral responses
are able to cross-regulate each other, as IgER cross-linking of pDCs prevents
IFN-a/ß production in response to viral infection. The clinical importance of
upper-respiratory viruses in the context of allergic asthma supports the need to 
understand how these pathways intersect and to identify potential therapeutic
targets.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4501675 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26026068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):156-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403219. Epub 2015 May
29.

Lymphoid Gene Upregulation on Circulating Progenitors Participates in Their
T-Lineage Commitment.

Zepponi V(1), Michaels Lopez V(1), Martinez-Cingolani C(1), Boudil A(1),
Pasqualetto V(1), Skhiri L(1), Gautreau L(1), Legrand A(1), Megret J(1), Zavala
F(1), Ezine S(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité 1151, Université Paris Descartes, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8253,
75993 Paris Cedex 14, France. (2)INSERM, Unité 1151, Université Paris Descartes, 
Unité Mixte de Recherche 8253, 75993 Paris Cedex 14, France
sophie.ezine@inserm.fr.

Extrathymic T cell precursors can be detected in many tissues and represent an
immediately competent population for rapid T cell reconstitution in the event of 
immunodeficiencies. Blood T cell progenitors have been detected, but their source
in the bone marrow (BM) remains unclear. Prospective purification of BM-resident 
and circulating progenitors, together with RT-PCR single-cell analysis, was used 
to evaluate and compare multipotent progenitors (MPPs) and common lymphoid
progenitors (CLPs). Molecular analysis of circulating progenitors in comparison
with BM-resident progenitors revealed that CCR9(+) progenitors are more abundant 
in the blood than CCR7(+) progenitors. Second, although Flt3(-) CLPs are less
common in the BM, they are abundant in the blood and have reduced
Cd25(+)-expressing cells and downregulated c-Kit and IL-7Ra intensities. Third,
in contrast, stage 3 MPP (MPP3) cells, the unique circulating MPP subset, have
upregulated Il7r, Gata3, and Notch1 in comparison with BM-resident counterparts. 
Evaluation of the populations' respective abilities to generate splenic T cell
precursors (Lin(-)Thy1.2(+)CD25(+)IL7Ra(+)) after grafting recipient nude mice
revealed that MPP3 cells were the most effective subset (relative to CLPs).
Although several lymphoid genes are expressed by MPP3 cells and Flt3(-) CLPs, the
latter only give rise to B cells in the spleen, and Notch1 expression level is
not modulated in the blood, as for MPP3 cells. We conclude that CLPs have reached
the point where they cannot be a Notch1 target, a limiting condition on the path 
to T cell engagement.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26026063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0127712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127712.
eCollection 2015.

TMEM120A and B: Nuclear Envelope Transmembrane Proteins Important for Adipocyte
Differentiation.

Batrakou DG(1), de Las Heras JI(1), Czapiewski R(1), Mouras R(2), Schirmer EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Center for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
Scotland, United Kingdom. (2)Institute for Materials and Processes, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Recent work indicates that the nuclear envelope is a major signaling node for the
cell that can influence tissue differentiation processes. Here we present two
nuclear envelope trans-membrane proteins TMEM120A and TMEM120B that are paralogs 
encoded by the Tmem120A and Tmem120B genes. The TMEM120 proteins are expressed
preferentially in fat and both are induced during 3T3-L1 adipocyte
differentiation. Knockdown of one or the other protein altered expression of
several genes required for adipocyte differentiation, Gata3, Fasn, Glut4, while
knockdown of both together additionally affected Pparg and Adipoq. The double
knockdown also increased the strength of effects, reducing for example Glut4
levels by 95% compared to control 3T3-L1 cells upon pharmacologically induced
differentiation. Accordingly, TMEM120A and B knockdown individually and together 
impacted on adipocyte differentiation/metabolism as measured by lipid
accumulation through binding of Oil Red O and coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering microscopy (CARS). The nuclear envelope is linked to several
lipodystrophies through mutations in lamin A; however, lamin A is widely
expressed. Thus it is possible that the TMEM120A and B fat-specific nuclear
envelope transmembrane proteins may play a contributory role in the
tissue-specific pathology of this disorder or in the wider problem of obesity.

PMCID: PMC4449205
PMID: 26024229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Apr;9(4):OE01-4. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/12235.5814. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Role of IL-25 in Immunity.

Valizadeh A(1), Khosravi A(2), Zadeh LJ(3), Parizad EG(1).

Author information: 
(1)PhD Student in Clinical Microbiology Research Center, Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ilam University of Medical Sciences , Ilam,
Iran . (2)Associate Professor, Department of Immunology, Clinical Microbiology
Research Center, Ilam University of Medical Sciences , Ilam, Iran . (3)PhD
Student, Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ilam University of
Medical Sciences , Ilam, Iran .

IL-25 a 2o KDa protein mostly known as IL-17E, encoded by chromosome 14, and
containing 117 amino acids. Cytokine IL-17 family consists of 6 members; IL-17A
to IL-17F, among which IL-25 has a unique structure and function. The receptor of
IL-25 (IL-17BR) is highly expressed in the main Th2 cells. IL-25 regulates the
internal safety of adaptive immune responses which leads to begin allergic
diseases and plays a role in stimulation of pulmonary mucosal cells and
fibroblasts. IL-25 can also have some effects on production of other cytokines.
For instance, production of IL-25 in human and mice or injection of IL-25 to
animals has resulted in production of high concentrations of Th2 cytokines,
including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. Pilot studies have shown that mRNA of IL-25 has 
a high expression in Th2 cells. However, the mechanism through which IL-25 leads 
to Th2 immune response is still unknown. Reaction between IL-25 and IL-17BR leads
to activation of transcription factors, such as NF-KB, STAT6, GATA3, NF-ATC1,
JUNNB, MAPK, and JNK. IL-25 has been used against the kidney damage in mice. A
large number of researchers in various countries, including the U.S. and Taiwan, 
have stated that IL-25 is a strong inflammatory cytokine protein which is
involved in allergic inflammations.

PMCID: PMC4437101
PMID: 26023586  [PubMed]


161. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 May 26;8:25. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0101-5.

Molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma are defined by specific gene
regulatory systems.

Eriksson P(1), Aine M(2), Veerla S(3), Liedberg F(4), Sjödahl G(5), Höglund M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. pontus.eriksson@med.lu.se.
(2)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.aine@med.lu.se. (3)Division
of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. srinivas.veerla@med.lu.se. (4)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Fredrik.liedberg@med.lu.se. (5)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Gottfrid.sjodahl@med.lu.se. (6)Division of
Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.hoglund@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: Molecular stratification of bladder cancer has revealed gene
signatures differentially expressed across tumor subtypes. While these signatures
provide important insights into subtype biology, the transcriptional regulation
that governs these signatures is not well characterized.
METHODS: In this study, we use publically available ChIP-Seq data on regulatory
factor binding in order to link transcription factors to gene signatures defining
molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma.
RESULTS: We identify PPARG and STAT3, as well as ADIRF, a novel regulator of
fatty acid metabolism, as putative mediators of the SCC-like phenotype. We link
the PLK1-FOXM1 axis to the rapidly proliferating Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like subtypes and show that differentiation programs involving PPARG/RXRA,
FOXA1/GATA3 and HOXA/HOXB are differentially expressed in UC molecular subtypes. 
We show that gene signatures and regulatory systems defined in urothelial
carcinoma operate in breast cancer in a subtype specific manner, suggesting
similarities at the gene regulatory level of these two tumor types.
CONCLUSIONS: At the gene regulatory level Urobasal, Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like tumors represents three fundamentally different tumor types. Urobasal
tumors maintain an apparent urothelial differentiation axis composed of
PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3 and anterior HOXA and HOXB genes. Genomically Unstable
and SCC-like tumors differ from Urobasal tumors by a strong increase of
proliferative activity through the PLK1-FOXM1 axis operating in both subtypes.
However, whereas SCC-like tumors evade urothelial differentiation by a block in
differentiation through strong downregulation of PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3, our
data indicates that Genomically Unstable tumors evade differentiation in a more
dynamic manner.

PMCID: PMC4446831
PMID: 26008846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genome Biol. 2015 May 21;16:105. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0668-3.

Inferring regulatory element landscapes and transcription factor networks from
cancer methylomes.

Yao L(1), Shen H(2), Laird PW(3), Farnham PJ(4), Berman BP(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. lijingya@usc.edu. (2)Center for Epigenetics, Van Andel Research Institute,
Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Hui.Shen@vai.org. (3)Center for Epigenetics, Van
Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Peter.Laird@vai.org.
(4)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. peggy.farnham@med.usc.edu. (5)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT
6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.
(6)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Research Center, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, AHSP Bldg., Suite A8111, Los
Angeles, CA, 90048, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.

Recent studies indicate that DNA methylation can be used to identify
transcriptional enhancers, but no systematic approach has been developed for
genome-wide identification and analysis of enhancers based on DNA methylation. We
describe ELMER (Enhancer Linking by Methylation/Expression Relationships), an
R-based tool that uses DNA methylation to identify enhancers and correlates
enhancer state with expression of nearby genes to identify transcriptional
targets. Transcription factor motif analysis of enhancers is coupled with
expression analysis of transcription factors to infer upstream regulators. Using 
ELMER, we investigated more than 2,000 tumor samples from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. We identified networks regulated by known cancer drivers such as GATA3 and
FOXA1 (breast cancer), SOX17 and FOXA2 (endometrial cancer), and NFE2L2, SOX2,
and TP63 (squamous cell lung cancer). We also identified novel networks with
prognostic associations, including RUNX1 in kidney cancer. We propose ELMER as a 
powerful new paradigm for understanding the cis-regulatory interface between
cancer-associated transcription factors and their functional target genes.

PMCID: PMC4460959
PMID: 25994056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):1987-95. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411776. Epub 2015 
May 17.

Allergen-induced asthmatic responses modified by a GATA3-specific DNAzyme.

Krug N(1), Hohlfeld JM, Kirsten AM, Kornmann O, Beeh KM, Kappeler D, Korn S,
Ignatenko S, Timmer W, Rogon C, Zeitvogel J, Zhang N, Bille J, Homburg U,
Turowska A, Bachert C, Werfel T, Buhl R, Renz J, Garn H, Renz H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (N.K., 
J.M.H.) and the Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Hannover Medical School
(J.Z., T.W.), Hannover, Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic
Grosshansdorf, Grosshansdorf (A.-M.K.), Institut für klinische Forschung
Pneumologie, Clinical Research Center Respiratory Medicine, Frankfurt (O.K.),
Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden (K.M.B.), Inamed, Gauting (D.K., 
W.T.), Pulmonary Department, Medical Clinic, University Hospital Mainz, Mainz
(S.K., R.B.), Charité Research Organization, Berlin (S.I.), FGK Clinical
Research, Munich (C.R.), Sterna Biologicals (J.B., U.H., A.T., J.R.) and
Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Philipps University Marburg, a member of
Universities Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (H.G., H.R.), Marburg - all in
Germany; Upper Airways Research Laboratory, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent,
Belgium (N.Z., C.B.); and the Division of Ear, Nose, and Throat Diseases,
Clintec, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm (N.Z., C.B.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1177.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 17;373(12):1176-7.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):2060-1.

BACKGROUND: The most prevalent phenotype of asthma is characterized by
eosinophil-dominated inflammation that is driven by a type 2 helper T cell (Th2).
Therapeutic targeting of GATA3, an important transcription factor of the Th2
pathway, may be beneficial. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of SB010, a
novel DNA enzyme (DNAzyme) that is able to cleave and inactivate GATA3 messenger 
RNA (mRNA).
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter
clinical trial of SB010 involving patients who had allergic asthma with sputum
eosinophilia and who also had biphasic early and late asthmatic responses after
laboratory-based allergen provocation. A total of 40 patients could be evaluated;
21 were assigned to receive 10 mg of SB010, and 19 were assigned to receive
placebo, with each study drug administered by means of inhalation once daily for 
28 days. An allergen challenge was performed before and after the 28-day period. 
The primary end point was the late asthmatic response as quantified by the change
in the area under the curve (AUC) for forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1).
RESULTS: After 28 days, SB010 attenuated the mean late asthmatic response by 34%,
as compared with the baseline response, according to the AUC for FEV1, whereas
placebo was associated with a 1% increase in the AUC for FEV1 (P=0.02). The early
asthmatic response with SB010 was attenuated by 11% as measured by the AUC for
FEV1, whereas the early response with placebo was increased by 10% (P=0.03).
Inhibition of the late asthmatic response by SB010 was associated with
attenuation of allergen-induced sputum eosinophilia and with lower levels of
tryptase in sputum and lower plasma levels of interleukin-5. Allergen-induced
levels of fractional exhaled nitric oxide and airway hyperresponsiveness to
methacholine were not affected by either SB010 or placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with SB010 significantly attenuated both late and early
asthmatic responses after allergen provocation in patients with allergic asthma. 
Biomarker analysis showed an attenuation of Th2-regulated inflammatory responses.
(Funded by Sterna Biologicals and the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01743768.).

PMID: 25981191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):2060-1. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1502660. Epub 2015
May 17.

Out of the orphanage and into the clinic--therapeutic targeting of GATA3.

Bochner BS(1), Schleimer RP.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy-Immunology, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2015 May 21;372(21):1987-95.

PMID: 25980977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Innate Immun. 2015 Aug;21(6):665-73. doi: 10.1177/1753425915586074. Epub 2015 May
14.

Type 1 innate lymphoid cells contribute to the pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis 
B.

Yang Z(1), Tang T(2), Wei X(2), Yang S(3), Tian Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China 914054186@qq.com. (2)Institute of
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, The People's
Hospital of Zunyi County, Zunyi, Guizhou Province, China. (4)Institute of
Immunology PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) function in producing effector cytokines in response
to pathogenic infections. However, the roles and related mechanisms of the ILC
subpopulations, ILC1 and ILC2, which mirror Th1 and Th2 in adaptive immunity,
remain unclear. In this study, we found the markedly elevated levels of the ILC1 
transcription factor T-bet, the effector cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> and the IL/receptor
signaling molecules IL-12/IL-12R, which are indispensable for ILC1
differentiation, in the helper ILCs of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients. The
elevated level of the ILC1 population was significantly associated with hepatic
damage in CHB patients, and was not related to telbivudine treatment. In
contrast, although we also observed elevated levels of ILC2-related factors,
including IL-33, ST2, GATA3 and IL-13 in helper ILCs, the extent of elevation
shown by each was lower than that shown by the ILC1-related factors. Furthermore,
the activity of the ILC2s did not correlate with either HBV copies or liver
damage. The findings of this study suggest potential pro-inflammatory roles for
ILC1s in CHB pathogenesis, potentiating these cells and their related molecules
as targets of diagnostic, prognostic and/or therapeutic strategies for hepatitis 
B.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25977358  [PubMed - in process]


166. Inflammation. 2015 Dec;38(6):2017-25. doi: 10.1007/s10753-015-0182-5.

Immunoregulatory Effects of Paeoniflorin Exerts Anti-asthmatic Effects via
Modulation of the Th1/Th2 Equilibrium.

Zhang T(1), Yang Z(2), Yang S(3), Du J(4), Wang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changhcun, 130117, China. (2)Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China. (3)Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, 130118, China. (4)School of Life Science, Peking University, Beijing, 
China, 100871. (5)Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changhcun, 130117,
China. wangshuminch@126.com.

Paeoniflorin has been demonstrated to exert anti-inflammatory and
immunomodulatory effects in the animal study. In this study, we investigated
immunoregulatory effects of paeoniflorin on anti-asthmatic effects and underlying
mechanisms. Asthma model was established by ovalbumin-induced. A total of 50 mice
were randomly assigned to five experimental groups: control, model, dexamethasone
(2 mg/kg), and paeoniflorin (10 and 20 mg/kg). Airway resistance (Raw) were
measured by the forced oscillation technique; histological studies were evaluated
by the hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining; Th1/Th2 cytokines were evaluated by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); Th1/Th2 cells were evaluated by flow
cytometry (FCM); and GATA3 and T-bet were evaluated by Western blot. Our study
demonstrated that, compared with model group, paeoniflorin inhibited ovalbumin
(OVA)-induced increases in Raw and eosinophil count; interleukin (IL)-4, IgE
levels were recovered in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid compared; increased IFN-<U+03B3>
level in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; histological studies demonstrated that
paeoniflorin substantially inhibited OVA-induced eosinophilia in lung tissue and 
lung tissue compared with model group. Flow cytometry studies demonstrated that
paeoniflorin can regulate Th1/Th2 balance. These findings suggest that
paeoniflorin may effectively ameliorate the progression of asthma and could be
used as a therapy for patients with allergic asthma.

PMID: 25971794  [PubMed - in process]


167. Molecules. 2015 May 11;20(5):8409-28. doi: 10.3390/molecules20058409.

Effects of Two Different Rhodiola rosea Extracts on Primary Human Visceral
Adipocytes.

Pomari E(1), Stefanon B(2), Colitti M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of Udine,
via delle Scienze, 206, 33100 Udine, Italy. elena.pomari@gmail.com. (2)Department
of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of Udine, via delle
Scienze, 206, 33100 Udine, Italy. bruno.stefanon@uniud.it. (3)Department of
Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of Udine, via delle Scienze, 
206, 33100 Udine, Italy. monica.colitti@uniud.it.

Rhodiola rosea (Rro) has been reported to have various pharmacological
properties, including anti-fatigue, anti-stress and anti-inflammatory activity.
It is also known to improve glucose and lipid metabolism, but the effects of
Rhodiola rosea on adipocyte differentiation and metabolism are not still
elucidated. In this study the anti-adipogenic and lipolytic activity of two
extracts of Rhodiola rosea, containing 3% salidroside (RS) or 1% salidroside and 
3% rosavines (RR) on primary human visceral adipocytes was investigated.
Pre-adipocytes were analyzed after 10 and 20 days of treatment during
differentiation and after 7 days of treatment when they reached mature shape. The
RS extract significantly induced higher apoptosis and lipolysis in comparison to 
control cells and to RR extract. In contrast, RR extract significantly reduced
triglyceride incorporation during maturation. Differentiation of pre-adipocytes
in the presence of RS and RR extracts showed a significant decrease in expression
of genes involved in adipocyte function such as SLC2A4 and the adipogenic factor 
FGF2 and significant increase in expression of genes involved in inhibition of
adipogenesis, such as GATA3, WNT3A, WNT10B. Furthermore RR extract, in contrast
to RS, significantly down-regulates PPARG, the master regulator of adipogenesis
and FABP4. These data support the lipolytic and anti-adipogenetic activity of two
different commercial extracts of Rhodiola rosea in primary human visceral
pre-adipocytes during differentiation.

PMID: 25970041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Exp Med. 2015 Jun 1;212(6):865-74. doi: 10.1084/jem.20142318. Epub 2015 May 11.

The transcription factor Bcl11b is specifically expressed in group 2 innate
lymphoid cells and is essential for their development.

Yu Y(1), Wang C(2), Clare S(1), Wang J(1), Lee SC(1), Brandt C(1), Burke S(1), Lu
L(3), He D(4), Jenkins NA(5), Copeland NG(5), Dougan G(1), Liu P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, England, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, England, UK
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Shanghai Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 201106, China. (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, England, UK Shanghai Institute of
Immunology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China. (4)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Shanghai Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 201106, China. (5)The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030. (6)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, England, UK pl2@sanger.ac.uk.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Jun 1;212(6):828.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), or ILC2s, are a subset of recently
identified ILCs, which play important roles in innate immunity by producing type 
2 effector cytokines. Several transcription factors have been found to have
critical functions in the development of both ILC2s and T cells. We report here
that Bcl11b, a transcription factor essential in T cell lineage commitment and
maintenance, is specifically expressed in progenitors committed to the ILC2
lineage and is required for ILC2 development. The Bcl11b gene is expressed in
~28% of ILC progenitors (ILCPs; common helper innate lymphoid progenitors or
ILCPs expressing either ID2 or promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger, respectively).
Both in vitro and in vivo, these Bcl11b-expressing early ILCPs generate only
ILC2s. Inactivation of Bcl11b causes a complete loss of ILC2 development from
hematopoietic progenitors, which is confirmed upon immune challenge with either
papain administration or influenza virus infection.

© 2015 Yu et al.

PMCID: PMC4451136
PMID: 25964371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Immunol Res. 2015 Jul;62(3):280-91. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8659-8.

Induction of a Th1 immune response and suppression of IgE via immunotherapy with 
a recombinant hybrid molecule encapsulated in liposome-protamine-DNA
nanoparticles in a model of experimental allergy.

Nouri HR(1), Varasteh A, Jaafari MR, Davies JM, Sankian M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran, nourihr851@gmail.com.

Liposome-protamine-DNA nanoparticles (LPD) are safe, effective, and non-toxic
adjuvants that induce Th1-like immune responses. We hypothesized that
encapsulation of allergens into liposomes could be an appropriate option for
immunotherapy. The present study evaluated the immunotherapeutic potential of a
recombinant hybrid molecule (rHM) encapsulated in LPD nanoparticles in a murine
model of Chenopodium album allergy. BALB/c mice were sensitized with the allergen
in alum, and the immunotherapy procedure was performed by subcutaneous injections
of LPD-rHM, rHM, or empty LPD at weekly intervals. Sensitized mice developed a
Th2-biased immune response characterized by strong specific IgG1 and IgE
production, IL-4, and the transcription factor GATA3 in spleen cell cultures.
Treatment with the LPD-rHM resulted in a reduction in IgE and a marked increase
in IgG2a. The LPD-rHM induced allergen-specific responses with relatively high
interferon-gamma production, as well as expression of the transcription factor
T-bet in stimulated splenocytes. In addition, lymphoproliferative responses were 
higher in the LPD-rHM-treated mice than in the other groups. Removal of the
nanoparticles from the rHM resulted in a decrease in the allergen's
immunogenicity. These results indicate that the rHM complexed with LPD
nanoparticles has a marked suppressive effect on the allergic response and caused
a shift toward a Th1 pathway.

PMID: 25957889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Genesis. 2015 Jun;53(6):356-65. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22857. Epub 2015 May 25.

Conditional cell ablation via diphtheria toxin reveals distinct requirements for 
the basal plate in the regional identity of diencephalic subpopulations.

Lee B(1), Lam DT(1), Baek K(1), Yoon J(1), Jeong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-Si, Republic of Korea.

The mammalian diencephalon is the caudal derivative of the embryonic forebrain.
Early events in diencephalic regionalization include its subdivision along the
dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. The prosomeric model by Puelles and
Rubenstein (1993) suggests that the alar plate of the posterior diencephalon is
partitioned into three different prosomeres (designated p1-p3), which develop
into the pretectum, thalamus, and prethalamus, respectively. Here, we report the 
developmental consequences of genetic ablation of cell populations from the
diencephalic basal plate. The strategy for conditionally regulated cell ablation 
is based on the targeted expression of the diphtheria toxin gene (DTA) to the
diencephalic basal plate via tamoxifen- induced, Cre-mediated recombination of
the ROSA(DTA) allele. We show that activation of DTA leads to specific cell loss 
in the basal plate of the posterior diencephalon, and disrupted early
regionalization of distinct alar territories. In the basal plate-deficient
embryos, the p1 alar plate exhibited reduced expression of subtype-specific
markers in the pretectum, whereas p2 alar plate failed to further subdivide into 
two discrete thalamic subpopulations. We also show that these defects lead to
abnormal nuclear organization at later developmental stages. Our data have
implications for increased understanding of the interactive roles between
discrete diencephalic compartments.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25950659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):678-684.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.03.030. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

Genome-wide association study of recalcitrant atopic dermatitis in Korean
children.

Kim KW(1), Myers RA(2), Lee JH(3), Igartua C(2), Lee KE(4), Kim YH(4), Kim EJ(5),
Yoon D(5), Lee JS(5), Hirota T(6), Tamari M(6), Takahashi A(7), Kubo M(8), Choi
JM(9), Kim KE(4), Nicolae DL(10), Ober C(2), Sohn MH(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Severance Hospital, Institute of Allergy, Brain
Korea 21 PLUS project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea; Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill. 
(2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.
(3)Department of Oral Biology, Yonsei University College of Dentistry, Seoul,
Korea. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Severance Hospital, Institute of Allergy,
Brain Korea 21 PLUS project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Division of Allergy and Chronic Respiratory Diseases, 
Center for Biomedical Sciences, Korea National Institute of Health, Osong, Korea.
(6)Laboratory for Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. (7)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis,
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Laboratory for
Genotyping Development, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama,
Japan. (9)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (10)Department of Human Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Ill; Department of Medicine and Statistics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Ill. (11)Department of Pediatrics, Severance Hospital,
Institute of Allergy, Brain Korea 21 PLUS project for Medical Science, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: mhsohn@yuhs.ac.

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a heterogeneous chronic inflammatory skin
disease. Most AD during infancy resolves during childhood, but moderate-to-severe
AD with allergic sensitization is more likely to persist into adulthood and more 
often occurs with other allergic diseases.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to find susceptibility loci by performing the first
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of AD in Korean children with recalcitrant
AD, which was defined as moderate-to-severe AD with allergic sensitization.
METHODS: Our study included 246 children with recalcitrant AD and 551 adult
control subjects with a negative history of both allergic disease and allergic
sensitization. DNA from these subjects was genotyped; sets of common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were imputed and used in the GWAS after quality
control checks.
RESULTS: SNPs at a region on 13q21.31 were associated with recalcitrant AD at a
genome-wide threshold of significance (P < 2.0 × 10(-8)). These associated SNPs
are more than 1 Mb from the closest gene, protocadherin (PCDH)9. SNPs at 4
additional loci had P values of less than 1 × 10(-6), including SNPs at or near
the neuroblastoma amplified sequence (NBAS; 2p24.3), thymus-expressed molecule
involved in selection (THEMIS; 6q22.33), GATA3 (10p14), and S-phase cyclin
A-associated protein in the ER (SCAPER; 15q24.3) genes. Further analysis of total
serum IgE levels suggested 13q21.31 might be primarily an IgE locus, and analyses
of published data demonstrated that SNPs at the 15q24.3 region are expression
quantitative trait loci for 2 nearby genes, ISL2 and proline-serine-threonine
phosphatase interacting protein 1 (PSTPIP1), in immune cells.
CONCLUSION: Our GWAS of recalcitrant AD identified new susceptibility regions
containing genes involved in epithelial cell function and immune dysregulation, 2
key features of AD, and potentially extend our understanding of their role in
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4562879 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25935106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Oct;39(10):1377-82. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000444.

Epithelioid Angiosarcoma of the Bladder: A Series of 9 Cases.

Matoso A(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Oncology Urology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, MD.

Primary angiosarcoma of the bladder is very rare, with approximately 30 cases
reported in the literature. Those with epithelioid morphology are even rarer,
with only single-case reports published. We describe the histopathologic features
and clinical follow-up of 9 patients with epithelioid angiosarcoma (EA) of the
bladder retrieved from our Surgical Pathology files from 1998 to 2014. Eight
cases were consults. The mean age at presentation was 65 years (range, 39 to 85
y). The M:F ratio was 8:1. The clinical presentation was hematuria and bladder
mass in all cases. Six patients had a history of radiotherapy to the pelvis, 5 to
treat prostate cancer and 1 to treat uterine cervical cancer. The time from
radiotherapy to the diagnosis of EA ranged from 6 to 15 years. The average size
of the tumor was 4 cm. (range, 1 to 8 cm.). The submitting diagnoses were poorly 
differentiated carcinoma (n=5), high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma (n=3),
and atypical vascular proliferation (n=1). Morphologically, the tumors were
composed of nests and sheets of highly atypical cells with high nuclear to
cytoplasmic ratio, occasional intracytoplasmic lumens, and a hemorrhagic
background. None of the cases showed any urothelial carcinoma component. Three
patients showed in addition usual angiosarcoma in the resection specimen. By
immunohistochemistry, 5/9 cases were positive for cytokeratins, including CK7
(n=3), AE1/AE3 (n=3), and Cam5.2 (n=1). All cases were positive for at least 1
endothelial marker, including CD31 (n=7), CD34 (n=2), FVIII (n=3), and ERG (n=2).
Urothelial markers (p63 and GATA3) were consistently negative. Surgical treatment
included transurethral resection of the bladder (TURB) only (n=5), TURB followed 
by cystoprostatectomy (n=2), TURB followed by partial cystectomy (n=1), and
cystoprostatectomy only (n=1). The tumor involved the muscularis propria in 5/9
patients, the periureteric adipose tissue in 1 patient, and the prostate and
seminal vesicles in 1 patient. Five of 9 patients died of disease, with a median 
survival of 7 months (range, 6 to 14 mo). Two patients were alive with disease at
3 and 6 months of follow-up. One patient who underwent radical cystoprostatectomy
was alive with no evidence of disease 12 months after surgery. EA of the bladder 
is a rare malignancy that is frequently misdiagnosed as high-grade carcinoma,
especially due to positive immunostaining for cytokeratins. This tumor is more
frequent in older men with a history of radiotherapy to the pelvis. Morphologic
features that should suggest the vascular origin of the tumor include highly
atypical nuclei with interspersed erythrocytes, hemorrhagic background, and
occasional intracytoplasmic lumens. Patients usually present with muscle invasive
disease, and the prognosis is dismal.

PMID: 25929352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;28(2):209-17. doi:
10.1177/0394632015584733. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Immunohistochemical pattern of T lymphocytes population within
bilharzial-associated bladder neoplasm microenvironment.

El-Aal AA(1), Emran AM(2), Al-Antably AS(3), El Saftawy EA(1), Bayoumy IR(4),
Hassan NS(5), Badawi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(2)Urosurgery Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(3)Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt
asalantably@kasralainy.edu.eg. (4)Parasitology Department, Theodor Bilharz
Research Institute, Egypt. (5)Pathology Department, National Research Center,
Giza, Egypt.

The present work aimed to investigate the cellular and immunochemical pattern of 
T cells population in biopsy material from chronic schistosomiasis haematobium
Egyptian patients complicated with bladder cancer. Digital real-time quantitative
photocytometry was applied to auto-analyze 29 stained tissue sections from cases 
and 17 controls using STAT4, GATA3, FOXP3, and CD8 markers specific for Th1, Th2,
T regulatory, and T cytotoxic cells, respectively. Area percentage showed
significant high level of GATA, followed by FOXP3 and low level of both STAT and 
CD8 was reported. Tissue samples from five healthy bladder tissues showed
significant lower optical density (OD) values. Tissue samples from 12
non-bilharzial bladder cancers showed variable OD values, reflecting wide
disparity in the control group.Our results hypothesized an exclusive pattern of T
population in long standing complicated schistosomiasis haematobium. Our cases
were poorly controlled by unbalanced Th1/Th2 in which Th2 was dominated. FOXP3
increased significantly, however, failed to downregulate Th2, instead, the
relation between Th1 and T cytotoxic was forcibly limited by the high level of
FOXP3, resulting in loss of their power in defending the host against both
parasite and carcinogenic changes. These results provide more clarification for
the immune evasion process played by the parasite and tumor cells under the
supervision of T regulatory cells. Additionally a critical role of FOXP3 is
suggested in manipulating STAT4 and CD8 in favor of malignant transformation in
this life-threatening parasite.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25926591  [PubMed - in process]


174. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Aug 15;411:113-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.04.018. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Gata3 cooperates with Gcm2 and MafB to activate parathyroid hormone gene
expression by interacting with SP1.

Han SI(1), Tsunekage Y(1), Kataoka K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medical Bioscience, Graduate School of Medical Life
Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Medical Bioscience, Graduate School
of Medical Life Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address:
kkataoka@tsurumi.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Haploinsufficiency of the Gata3 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor, is associated with the disorder hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
dysplasia (HDR) syndrome in humans. However, the roles of Gata3 in
transcriptional regulation in the parathyroid glands are not well-understood. In 
this study, we show that Gata3 activates transcription of parathyroid hormone
(PTH), which is secreted from parathyroid glands and is critical for regulating
serum calcium and phosphate homeostasis. Gata3 interacted with Gcm2 and MafB, two
known transcriptional regulators of parathyroid development, and synergistically 
stimulated the PTH promoter. An SP1-binding element (GC box) located within the
PTH-promoter proximal region was critical for activating transcription by Gata3. 
In addition, the ubiquitous transcription factor SP1 also interacted with Gata3
as well as MafB and Gcm2, and HDR syndrome-associated Gata3 mutants were
defective in activating the PTH promoter. These results suggest that Gata3 is a
critical regulator of PTH gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25917456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Apr 21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Novel Marker GATA3 is Significantly More Sensitive Than Traditional Markers
Mammaglobin and GCDFP15 for Identifying Breast Cancer in Surgical and Cytology
Specimens of Metastatic and Matched Primary Tumors.

Sangoi AR(1), Shrestha B, Yang G, Mego O, Beck AH.

Author information: 
(1)*El Camino Hospital Mountain, Department of Pathology, Mountain View, CA Cell
Marque, Rocklin, CA Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.

Traditional markers mammaglobin and GCDFP15 show good specificity but lack
sensitivity and can be difficult to interpret in small tissue samples. We
undertook a comparative study of the novel nuclear marker GATA3 (expression
typically restricted to breast and urothelial carcinomas) and GCDFP15 and
mammaglobin. We first compared quantitative mRNA expression levels of these 3
markers across a diverse set of over 6000 tumors and 500 normal samples from The 
Cancer Genome Atlas which showed dramatically higher GATA3 expression (>10-fold
higher) in breast cancer as compared with GCDFP15 or mammaglobin (both
P<2.2e-16), suggesting that GATA3 may represent a more sensitive marker of breast
cancer than GCDFP15 or mammaglobin. We next examined protein expression by
immunohistochemistry in 166 cases (including surgical and cytology specimens) of 
metastatic breast carcinoma and 54 cases with available matched primaries. One
whole-slide section from each case was stained for monoclonal GATA3 (L50-823),
monoclonal mammaglobin (31A5), and monoclonal GCDFP15 (EP1582Y). Staining
intensity (0 to 3+) and extent (0% to 100%) were scored with an H-score
calculated (range, 0 to 300). Sensitivities by varying H-score cutoffs for a
positive result in metastatic breast carcinoma among GATA3/GCDFP15/mammaglobin,
respectively, were as follows: any H-score=95%/65%/78%, H-score>50=93%/37%/47%,
H-score>100=90%/25%/27%, H-score>150=86%/21%/19%, H-score>200=73%/18%/9%,
H-score>250=66%/14%/6%. Significant staining differences by specimen type, tumor 
subtype/grade, or ER/PR/HER2 status were not identified. Significantly stronger
correlation was observed between primary/metastatic GATA3 expression [Pearson's
correlation=0.81 (0.68-0.89)] as compared with the primary/metastatic
correlations of GCDFP15 [Pearson's correlation=0.57 (0.33-0.74)] and mammaglobin 
[Pearson's correlation=0.50 (0.24-0.70)] (both P<0.05). In conclusion, the novel 
marker GATA3 stains a significantly higher proportion of both primary and
metastatic breast carcinomas than GCDFP15 or mammaglobin with stronger and more
diffuse staining, helpful in cases with small tissue samples. The matched
primary/metastatic expression of GATA3 is also more consistent. We propose that
GATA3 be included among a panel of confirmatory markers for metastatic breast
carcinoma.

PMID: 25906123  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


176. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(6):987-96. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1030552. Epub
2015 Apr 22.

GATA-3 augmentation down-regulates Connexin43 in Helicobacter pylori associated
gastric carcinogenesis.

Liu X(1), Cao K, Xu C, Hu T, Zhou L, Cao D, Xiao J, Luo L, Guo Y, Qi Y.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology ; Third Xiangya Hospital ; Central South
University ; Changsha , PR China.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a risk factor of gastric carcinoma, and
inflammation with H.pylori infection has widely been suggested to trigger gastric
carcinogenesis through "inflammation-carcinoma chain" (non-atrophic gastritis
(NAG) <U+2192> chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) <U+2192> intestinal metaplasia (IM) <U+2192> dysplasia
(DYS) and gastric carcinoma (GC)). Connexin43 (Cx43) is a major constituent of
gap junction in normal gastric mucosa (NGM) and it is continuously down-regulated
from normal gastric mucosa to precancerous lesions or ultimate gastric carcinoma,
which shows novel target against gastric carcinoma by preventing the Cx43
decline. Our previous studies demonstrated that H. pylori infection in gastric
mucosa down-regulates Cx43 expression, but its mechanism remains unknown. The
transcriptional factor, GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) is the key to regulate
adaptive immune response, which possibly relates to inflammation toward malignant
transformation. Here the substantial rising of GATA-3 was screened by
transcriptional factor microarray along the developmental stages of H. pylori
associated gastric carcinoma. Moreover, the increased GATA-3 and inhibited Cx43
were confirmed in clinical specimens, Mongolian gerbils and normal gastric
epithelial cell line GES-1 with H. pylori infection. GATA-3 silencing generated
the Cx43 restoration both in intermediate differentiation gastric cancer cells
BGC-803 and in H. pylori infected GES-1 cells. Dual-luciferase reporter assay
further revealed the GATA-3 as one of Cx43 down-regulators by directly binding to
its promoters. Together, the incremental GATA-3 is found in H. pylori associated 
gastric carcinogenesis, which is responsible for Cx43 inhibition as well.

PMCID: PMC4622629 [Available on 2016-04-22]
PMID: 25901741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):793-807. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141849. Epub 2015 Apr
20.

The transcription factor lymphoid enhancer factor 1 controls invariant natural
killer T cell expansion and Th2-type effector differentiation.

Carr T(1), Krishnamoorthy V(1), Yu S(2), Xue HH(2), Kee BL(3), Verykokakis M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular
Medicine, and Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637. (2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242.
(3)Committee on Immunology, Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular
Medicine, and Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637 Committee on Immunology, Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular 
Medicine, and Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637 Committee on Immunology, Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular 
Medicine, and Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637 bkee@bsd.uchicago.edu mvery@uchicago.edu. (4)Committee on Immunology,
Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular Medicine, and Department of
Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 Committee on Immunology, 
Committee on Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular Medicine, and Department of
Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 bkee@bsd.uchicago.edu
mvery@uchicago.edu.

Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT cells) are innate-like T cells that
rapidly produce cytokines that impact antimicrobial immune responses, asthma, and
autoimmunity. These cells acquire multiple effector fates during their thymic
development that parallel those of CD4(+) T helper cells. The number of Th2-type 
effector iNKT cells is variable in different strains of mice, and their number
impacts CD8 T, dendritic, and B cell function. Here we demonstrate a unique
function for the transcription factor lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF1) in the
postselection expansion of iNKT cells through a direct induction of the CD127
component of the receptor for interleukin-7 (IL-7) and the transcription factor
c-myc. LEF1 also directly augments expression of the effector fate-specifying
transcription factor GATA3, thus promoting the development of Th2-like effector
iNKT cells that produce IL-4, including those that also produce interferon-<U+03B3>. Our
data reveal LEF1 as a central regulator of iNKT cell number and Th2-type effector
differentiation.

© 2015 Carr et al.

PMCID: PMC4419352
PMID: 25897173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(3):e0122872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122872.
eCollection 2015.

Experimental hyperglycemia induces an increase of monocyte and T-lymphocyte
content in adipose tissue of healthy obese women.

Tencerová M(1), Kracmerová J(1), Krauzová E(1), Maliová L(1), Kovácová Z(1),
Wedellová Z(2), iklová M(1), tich V(1), Rossmeislová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague 10, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic;
Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic. (2)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical
Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague,
Prague 10, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic; Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty 
of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic;
Second Internal Medicine Department, Vinohrady Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech
Republic.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Hyperglycemia represents one of possible mediators for
activation of immune system and may contribute to worsening of inflammatory state
associated with obesity. The aim of our study was to investigate the effect of a 
short-term hyperglycemia (HG) on the phenotype and relative content of immune
cells in circulation and subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue (SAAT) in obese
women without metabolic complications.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Three hour HG clamp with infusion of octreotide and control
investigations with infusion of octreotide or saline were performed in three
groups of obese women (Group1: HG, Group 2: Octreotide, Group 3: Saline, n=10 per
group). Before and at the end of the interventions, samples of SAAT and blood
were obtained. The relative content of immune cells in blood and SAAT was
determined by flow cytometry. Gene expression analysis of immunity-related
markers in SAAT was performed by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In blood, no changes in analysed immune cell population were observed in
response to HG. In SAAT, HG induced an increase in the content of CD206 negative 
monocytes/macrophages (p<0.05) and T lymphocytes (both T helper and T cytotoxic
lymphocytes, p<0.01). Further, HG promoted an increase of mRNA levels of immune
response markers (CCL2, TLR4, TNFa) and lymphocyte markers (CD3g, CD4, CD8a,
TBX21, GATA3, FoxP3) in SAAT (p<0.05 and 0.01). Under both control infusions,
none of these changes were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute HG significantly increased the content of monocytes and
lymphocytes in SAAT of healthy obese women. This result suggests that the
short-term HG can modulate an immune status of AT in obese subjects.

PMCID: PMC4403863
PMID: 25894202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 17;10(4):e0123499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123499.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-wide association study of serum minerals levels in children of different
ethnic background.

Chang X(1), Li J(1), Guo Y(1), Wei Z(2), Mentch FD(1), Hou C(1), Zhao Y(1), Qiu
H(1), Kim C(1), Sleiman PM(3), Hakonarson H(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)Department of Computer
Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, United States of
America. (3)The Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics,
The Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Division of Human Genetics, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, chloride and phosphorus are the major
dietary minerals involved in various biological functions and are commonly
measured in the blood serum. Sufficient mineral intake is especially important
for children due to their rapid growth. Currently, the genetic mechanisms
influencing serum mineral levels are poorly understood, especially for children. 
We carried out a genome-wide association (GWA) study on 5,602 European-American
children and 4,706 African-American children who had mineral measures available
in their electronic medical records (EMR). While no locus met the criteria for
genome-wide significant association, our results demonstrated a nominal
association of total serum calcium levels with a missense variant in the calcium 
-sensing receptor (CASR) gene on 3q13 (rs1801725, P = 1.96 × 10(-3)) in the
African-American pediatric cohort, a locus previously reported in Caucasians. We 
also confirmed the association result in our pediatric European-American cohort
(P = 1.38 × 10(-4)). We further replicated two other loci associated with serum
calcium levels in the European-American cohort (rs780094, GCKR, P = 4.26 ×
10(-3); rs10491003, GATA3, P = 0.02). In addition, we replicated a previously
reported locus on 1q21, demonstrating association of serum magnesium levels with 
MUC1 (rs4072037, P = 2.04 × 10(-6)). Moreover, in an extended gene-based
association analysis we uncovered evidence for association of calcium levels with
the previously reported gene locus DGKD in both European-American children and
African-American children. Taken together, our results support a role for CASR
and DGKD mediated calcium regulation in both African-American and
European-American children, and corroborate the association of calcium levels
with GCKR and GATA3, and the association of magnesium levels with MUC1 in the
European-American children.

PMCID: PMC4401557
PMID: 25886283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;20(1):59-63. doi:
10.6065/apem.2015.20.1.59. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysgenesis syndrome with a 
GATA3 mutation.

Shim YS(1), Choi W(1), Hwang IT(1), Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysgenesis syndrome is an
autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in the GATA3 gene on chromosome
10p15. We identified a patient diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism who also had a
family history of hypoparathyroidism and sensorineural deafness, present in the
father. The patient was subsequently diagnosed and found to be a heterozygote for
an insertion mutation c.255_256ins4 (GTGC) in exon 2 of GATA3. His father was
also confirmed to have the same mutation in GATA3.

PMCID: PMC4397275
PMID: 25883929  [PubMed]


181. Clin Transl Med. 2015 Mar 19;4:13. doi: 10.1186/s40169-015-0054-5. eCollection
2015.

Psoriasis drug development and GWAS interpretation through in silico analysis of 
transcription factor binding sites.

Swindell WR(1), Sarkar MK(1), Stuart PE(1), Voorhees JJ(1), Elder JT(1), Johnston
A(1), Gudjonsson JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2200 USA.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a cytokine-mediated skin disease that can be treated
effectively with immunosuppressive biologic agents. These medications, however,
are not equally effective in all patients and are poorly suited for treating mild
psoriasis. To develop more targeted therapies, interfering with transcription
factor (TF) activity is a promising strategy.
METHODS: Meta-analysis was used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
in the lesional skin from psoriasis patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>237). We compiled a dictionary 
of 2935 binding sites representing empirically-determined binding affinities of
TFs and unconventional DNA-binding proteins (uDBPs). This dictionary was screened
to identify "psoriasis response elements" (PREs) overrepresented in sequences
upstream of psoriasis DEGs.
RESULTS: PREs are recognized by IRF1, ISGF3, NF-kappaB and multiple TFs with
helix-turn-helix (homeo) or other all-alpha-helical (high-mobility group)
DNA-binding domains. We identified a limited set of DEGs that encode proteins
interacting with PRE motifs, including TFs (GATA3, EHF, FOXM1, SOX5) and uDBPs
(AVEN, RBM8A, GPAM, WISP2). PREs were prominent within enhancer regions near
cytokine-encoding DEGs (IL17A, IL19 and IL1B), suggesting that PREs might be
incorporated into complex decoy oligonucleotides (cdODNs). To illustrate this
idea, we designed a cdODN to concomitantly target psoriasis-activated TFs (i.e., 
FOXM1, ISGF3, IRF1 and NF-kappaB). Finally, we screened psoriasis-associated SNPs
to identify risk alleles that disrupt or engender PRE motifs. This identified
possible sites of allele-specific TF/uDBP binding and showed that PREs are
disproportionately disrupted by psoriasis risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified new TF/uDBP candidates and developed an approach that 
(i) connects transcriptome informatics to cdODN drug development and (ii)
enhances our ability to interpret GWAS findings. Disruption of PRE motifs by
psoriasis risk alleles may contribute to disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4392043
PMID: 25883770  [PubMed]


182. Sci Rep. 2015 Apr 15;5:9511. doi: 10.1038/srep09511.

Copy number variants and genetic polymorphisms in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc, Foxp3 and
susceptibility to Behcet's disease and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome.

Liao D(1), Hou S(1), Zhang J(1), Fang J(1), Liu Y(1), Bai L(1), Cao Q(1),
Kijlstra A(2), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, China.
(2)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

This study aimed to investigate the role of genetic variants including single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) of TBX21, GATA3, 
Rorc and Foxp3 genes in Behcet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
syndrome in a Chinese Han population. Genotyping of 25 SNPs was performed by
iPLEX system (Sequenom) or polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). TaqMan real time PCR was used to assess CNVs. The
expression of Rorc and Foxp3 were examined by real-time PCR and cytokine
production was measured by ELISA. High Rorc CNV was associated with the
susceptibility to BD (P = 8.99 × 10(-8), OR = 3.0), and low Foxp3 CNV predisposed
to BD in female patients (P = 1.92 × 10(-5), OR = 3.1). CNVs for the investigated
genes were not altered in VKH syndrome. Further functional studies demonstrated
that the relative mRNA expression levels of Rorc were increased in individuals
with high Rorc copy number, but not for Foxp3. Increased production of IL-1ß and 
IL-6 was found in individuals carrying a high CNV of Rorc. Our study showed that 
high CNVs of Rorc and low CNVs of Foxp3 confer risk for BD but not for VKH
syndrome. The tested 25 SNPs in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc and Foxp3 did not associate
with BD and VKH syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4397537
PMID: 25873156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Immunol. 2015 May 15;194(10):4777-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500020. Epub 2015 
Apr 13.

IL-33 Reverses an Obesity-Induced Deficit in Visceral Adipose Tissue ST2+ T
Regulatory Cells and Ameliorates Adipose Tissue Inflammation and Insulin
Resistance.

Han JM(1), Wu D(1), Denroche HC(1), Yao Y(1), Verchere CB(1), Levings MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia and Child and Family
Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada. (2)Department of
Surgery, University of British Columbia and Child and Family Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada mlevings@mail.ubc.ca.

Obesity is associated with insulin resistance and inflammation thought to be
caused by a visceral adipose tissue (VAT)-localized reduction in immunoregulatory
cells and increase in proinflammatory immune cells. We previously found that VAT 
regulatory T cells (Tregs) normally express high levels of IL-10 and that
expression of this cytokine in VAT Tregs is specifically reduced in mice fed a
high-fat diet. In this study, we further investigated the phenotype of VAT Tregs 
and found that the majority of IL-10-expressing Tregs in the VAT of lean mice
also expressed the ST2 chain of the IL-33R. In addition to high expression of
IL-10, ST2(+) Tregs in lean VAT expressed higher proportions of Th2-associated
proteins, including GATA3 and CCR4, and Neuropillin-1 compared with ST2(-) Tregs.
The proportion of ST2(+) Tregs in VAT was severely diminished in obese mice that 
had been fed a high-fat/sucrose diet, and this effect could be completely
reversed by treatment with IL-33. IL-33 treatment also reversed VAT inflammation 
in obese mice and resulted in a reduction of hyperinsulinemia and insulin
resistance. These data suggest that IL-33 contributes to the maintenance of the
normal pool of ST2(+) Tregs in the VAT, and that therapeutic administration of
IL-33 results in multiple anti-obesity effects, including the reversal of VAT
inflammation and alleviation of insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25870243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 May;26(1):246-56. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.03.035.
Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Therapeutic effects of R8, a semi-synthetic analogue of Vasicine, on murine model
of allergic airway inflammation via STAT6 inhibition.

Rayees S(1), Mabalirajan U(2), Bhat WW(3), Rasool S(4), Rather RA(5), Panda L(2),
Satti NK(6), Lattoo SK(7), Ghosh B(2), Singh G(8).

Author information: 
(1)PK-PD Toxicology Division, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR,
Jammu, India; School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Katra
Jammu, India. (2)Molecular Immunogenetics Laboratory, Institute of genomics and
Integrative Biology-CSIR, Delhi, India. (3)Biotransformation Group-Industrail
Biotechnology, Scion Research, New Zealand. (4)School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata
Vaishno Devi University, Katra Jammu, India. (5)PK-PD Toxicology Division, Indian
Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, Jammu, India. (6)Chemistry Division,
Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, Jammu, India. (7)Plant
Biotechnology Division, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, Jammu,
India. (8)PK-PD Toxicology Division, Indian Institute of Integrative
Medicine-CSIR, Jammu, India. Electronic address: singh_gd@iiim.ac.in.

This is a follow-up study of our previous work in which we screened a series of
Vasicine analogues for their anti-inflammatory activity in a preventive OVA
induced murine model of asthma. The study demonstrated that R8, one of the
analogues, significantly suppressed the Th2 cytokine production and eosinophil
recruitment to the airways. In the present study, we have been using two standard
experimental murine models of asthma, where the mice were treated with R8 either 
during (preventive use) or after (therapeutic use) the development of asthma
features. In the preventive model, R8 reduced inflammatory cell infiltration to
the airways, OVA specific IgE and Th2 cytokine production. Also, the R8 treatment
in the therapeutic model decreased methacholine induced AHR, Th2 cytokine
release, serum IgE levels, infiltration of inflammatory cells into the airways,
phosphorylation of STAT6 and expression of GATA3. Moreover, R8 not only reduced
goblet cell metaplasia in asthmatic mice but also reduced IL-4 induced Muc5AC
gene expression in human alveolar basal epithelial cells. Further, R8 attenuated 
IL-4 induced differentiation of murine splenocytes into Th2 cells in vitro. So,
we may deduce that R8 treatment profoundly reduced asthma features by attenuating
the differentiation of T cells into Th2 cells by interfering with the binding of 
IL-4 to its receptor in turn decreasing the phosphorylation of STAT6 and
expression of GATA3 in murine model of asthma. These preclinical findings suggest
a possible therapeutic role of R8 in allergic asthma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25863236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 22;290(21):13095-103. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.621524. Epub
2015 Apr 10.

Methylation of Gata3 protein at Arg-261 regulates transactivation of the Il5 gene
in T helper 2 cells.

Hosokawa H(1), Kato M(1), Tohyama H(1), Tamaki Y(1), Endo Y(1), Kimura MY(1),
Tumes DJ(1), Motohashi S(2), Matsumoto M(3), Nakayama KI(3), Tanaka T(4),
Nakayama T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Immunology. (2)Department of Medical Immunology. (3)the
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, and.
(4)Department of Clinical Cell Biology, and Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. (5)From the Department of Immunology,
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8670, Japan tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

Gata3 acts as a master regulator for T helper 2 (Th2) cell differentiation by
inducing chromatin remodeling of the Th2 cytokine loci, accelerating Th2 cell
proliferation, and repressing Th1 cell differentiation. Gata3 also directly
transactivates the interleukin-5 (Il5) gene via additional mechanisms that have
not been fully elucidated. We herein identified a mechanism whereby the
methylation of Gata3 at Arg-261 regulates the transcriptional activation of the
Il5 gene in Th2 cells. Although the methylation-mimicking Gata3 mutant retained
the ability to induce IL-4 and repress IFN<U+03B3> production, the IL-5 production was
selectively impaired. We also demonstrated that heat shock protein (Hsp) 60
strongly associates with the methylation-mimicking Gata3 mutant and negatively
regulates elongation of the Il5 transcript by RNA polymerase II. Thus, arginine
methylation appears to play a pivotal role in the organization of Gata3 complexes
and the target gene specificity of Gata3.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505565 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25861992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 9;6:6825. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7825.

New basal cell carcinoma susceptibility loci.

Stacey SN(1), Helgason H(1), Gudjonsson SA(1), Thorleifsson G(1), Zink F(1),
Sigurdsson A(1), Kehr B(1), Gudmundsson J(1), Sulem P(1), Sigurgeirsson B(2),
Benediktsdottir KR(2), Thorisdottir K(2), Ragnarsson R(2), Fuentelsaz V(3),
Corredera C(4), Gilaberte Y(5), Grasa M(6), Planelles D(7), Sanmartin O(8),
Rudnai P(9), Gurzau E(10), Koppova K(11), Nexø BA(12), Tjønneland A(13), Overvad 
K(14), Jonasson JG(15), Tryggvadottir L(16), Johannsdottir H(1), Kristinsdottir
AM(1), Stefansson H(1), Masson G(1), Magnusson OT(1), Halldorsson BV(17), Kong
A(1), Rafnar T(1), Thorsteinsdottir U(18), Vogel U(19), Kumar R(20), Nagore E(8),
Mayordomo JI(21), Gudbjartsson DF(1), Olafsson JH(2), Stefansson K(18).

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics/AMGEN, Sturlugata 8, Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (2)1]
Landspitali-University Hospital, Reykjavik 101, Iceland [2] Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (3)Division of Dermatology,
Gregorio Marañón Hospital, Madrid 28007, Spain. (4)Division of Dermatology,
Quiron Hospital, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain. (5)Division of Dermatology, San Jorge
General Hospital, Huesca 22004, Spain. (6)Division of Dermatology, University
Hospital, Zaragoza 50009, Spain. (7)Laboratory of Histocompatibility-Molecular
Biology, Centro de Transfusión de la Comunidad Valenciana, Avenida del Cid, 65-A,
Valencia 46014, Spain. (8)1] Department of Oncology, Instituto Valenciano de
Oncologia, Valencia 46009, Spain [2] Universidad Católica de Valencia, Valencia
46003, Spain. (9)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, National Institute of 
Environmental Health, Budapest H-1450, Hungary. (10)Health Department,
Environmental Health Centre, Babes Bolyai University, Cluj, RO-Cluj-Napoca,
Romania. (11)Department of Environmental Health, Regional Authority of Public
Health, Banska Bystrica SK-975 56, Slovakia. (12)Department of Biomedicine,
University of Aarhus, Aarhus C DK-8000, Denmark. (13)Danish Cancer Society
Research Centre, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark. (14)Department of Public Health, 
Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Aarhus, Aarhus C
DK-8000, Denmark. (15)1] Landspitali-University Hospital, Reykjavik 101, Iceland 
[2] Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland [3]
Icelandic Cancer Registry, Skogarhlid 8, Reykjavik 105, Iceland. (16)1] Faculty
of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland [2] Icelandic Cancer
Registry, Skogarhlid 8, Reykjavik 105, Iceland. (17)1] deCODE Genetics/AMGEN,
Sturlugata 8, Reykjavik 101, Iceland [2] Institute of Biomedical and Neural
Engineering, School of Science and Engineering, Reykjavik University, Reykjavik
101, Iceland. (18)1] deCODE Genetics/AMGEN, Sturlugata 8, Reykjavik 101, Iceland 
[2] Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
(19)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Copenhagen DK-2100,
Denmark. (20)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Centre, Heidelberg D-69120, Germany. (21)Division of Medical Oncology, University
of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

In an ongoing screen for DNA sequence variants that confer risk of cutaneous
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), we conduct a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 
24,988,228 SNPs and small indels detected through whole-genome sequencing of
2,636 Icelanders and imputed into 4,572 BCC patients and 266,358 controls. Here
we show the discovery of four new BCC susceptibility loci: 2p24 MYCN
(rs57244888[C], OR=0.76, P=4.7 × 10(-12)), 2q33 CASP8-ALS2CR12 (rs13014235[C],
OR=1.15, P=1.5 × 10(-9)), 8q21 ZFHX4 (rs28727938[G], OR=0.70, P=3.5 × 10(-12))
and 10p14 GATA3 (rs73635312[A], OR=0.74, P=2.4 × 10(-16)). Fine mapping reveals
that two variants correlated with rs73635312[A] occur in conserved binding sites 
for the GATA3 transcription factor. In addition, expression microarrays and
RNA-seq show that rs13014235[C] and a related SNP rs700635[C] are associated with
expression of CASP8 splice variants in which sequences from intron 8 are
retained.

PMCID: PMC4403348
PMID: 25855136  [PubMed - in process]


187. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Sep;34(5):480-6. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000167.

Differential Expression Patterns of GATA3 in Uterine Mesonephric and
Nonmesonephric Lesions.

Roma AA(1), Goyal A, Yang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a recently described immunohistochemical marker
that has proven useful in the characterization of breast and urothelial
carcinomas. However, the expression pattern of GATA3 in mesonephric
proliferations is largely unknown. The aim of this study was to examine the
immunohistochemical expression of GATA3 in cervicovaginal mesonephric lesions and
compare it to its expression in endocervical and endometrial adenocarcinomas and 
cervicovaginal endometriosis. A cohort of 107 cases, including 33 cases of
mesonephric lesions and 74 cases of nonmesonephric lesions, was selected for the 
study. Of 33 mesonephric lesions, 31 (94%) cases (16 remnants, 12 hyperplasias,
and 3 adenocarcinomas) were strongly and diffusely positive in tumor cell nuclei 
for GATA3. The remaining 2 mesonephric carcinosarcomas showed focal nuclear
staining and rare nuclear positivity, respectively. Of 36 endocervical
adenocarcinomas, 33 (92%) were negative for GATA3 and the remaining revealed
focal weak nuclear staining. Of 34 endometrial adenocarcinomas, 32 (94%) were
negative, whereas 2 showed rare nuclear positivity. All 4 cases of endometriosis 
were negative. The benign endocervical epithelium and the benign endometrium in
most cases lacked GATA3 expression, whereas the benign squamous epithelium in the
majority exhibited nuclear basal and parabasal staining pattern. Our study
demonstrates that GATA3 protein is expressed in most mesonephric lesions,
regardless of them being benign or malignant. In contrast, GATA3 is absent in the
majority of endometrial and endocervical adenocarcinomas. These results support
that GATA3 immunostain can be a useful tool in differentiating mesonephric
lesions from endocervical and endometrial adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 25851711  [PubMed - in process]


188. J Pathol. 2015 Aug;236(4):457-66. doi: 10.1002/path.4540. Epub 2015 May 7.

Uncovering the genomic heterogeneity of multifocal breast cancer.

Desmedt C(1), Fumagalli D(1), Pietri E(2), Zoppoli G(1,)(3), Brown D(1),
Nik-Zainal S(4), Gundem G(4), Rothé F(1), Majjaj S(1), Garuti A(3), Carminati
E(3), Loi S(1,)(5), Van Brussel T(6), Boeckx B(6), Maetens M(1), Mudie L(4),
Vincent D(1), Kheddoumi N(1), Serra L(7), Massa I(2), Ballestrero A(3), Amadori
D(2), Salgado R(1,)(8), de Wind A(9), Lambrechts D(6), Piccart M(10), Larsimont
D(9), Campbell PJ(4,)(11,)(12), Sotiriou C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Institut Jules Bordet, Boulevard de Waterloo 121, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e
la Cura dei Tumouri (IRST) - IRCCS, Meldola, Italy. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Genoa and IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San
Martino - IST, Genoa, Italy. (4)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK.
(5)Translational Breast Cancer Genomics Lab, Division of Research, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (6)VIB Vesalius
Research Center, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Bus 912, Leuven, 
Belgium. (7)Pathology Unit, 'G.B. Morgagni-L. Pierantoni' Hospital, Forlì, Italy.
(8)Breast International Group Headquarters (BIG-aisbl), Brussels, Belgium.
(9)Pathology Department, Jules Bordet Institute, Boulevard de Waterloo 121,
Brussels, Belgium. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Jules Bordet Institute,
Boulevard de Waterloo 121, Brussels, Belgium. (11)Department of Haematology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (12)Department of Haematology,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2015 Sep;237(1):1-3.

Multifocal breast cancer (MFBC), defined as multiple synchronous unilateral
lesions of invasive breast cancer, is relatively frequent and has been associated
with more aggressive features than unifocal cancer. Here, we aimed to investigate
the genomic heterogeneity between MFBC lesions sharing similar histopathological 
parameters. Characterization of different lesions from 36 patients with ductal
MFBC involved the identification of non-silent coding mutations in 360
protein-coding genes (171 tumour and 36 matched normal samples). We selected only
patients with lesions presenting the same grade, ER, and HER2 status. Mutations
were classified as 'oncogenic' in the case of recurrent substitutions reported in
COSMIC or truncating mutations affecting tumour suppressor genes. All mutations
identified in a given patient were further interrogated in all samples from that 
patient through deep resequencing using an orthogonal platform. Whole-genome
rearrangement screen was further conducted in 8/36 patients. Twenty-four patients
(67%) had substitutions/indels shared by all their lesions, of which 11 carried
the same mutations in all lesions, and 13 had lesions with both common and
private mutations. Three-quarters of those 24 patients shared oncogenic variants.
The remaining 12 patients (33%) did not share any substitution/indels, with
inter-lesion heterogeneity observed for oncogenic mutation(s) in genes such as
PIK3CA, TP53, GATA3, and PTEN. Genomically heterogeneous lesions tended to be
further apart in the mammary gland than homogeneous lesions. Genome-wide analyses
of a limited number of patients identified a common somatic background in all
studied MFBCs, including those with no mutation in common between the lesions. To
conclude, as the number of molecular targeted therapies increases and trials
driven by genomic screening are ongoing, our findings highlight the presence of
genomic inter-lesion heterogeneity in one-third, despite similar pathological
features. This implies that deeper molecular characterization of all MFBC lesions
is warranted for the adequate management of those cancers.

© 2015 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC4691324
PMID: 25850943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 May;34(3):257-65. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000155.

Simultaneous carcinomas of the breast and ovary: utility of Pax-8, WT-1, and
GATA3 for distinguishing independent primary tumors from metastases.

Espinosa I(1), Gallardo A, D'Angelo E, Mozos A, Lerma E, Prat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Institute of
Biomedical Research (IIB Sant Pau), Autonomous University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Breast carcinomas rarely metastasize to the ovary and are even more rarely
present clinically as primary ovarian tumors. However, patients with breast
cancer not infrequently develop independent primary ovarian carcinomas. In these 
cases, distinction between independent primaries and metastatic tumors is
crucial. Several comparative immunohistochemical studies have been reported, but 
few included significant clinicopathologic data and none investigated cases of
ovarian and breast carcinomas from the same patients. In this study, we compared 
18 cases of patients with bona fide independent breast and ovarian carcinomas (15
high-grade serous and 3 clear cell carcinomas), with 9 cases of patients with
known mammary carcinomas (7 lobular and 2 ductal carcinomas) metastatic to the
ovary. Immunohistochemical stains for Pax-8, WT-1, and GATA3 were carried out on 
tissue microarrays (TMA). Most primary ovarian carcinomas were larger than the
metastatic tumors (P=0.001) and were diagnosed at an advanced stage. All primary 
ovarian tumors showed marked nuclear pleomorphism, whereas only 2 metastatic
breast carcinomas had Grade 3 nuclei (P=0.000). The vast majority of ovarian
metastases (7/9) showed the typical pattern of lobular breast carcinoma. Pax-8
and WT-1 expression were found in 16 of 18 (88%) and 13 of 18 (72%) primary
ovarian carcinomas, respectively. In contrast, all primary ovarian carcinomas
were negative for GATA3. The 2 Pax-8-negative ovarian carcinomas were also
negative for WT-1. With the exception of 3 triple-negative carcinomas, all
primary breast carcinomas were positive for GATA3. All metastatic breast
carcinomas were positive for GATA3 and negative for Pax-8. WT-1 expression was
seen in only 1 of 9 metastatic breast carcinomas (11%). Patients with ovarian
metastases had worse prognosis than patients with independent breast and ovarian 
carcinomas (P=0.000). Pax-8, WT-1, and GATA3 immunoreactions are useful in the
distinction between independent primaries and metastatic mammary carcinomas to
the ovary in the light of clinicopathologic findings.

PMID: 25844549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):797-800. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.018.
Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Safety and tolerability of a novel inhaled GATA3 mRNA targeting DNAzyme in
patients with TH2-driven asthma.

Homburg U(1), Renz H(2), Timmer W(3), Hohlfeld JM(4), Seitz F(5), Lüer K(4),
Mayer A(5), Wacker A(6), Schmidt O(6), Kuhlmann J(1), Turowska A(1), Roller J(7),
Kutz K(8), Schlüter G(9), Krug N(4), Garn H(10).

Author information: 
(1)Sterna Biologicals GmbH, Marburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Laboratory Medicine
and Pathobiochemistry-Molecular Diagnostics, Medical Faculty, Philipps University
Marburg, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Marburg,
Germany. (3)Private Consultant, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Clinical Airway
Research, Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine,
Hannover, Germany. (5)CRS Clinical Research Services Mannheim GmbH, Mannheim,
Germany. (6)Engelhard Arzneimittel GmbH, Niederdorfelden, Germany. (7)Vectura
GmbH, Gauting, Germany. (8)AccelPharm, Basel, Switzerland. (9)Private Consultant,
Wuppertal, Germany. (10)Institute of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiochemistry-Molecular Diagnostics, Medical Faculty, Philipps University
Marburg, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Marburg,
Germany. Electronic address: garn@staff.uni-marburg.de.

PMID: 25842286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Inflammation. 2015 Oct;38(5):1814-22. doi: 10.1007/s10753-015-0159-4.

Anti-Asthmatic Effects of Ginsenoside Rb1 in a Mouse Model of Allergic Asthma
Through Relegating Th1/Th2.

Chen T(1), Xiao L, Zhu L, Ma S, Yan T, Ji H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University,
No. 24 Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of
China.

The aim of the study was to investigate the anti-asthma effects of ginsenoside
Rb1 (Rb1) and its possible mechanisms. A total of 50 mice were randomly assigned 
to five experimental groups: control, model, dexamethasone (2 mg/kg), and Rb1 (10
and 20 mg/kg). Airway resistance (RI) was measured; histological studies were
evaluated by the hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining; Th1/Th2, ovalbumin
(OVA)-specific serum, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) IgE levels were
evaluated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); and T-bet/GATA3 proteins
were evaluated by Western blot. Our study demonstrated that Rb1 inhibited
OVA-induced increases in RI and eosinophil counts; interleukin (IL)-4 was
recovered, and IFN-<U+03B3>level increased in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Histological
studies demonstrated that Rb1 substantially inhibited OVA-induced eosinophilia in
lung tissue. Western blot studies demonstrated that Rb1 substantially inhibited
GATA3 and increased T-bet. These findings suggest that Rb1 may effectively
ameliorate the progression of asthma and could be used as a therapy for patients 
with allergic asthma.

PMID: 25832478  [PubMed - in process]


192. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2015 Apr;20(3):575-83. doi: 10.1007/s00775-015-1242-x. Epub
2015 Feb 10.

In vitro effects of binuclear (<U+03B7> (6)-p-cymene)ruthenium(II) complex containing
bridging bis(nicotinate)-polyethylene glycol ester ligand on differentiation
pathways of murine Th lymphocytes activated by T cell mitogen.

Momcilovic M(1), Eichhorn T, Blazevski J, Schmidt H, Kaluderovic GN,
Stosic-Grujicic S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Biological Research "Sinisa
Stankovic", University of Belgrade, Bulevar Despota Stefana 142, 11060, Belgrade,
Serbia, mommilja@yahoo.com.

T cell differentiation into distinct T helper (Th) subpopulations is crucial in
governing acquired immune responses as well as some inflammatory and autoimmune
disorders. This study investigated potential of the novel neutral binuclear
ruthenium(II) complexes 1-8 with general formula [{RuCl2(<U+03B7>(6)-p-cym)}2µ-(N(n)N)] 
(N(n)N = bis(nicotinate)- and bis(iso-nicotinate)-polyethylene glycol esters;
(3-py)COO(CH2CH2O) n CO(3-py) and (4-py)COO(CH2CH2O) n CO(4-py); n = 1-4), as
well as [RuCl2(<U+03B7>(6)-p-cym)(nic)] (R1, nic = nicotinate) and
[RuCl2(<U+03B7>(6)-p-cym)(inic)] (R2, inic = isonicotinate) as an immunomodulatory
agents capable to direct Th cell differentiation. From all investigated
complexes, [{RuCl2(<U+03B7>(6)-p-cym)}2µ-{(3-py)COO(CH2CH2O)4CO(3-py)}] (4) was selected
for further study because it did not affect splenocyte viability (in
concentration up to 50 µM), but significantly reduced secretion of representative
Th1 cytokine, IFN-<U+03B3> induced by T cell mitogen. Besides IFN-<U+03B3>, 4 inhibited dose
dependently expression and production of representative Th17 cytokine, IL-17, in 
these cells. Otherwise, the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4 and
IL-10 was upregulated. Also, 4 significantly increased CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) Treg
cell frequency in the activated splenocytes. Moreover, ConA-induced expression of
Th1 transcription factors, T-bet and STAT1, as well as of Th17-related protein
STAT3 was attenuated upon exposure to 4, while the expression of Th2-related
transcription factor GATA3 remained stable. In conclusion, ruthenium(II) complex 
4 modulates immune system cell functions in vitro by inhibiting T cell
differentiation towards pathogenic Th1/Th17 phenotype and inducing a regulatory
phenotype characterized by IL-10 and IL-4 production, which may provide novel
therapeutic opportunities for immune-inflammatory and/or autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 25827592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 24;11(3):e1004671. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004671.
eCollection 2015.

Human CD8+ T-cells recognizing peptides from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
presented by HLA-E have an unorthodox Th2-like, multifunctional, Mtb inhibitory
phenotype and represent a novel human T-cell subset.

van Meijgaarden KE(1), Haks MC(1), Caccamo N(2), Dieli F(2), Ottenhoff TH(1),
Joosten SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. (2)Central Laboratory for Advanced Diagnostic and Biomedical
Research (CLADIBIOR), Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche e
Forensi, Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Mycobacterial antigens are not exclusively presented to T-cells by classical
HLA-class Ia and HLA-class II molecules, but also through alternative antigen
presentation molecules such as CD1a/b/c, MR1 and HLA-E. We recently described
mycobacterial peptides that are presented in HLA-E and recognized by CD8+
T-cells. Using T-cell cloning, phenotyping, microbiological, functional and
RNA-expression analyses, we report here that these T-cells can exert cytolytic or
suppressive functions, inhibit mycobacterial growth, yet express GATA3, produce
Th2 cytokines (IL-4,-5,-10,-13) and activate B-cells via IL-4. In TB patients,
Mtb specific cells were detectable by peptide-HLA-E tetramers, and IL-4 and IL-13
were produced following peptide stimulation. These results identify a novel human
T-cell subset with an unorthodox, multifunctional Th2 like phenotype and
cytolytic or regulatory capacities, which is involved in the human immune
response to mycobacteria and demonstrable in active TB patients' blood. The
results challenge the current dogma that only Th1 cells are able to inhibit Mtb
growth and clearly show that Th2 like cells can strongly inhibit outgrowth of Mtb
from human macrophages. These insights significantly expand our understanding of 
the immune response in infectious disease.

PMCID: PMC4372528
PMID: 25803478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Sep;23(8):550-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000121.

Close relation of large cell carcinoma to adenocarcinoma by hierarchical cluster 
analysis: implications for histologic typing of lung cancer on biopsies.

Hammer SH(1), Prall F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Rostock University, Rostock, Germany.

Determining histologic types of lung cancer on biopsies can be difficult. This
study addresses the role of immunohistochemistry in histologic typing, using a
tissue microarray (TMA) as "model biopsies," and presents a classification
generated by an unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis. A TMA was made from
resection specimens of a consecutive series of 165 lung tumors. In a "tissue-spot
review" with hematoxylin and eosin sections all the large cell carcinomas (N=22) 
were assigned to the noncommittal class of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), as
were an additional 37 tumors of defined histologic types. Adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas included with these NSCLC could be diagnosed by
immunohistochemistry with antibodies against TTF-1, Napsin A, cytokeratin (CK)7, 
p40, p63, and CK5/6 with moderate to good sensitivities and specificities.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was done with these data and additional
high-molecular-weight cytokeratins, CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin
immunohistochemistry. This delineated separate clusters for adenocarcinomas,
large cell carcinomas, neuroendocrine tumors, and squamous cell carcinomas.
Notably, adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma clusters were closely related
and clearly set off from the squamous cell carcinoma cluster. As would be
expected for a clinically well-staged series CDX2, GATA3, estrogen, and
progesterone receptor immunohistochemistry remained negative in the vast majority
of the tumors and, if positive, were restricted to very few cells. These results,
the clustering data in particular, underpin the pragmatic recommendation
canvassed with the IASLC/ATS/ERS classification of lung cancers that
adenocarcinoma-type molecular studies should include NSCLC with a nonsquamous
cell carcinoma immunophenotype.

PMID: 25789531  [PubMed - in process]


195. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Oct;136(4):983-92.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.01.029. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Jug r 2-reactive CD4(+) T cells have a dominant immune role in walnut allergy.

Archila LD(1), Jeong D(2), Pascal M(3), Bartra J(4), Juan M(3), Robinson D(5),
Farrington ML(5), Kwok WW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, Wash. (2)Virginia
Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Wash; Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash. (3)Servei d'Immunologia, CDB, Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Unitat d'Allèrgia, Servei de Pneumologia, ICT,
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Virginia Mason Medical Center,
Seattle, Wash. (6)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, Wash;
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash. Electronic
address: bkwok@benaroyaresearch.org.

BACKGROUND: Allergic reactions to walnut can be life-threatening. Although IgE
epitopes of walnut have been studied, CD4(+) T cell-specific epitopes for walnut 
remain uncharacterized. In particular, the relationship of both phenotype and
frequency of walnut-specific T cells to the disease have not been examined.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to provide a thorough phenotypic analysis for
walnut-reactive T cells in allergic and nonallergic subjects, particularly the
relationship of phenotypes and frequencies of walnut-specific T cells with the
disease.
METHODS: The CD154 upregulation assay was used to examine CD4(+) T-cell
reactivity toward the walnut allergens Jug r 1, Jug r 2, and Jug r 3. A
tetramer-guided epitope mapping approach was used to identify HLA-restricted
CD4(+) T-cell epitopes in Jug r 2. Direct ex vivo staining with peptide-major
histocompatibility complex class II tetramers enabled comparison of the frequency
and phenotype of Jug r 2-specific CD4(+) T cells between allergic and nonallergic
subjects. Jug r 2-specific T-cell clones were also generated, and mRNA
transcription factor levels were assessed by using quantitative RT-PCR.
Intracellular cytokine staining assays were performed for further phenotypic
analyses.
RESULTS: Jug r 2 was identified as the major allergen that elicited CD4(+) T-cell
responses. Multiple Jug r 2 T-cell epitopes were identified. The majority of
these T cells in allergic subjects have a CCR4(+) phenotype. A subset of these T 
cells express CCR4(+)CCR6(+) irrespective of the asthmatic status of the allergic
subjects. Intracellular cytokine staining confirmed these TH2-, TH2/TH17-, and
TH17-like heterogenic profiles. Jug r 2-specific T-cell clones from allergic
subjects mainly expressed GATA3, nonetheless, a portion of T-cell clones both
GATA3 and RAR-related orphan receptor C (RORC) or RORC alone, confirming the
presence of TH2, TH2/TH17, and TH17 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Jug r 2-specific responses dominate walnut T-cell responses in
patients with walnut allergy. Jug r 2 central memory CD4(+) cells and terminal
effector T cells were detected in peripheral blood, with the central memory
phenotype as the most prevalent phenotype. In addition to conventional TH2 cells,
TH2/TH17 and TH17 cells were also detected in nonasthmatic and asthmatic patients
with walnut allergy. Understanding this T-cell heterogeneity might render better 
understanding of the disease manifestation.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4568181 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25772597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mutat Res. 2015 Jan;771:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Identification of a novel GATA3 mutation in a deaf Taiwanese family by massively 
parallel sequencing.

Lin YH(1), Wu CC(2), Hsu TY(3), Chiu WY(4), Hsu CJ(5), Chen PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine
and Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and
Proteomics, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine
and Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Otolaryngology, E-DA
Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology, Taichung Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist
Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Taiwan. Electronic address: cjhsu@ntu.edu.tw.
(6)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Genetics,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic
address: paylong@ntu.edu.tw.

Recent studies have confirmed the utility of massively parallel sequencing (MPS) 
in addressing genetically heterogeneous hereditary hearing impairment. By
applying a MPS diagnostic panel targeting 129 known deafness genes, we identified
a novel frameshift GATA3 mutation, c.149delT (p.Phe51LeufsX144), in a
hearing-impaired family compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance. The GATA3
haploinsufficiency is thought to be associated with the hypoparathyroidism,
sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome. The pathogenicity of 
GATA3 c.149delT was supported by its absence in the 5400 NHLBI exomes, 1000
Genomes, and the 100 normal hearing controls of the present study; the
co-segregation of c.149delT heterozygosity with hearing impairment in 9 affected 
members of the family; as well as the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay of the mutant 
allele in in vitro functional studies. The phenotypes in this family appeared
relatively mild, as most affected members presented no signs of
hypoparathyroidism or renal abnormalities, including the proband. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of genetic diagnosis of HDR syndrome before
the clinical diagnosis. Genetic examination for multiple deafness genes with MPS 
might be helpful in identifying certain types of syndromic hearing loss such as
HDR syndrome, contributing to earlier diagnosis and treatment of the affected
individuals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Clin Case Rep. 2015 Feb;3(2):73-5. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.125. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Tumoral calcinosis in a patient with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, 
and renal dysplasia syndrome undergoing hemodialysis.

Hiramatsu R(1), Ubara Y(1), Tajima T(2), Usui T(3), Namba K(3), Takeuchi Y(4),
Sawa N(1), Hasegawa E(1), Takaichi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Center, Toranomon Hospital and Okinaka Memorial Institute for
Medical Research Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University
School of Medicine Sapporo, Japan. (3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center Kyoto, Japan. (4)Toranomon
Hospital Endocrine Center and Okinaka Memorial Institute for Medical Research
Tokyo, Japan.

We describe a hemodialysis patient with hypoparathyroidism due to HDR
(hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia) syndrome caused
by GATA3 mutation. She presents tumoral calcinosis which is a rare complication
of end-stage renal failure. A novel mutation of GATA3 is identified in this
patient.

PMCID: PMC4352355
PMID: 25767699  [PubMed]


198. Transcription. 2014;5(2):e28263. doi: 10.4161/trns.28263.

mTOR signaling and transcriptional regulation in T lymphocytes.

Zeng H(1), Chi H.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Immunology; St. Jude Children's Research Hospital; Memphis, TN
USA.

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling integrates diverse
environmental cues, including growth factors, nutrients and immunological
signals. Activation of mTOR signaling stimulates protein synthesis and anabolic
metabolism and coordinates cell growth, proliferation and fate decisions. In
recent years, mTOR signaling has been linked to the entire spectrum of T cell
biology, ranging from T cell development and activation to lineage specification 
and memory formation. Mechanistically, mTOR activation profoundly affects the
expression and activity of many immunologically relevant transcription factors to
propagate immune signaling and mediate effector functions. These transcription
factors orchestrate cell metabolism (MYC, SREBPs and HIF1), lineage
differentiation (T-bet, GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, FOXP3 and Eomesodermin) and immune
activation and functions (NF-<U+03BA>B, FOXOs, IRF4, STATs and GFI-1). This review
discusses how mTOR signaling, through impinging upon transcriptional factors,
regulates T cell development, activation, and effector and memory
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4214230
PMID: 25764218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Mar 10;16(3):5434-51. doi: 10.3390/ijms16035434.

SOCS3 silencing attenuates eosinophil functions in asthma patients.

Zafra MP(1,)(2), Cañas JA(3), Mazzeo C(4,)(5), Gámez C(6,)(7), Sanz V(8,)(9),
Fernández-Nieto M(10,)(11), Quirce S(12,)(13), Barranco P(14,)(15),
Ruiz-Hornillos J(16), Sastre J(17,)(18), del Pozo V(19,)(20).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
mp_zafra@hotmail.es. (2)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. mp_zafra@hotmail.es. (3)Department 
of Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
jose.canas@fjd.es. (4)Department of Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040
Madrid, Spain. cmazzeo@fjd.es. (5)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. cmazzeo@fjd.es.
(6)Department of Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
cgamez@fjd.es. (7)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. cgamez@fjd.es. (8)Department of
Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain. vsanz@fjd.es.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. vsanz@fjd.es. (10)Centro de Investigación
Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Allergy, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(12)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. squirce@gmail.com. (13)Department of Allergy,
Hospital La Paz Health Research Institute (IdiPAZ), 28046 Madrid, Spain.
squirce@gmail.com. (14)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. mpbarranco@gmail.com.
(15)Department of Allergy, Hospital La Paz Health Research Institute (IdiPAZ),
28046 Madrid, Spain. mpbarranco@gmail.com. (16)Department of Allergy, Hospital
Infanta Elena, Valdemoro, 28342 Madrid, Spain. javier.ruiz@idcsalud.es.
(17)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. jsastre@fjd.es. (18)Department of Allergy,
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain. jsastre@fjd.es. (19)Department of
Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, 28040 Madrid, Spain. vpozo@fjd.es.
(20)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain. vpozo@fjd.es.

Eosinophils are one of the key inflammatory cells in asthma. Eosinophils can
exert a wide variety of actions through expression and secretion of multiple
molecules. Previously, we have demonstrated that eosinophils purified from
peripheral blood from asthma patients express high levels of suppressor of
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3). In this article, SOCS3 gene silencing in
eosinophils from asthmatics has been carried out to achieve a better
understanding of the suppressor function in eosinophils. SOCS3 siRNA treatment
drastically reduced SOCS3 expression in eosinophils, leading to an inhibition of 
the regulatory transcription factors GATA-3 and FoxP3, also interleukin (IL)-10; 
in turn, an increased STAT3 phosphorilation was observed. Moreover, SOCS3
abrogation in eosinophils produced impaired migration, adhesion and
degranulation. Therefore, SOCS3 might be regarded as an important regulator
implicated in eosinophil mobilization from the bone marrow to the lungs during
the asthmatic process.

PMCID: PMC4394485
PMID: 25764157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Apr;150(2):335-46. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3335-1. 
Epub 2015 Mar 12.

Clinical and biological significance of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression
in breast cancer.

Abduljabbar R(1), Negm OH, Lai CF, Jerjees DA, Al-Kaabi M, Hamed MR, Tighe PJ,
Buluwela L, Mukherjee A, Green AR, Ali S, Rakha EA, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer and Stem Cell, Department of Histopathology, The University
of Nottingham, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham, UK, mrxra10@nottingham.ac.uk.

The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily 
of transcription factors, which exerts anti-proliferative and anti-apoptotic
activities. The GR is expressed in a large proportion of breast cancer (BC)
although levels generally decrease during cancer progression. This study aimed to
determine the clinical and biological significance of GR expression using a large
series of early-stage BC with long-term follow-up and BC cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry was used to assess the expression of GR in 999 cases of
primary invasive BC prepared as tissue microarrays. Reverse phase protein
microarray was used to assess the expression of GR in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines. Nuclear expression of GR was observed in 61.6 % of breast tumours and was 
associated with features of good prognosis including smaller tumour size and
lower grade with less pleomorphism and low mitotic count. GR expression was
positively correlated with expression of oestrogen (ER) and progesterone
receptors. In ER-positive tumours, GR was associated with other features of
favourable outcome including FOXA1, GATA3 and BEX1 expression, while low GR
expression was associated with high Ki67, p53 and CD71 expression. GR expression 
is associated with features of good outcome but does not provide prognostic
information independent of size, stage and grade. Understanding the receptor and 
its effects on BC behaviour is essential for avoiding any unwanted effects from
the use of glucocorticoids in routine oncology practice.

PMID: 25762479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. JAMA Dermatol. 2015 Jul;151(7):753-60. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.2.

Immunologic Overlap of Helper T-Cell Subtypes 17 and 22 in Erythrodermic
Psoriasis and Atopic Dermatitis.

Moy AP(1), Murali M(2), Kroshinsky D(3), Duncan LM(1), Nazarian RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston. (2)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston2Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston.

IMPORTANCE: Psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD) are inflammatory diseases
thought to be mediated by helper T-cell subtypes 1 and 2 (TH1 and TH2),
respectively. Although psoriasis and AD show histopathologic differences during
chronic disease, they are difficult to distinguish histologically during
erythrodermic exacerbations.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the immune phenotype of helper T cells can
differentiate erythrodermic psoriasis and erythrodermic AD by studying skin
biopsy specimens of patients with psoriasis and AD during erythrodermic and
chronic disease phases.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a retrospective study using
biopsy samples of psoriasis, AD, and erythroderma belonging to the surgical
pathology files of the James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and collected from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2011. 
Samples were obtained from patients with chronic psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), chronic AD
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7), and
erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as AD (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5). We evaluated
immunohistochemical stains for CD3 and dual stains for CD4 and T-bet, GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3), or basonuclin 2 (BNC2), which are transcription factors reported to be
specific and mutually exclusive for TH1, TH2, TH17, and TH22 cells, respectively.
Two investigators independently counted CD3+ cells and dual-labeled CD4+/T-bet+, 
CD4+/GATA3+, CD4+/STAT3+, and CD4+/BNC2+ cells in 5 consecutive high-power
fields.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We evaluated the percentage of TH1, TH2, TH17, and
TH22 cells in CD3+ T cells and the TH1:TH2 ratio in chronic psoriasis, chronic
AD, erythrodermic psoriasis, and erythrodermic AD.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in the TH1:TH2 ratio between chronic
psoriasis and chronic AD (0.26 and 0.09, respectively; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.005). However, we
detected no significant difference in the percentage of TH1 (6.5% and 4.8%), TH2 
(55.2% and 64.6%), TH17 (14.7% and 30.4%), and TH22 (3.8% and 3.3%) cells of CD3+
T cells or in the TH1:TH2 ratio (0.16 and 0.07) within biopsy specimens from
patients with erythrodermic psoriasis and AD, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study confirms the TH1- and TH2-skewed phenotype 
of chronic psoriasis and chronic AD, respectively. However, the immune phenotype,
as determined by immunohistochemical analysis, cannot discriminate between these 
inflammatory diseases in the erythrodermic phase. These findings advance our
understanding of the pathophysiological characteristics of erythroderma,
psoriasis, and AD and may influence therapeutic decisions.

PMID: 25760640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):236-43. eCollection 2015.

Boswellic acid attenuates asthma phenotypes by downregulation of GATA3 via pSTAT6
inhibition in a murine model of asthma.

Liu Z(1), Liu X(1), Sang L(1), Liu H(1), Xu Q(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cadre Health Protection, Liaocheng People's Hospital Liaocheng
252000, China.

Asthma is a serious global health problem characterised by airway inflammation,
airway epithelial wall shedding, enhanced mucus production, increased IgE levels 
and airway hyperresponsiveness. The pathophysiology of asthma is mediated by Th2 
cells which produce Th2 cytokines like interleukin-4, interleukin-5,
interleukin-13 and interleukin-9. The differentiation of Th2 cells is induced by 
the transcription factor GATA3 which is activated by pSTAT6 via IL-4 signalling. 
To investigate the anti-asthmatic potential of Boswellic acid, as well as the
underlying mechanism involved, we studied its anti-asthmatic potential in a
murine model of asthma. In this study, BALB/c mice were systemically sensitized
by ovalbumin (OVA) followed by aerosol allergen challenges. We investigated the
effect of Boswellic acid on airway hyperresponsiveness, inflammatory cell
infiltration, Th2 cytokine and OVA-specific IgE production in a mouse model of
asthma. We found that Boswellic acid treated groups suppressed allergic airway
inflammation, AHR, OVA-specific IgE and Th2 cytokines secretion. It also
suppressed the expression of pSTAT6 and GATA3 in a dose dependent manner. Our
data suggest that the mechanism by which Boswellic acid effectively treats asthma
is based on reductions of Th2 cytokines via inhibition of pSTAT6 and GATA-3
expression.

PMCID: PMC4348891
PMID: 25755710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Histopathology. 2015 Nov;67(5):636-44. doi: 10.1111/his.12681. Epub 2015 May 12.

GATA3 expression in gestational trophoblastic tissues and tumours.

Mirkovic J(1,)(2), Elias K(2,)(3), Drapkin R(4), Barletta JA(1,)(2), Quade
B(1,)(2), Hirsch MS(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Women's and Perinatal Pathology Division, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA.

AIMS: GATA3 is a zinc-finger transcription factor that is important for
trophoblast differentiation. GATA3 is sensitive for urothelial and breast
carcinomas, but the specificity is low. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the expression of GATA3 in trophoblast-related tissues and neoplasia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: GATA3 immunohistochemistry was performed on 33 placentas,
one atypical placental site nodule, 25 hydatidiform moles (HMs), and 13
gestational trophoblastic tumours (GTTs). One hundred and sixty endometrial
adenocarcinomas were also stained. Western blotting was performed on
trophoblastic cell lines and compared to other cancer cell lines. Immature
placentas were characterized by strong, diffuse nuclear GATA3 staining. Mature
placentas showed less expression with scattered positive cells in the villous
cytotrophoblast. HMs showed diffuse expression in cytotrophoblast and
implantation site trophoblast, and heterogeneous expression in extravillous
trophoblast. All GTTs were positive for GATA3. All endometrial adenocarcinomas
were GATA3-negative. Western blotting demonstrated GATA3 in choriocarcinoma,
whereas the placenta, and cervical and endometrial cancer cell lines, were
negative.
CONCLUSIONS: All trophoblast lineages were positive for GATA3. The extent of
GATA3 expression varied between immature and mature placentas, suggesting a role 
in trophoblast maturation. GATA3 does not distinguish normal placenta, HMs, or
GTTs. Nevertheless, GATA3 may help in distinguishing trophoblastic tumors from
Mullerian epithelial malignancies and a subset of tumours of unknown origin.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25753145  [PubMed - in process]


204. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):71-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3391. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Afzelin attenuates asthma phenotypes by downregulation of GATA3 in a murine model
of asthma.

Zhou W(1), Nie X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100053, P.R. China.

Asthma is a serious health problem causing significant mortality and morbidity
globally. Persistent airway inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, increased
immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels and mucus hypersecretion are key characteristics of
the condition. Asthma is mediated via a dominant T-helper 2 (Th2) immune
response, causing enhanced expression of Th2 cytokines. These cytokines are
responsible for the various pathological changes associated with allergic asthma.
To investigate the anti-asthmatic potential of afzelin, as well as the underlying
mechanisms involved, its anti-asthmatic potential were investigated in a murine
model of asthma. In the present study, BALB/c mice were systemically sensitized
using ovalbumin (OVA) followed by aerosol allergen challenges. The effect of
afzelin on airway hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilic infiltration, Th2 cytokine
and OVA-specific IgE production in a mouse model of asthma were investigated. It 
was found that afzelin-treated groups suppressed eosinophil infiltration,
allergic airway inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, OVA-specific IgE and
Th2 cytokine secretion. The results of the present study suggested that the
therapeutic mechanism by which afzelin effectively treats asthma is based on
reduction of Th2 cytokine via inhibition of GATA-binding protein 3 transcription 
factor, which is the master regulator of Th2 cytokine differentiation and
production.

PMCID: PMC4438945
PMID: 25738969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Pathol Int. 2015 Jun;65(6):286-92. doi: 10.1111/pin.12278. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Evaluation of androgen receptor and GATA binding protein 3 as immunohistochemical
markers in the diagnosis of metastatic breast carcinoma to the lung.

Hattori Y(1,)(2), Yoshida A(1), Yoshida M(1), Takahashi M(2), Tsuta K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Differentiating metastatic breast carcinoma in the lungs from primary lung tumors
and mesotheliomas is important for determining prognosis and treatment. We
evaluated novel breast specific markers, androgen receptor (AR) and GATA binding 
protein 3 (GATA3) immunohistostaining, for this differential, and compare to
other traditional markers. The specimens comprised 33 metastatic breast
carcinomas to the lung, 566 primary lung tumors (170 adenocarcinomas, 157
squamous cell carcinomas, 31 pleomorphic carcinomas, 115 large cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas, 43 small cell carcinomas, and 49 typical carcinoids)
and 42 malignant mesotheliomas. They were analyzed by immunohistochemistry using 
antibodies to AR, GATA3, estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR),
mammaglobin, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15). Of the metastatic 
breast carcinomas, immunohistostaining of AR, GATA3, ER, PgR, mammaglobin,
GCDFP-15 were positive in 27 cases (81.8%), 24 cases (72.7%), 26 cases (78.8%),
13 cases (39.4%), 12 cases (36.4%), 9 cases (27.3%), respectively. Of primary
lung tumors and mesotheliomas, staining of AR, GATA3, ER, PgR, mammaglobin,
GCDFP-15 were positive in 18 cases (3%), 3 cases (0.5%), 4 cases (0.7%), 2 cases 
(0.3%), 0 case (0%), 2 cases (0.3%), respectively. Immunohistochemistry of AR and
GATA3 are reliable for differentiating metastatic breast carcinoma from primary
lung tumors and mesotheliomas.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25727644  [PubMed - in process]


206. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jun;135(6):1476-85.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

IL-25 as a novel therapeutic target in nasal polyps of patients with chronic
rhinosinusitis.

Shin HW(1), Kim DK(2), Park MH(3), Eun KM(3), Lee M(4), So D(4), Kong IG(5), Mo
JH(6), Yang MS(7), Jin HR(3), Park JW(4), Kim DW(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of
Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Chuncheon Sacred Heart
Hospital, Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea. (3)Department 
of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boramae Medical Center, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Healthcare System Gangnam Center, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Dankook University College of Medicine, Chonan, Korea. (7)Department of Internal 
Medicine, Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea. (8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boramae
Medical Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: kicubi@daum.net.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) with nasal polyps (NPs) in Western
populations is associated with TH2 cytokine polarization. IL-25, an IL-17 family 
cytokine, was recently reported to induce TH2-type immune responses and to
contribute to several allergic diseases, such as atopic dermatitis and asthma.
However, the role of IL-25 in Asian patients with nasal polyposis remains
unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the role of IL-25 in Asian patients with nasal 
polyposis and CRS.
METHODS: We investigated IL-25 expression and its cellular origins in NPs of
human subjects using immunohistochemistry (IHC), quantitative RT-PCR, and ELISA
of NP tissues. Correlations between IL-25 expression and expression of other
inflammatory markers in NP tissues were also explored. Anti-IL-25 neutralizing
antibody was administered in an ovalbumin- and staphylococcal enterotoxin
B-induced murine NP model to confirm the function of IL-25 during nasal
polypogenesis.
RESULTS: IL-25 expression was upregulated in NP mucosa from patients with CRS
with NPs compared with uncinate process tissue from control subjects and those
with CRS without NPs. Overexpression of epithelial IL-25 was confirmed by using
IHC, and double IHC staining showed that tryptase-positive cells were one of the 
main sources of IL-25 among immune cells. Furthermore, IL-17 receptor B levels
were also increased in immune cells of patients with NPs compared with those in
control subjects. In NPs IL-25 mRNA expression positively correlated with the
expression of several inflammatory markers, including T-box transcription factor,
RAR-related orphan receptor C, GATA3, eosinophil cationic protein, TGF-ß1, and
TGF-ß2. IL-25 was more abundant in the murine NP model compared with control
mice, and similar correlations between IL-25 and inflammatory markers were
observed in murine models. Anti-IL-25 treatment reduced the number of polyps,
mucosal edema thickness, collagen deposition, and infiltration of inflammatory
cells, such as eosinophils and neutrophils. This treatment also inhibited
expression of local inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3>. Furthermore, 
expression of CCL11, CXCL2, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and vascular cell 
adhesion molecule 1 in the nasal mucosa was suppressed in the anti-IL-25-treated 
group.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that IL-25 secreted from the sinonasal epithelia 
and infiltrating mast cells plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of CRS with 
NPs in Asian patients. In addition, our results suggest the novel possibility of 
treating nasal polyposis with anti-IL-25 therapy.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2015 May;121(2):41-9. doi: 10.3109/13813455.2014.1003566.
Epub 2015 Feb 27.

An acute bout of exercise modulate the inflammatory response in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells in healthy young men.

Ulven SM(1), Foss SS, Skjølsvik AM, Stadheim HK, Myhrstad MC, Raael E, Sandvik M,
Narverud I, Andersen LF, Jensen J, Holven KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Nutrition and Management, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences , St Olavsplass, Oslo , 
Norway .

CONTEXT: Exercise increases the levels of circulating inflammatory mediators.
OBJECTIVE: Does an acute bout of exercise affect the mRNA gene expression level
of inflammatory markers in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and
contribute to the circulating levels of inflammatory mediators?
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten healthy, non-smoking men (22-28 years old) performed
1-hour cycling at 70% of VO2 max.
RESULTS: The gene transcripts of CXCL16, IL-1ß, IL-8, COX-2, TXB21 and GATA3 were
significantly up-regulated in PBMCs. Serum levels of CXCL16, IL-6, TNFa and IL-10
were also significantly increased after exercise.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Increased mRNA transcription of inflammatory genes in 
PBMCs may contribute to increased level of inflammatory markers after an acute
bout of exercise. The increased mRNA levels of GATA-3 and TXB21 may indicate that
T cell lymphocytes are activated and secrete cytokines into the circulation. It
needs to be further investigated if exercise changes the Th1/Th2 balance.

PMID: 25720858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):506-19. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-1042. Epub 2015
Feb 25.

Suppression of early hematogenous dissemination of human breast cancer cells to
bone marrow by retinoic Acid-induced 2.

Werner S(1), Brors B(2), Eick J(1), Marques E(3), Pogenberg V(4), Parret A(4),
Kemming D(5), Wood AW(6), Edgren H(7), Neubauer H(8), Streichert T(9), Riethdorf 
S(1), Bedi U(1), Baccelli I(10), Jücker M(11), Eils R(12), Fehm T(8), Trumpp
A(10), Johnsen SA(1), Klefström J(3), Wilmanns M(4), Müller V(13), Pantel K(1),
Wikman H(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. (2)Division of Applied Bioinformatics (G200), German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. National Center for Tumor Diseases
(NCT), Heidelberg, Germany. German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Translational Cancer Biology Research Program and
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg, Germany. (5)Department of Tumor Biology,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. European
Laboratory Association, Ibbenbüren, Germany. (6)Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., 
Danvers, Massachusetts. (7)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany. Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (9)Department of Clinical 
Chemistry, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany. (10)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Institute of Biochemistry and Signal
Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(12)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics (B080), German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology,
and Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. (14)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. h.wikman@uke.de.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):466-8.

Regulatory pathways that drive early hematogenous dissemination of tumor cells
are insufficiently defined. Here, we used the presence of disseminated tumor
cells (DTC) in the bone marrow to define patients with early disseminated breast 
cancer and identified low retinoic acid-induced 2 (RAI2) expression to be
significantly associated with DTC status. Low RAI2 expression was also shown to
be an independent poor prognostic factor in 10 different cancer datasets.
Depletion of RAI2 protein in luminal breast cancer cell lines resulted in
dedifferentiation marked by downregulation of ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3, together
with increased invasiveness and activation of AKT signaling. Functional analysis 
of the previously uncharacterized RAI2 protein revealed molecular interaction
with CtBP transcriptional regulators and an overlapping function in controlling
the expression of a number of key target genes involved in breast cancer. These
results suggest that RAI2 is a new metastasis-associated protein that sustains
differentiation of luminal breast epithelial cells.SIGNIFICANCE: We identified
downregulation of RAI2 as a novel metastasis-associated genetic alteration
especially associated with early occurring bone metastasis in ERa-positive breast
tumors. We specified the role of the RAI2 protein to function as a
transcriptional regulator that controls the expression of several key regulators 
of breast epithelial integrity and cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25716347  [PubMed - in process]


209. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Feb 23;107(5). pii: djv015. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv015.

Breast cancer genomics from microarrays to massively parallel sequencing:
paradigms and new insights.

Ng CK(1), Schultheis AM(1), Bidard FC(1), Weigelt B(2), Reis-Filho JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
(CKYN, AMS, BW, JSRF); Department of Medical Oncology, SIRIC, Institut Curie,
Paris, France (FCB); Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (JSRF). (2)Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (CKYN, AMS, BW, JSRF);
Department of Medical Oncology, SIRIC, Institut Curie, Paris, France (FCB); Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY (JSRF). weigeltb@mskcc.org reisfilj@mskcc.org.

Rapid advancements in massively parallel sequencing methods have enabled the
analysis of breast cancer genomes at an unprecedented resolution, which have
revealed the remarkable heterogeneity of the disease. As a result, we now accept 
that despite originating in the breast, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
ER-negative breast cancers are completely different diseases at the molecular
level. It has become apparent that there are very few highly recurrently mutated 
genes such as TP53, PIK3CA, and GATA3, that no two breast cancers display an
identical repertoire of somatic genetic alterations at base-pair resolution and
that there might not be a single highly recurrently mutated gene that defines
each of the "intrinsic" subtypes of breast cancer (ie, basal-like, HER2-enriched,
luminal A, and luminal B). Breast cancer heterogeneity, however, extends beyond
the diversity between tumors. There is burgeoning evidence to demonstrate that at
least some primary breast cancers are composed of multiple, genetically diverse
clones at diagnosis and that metastatic lesions may differ in their repertoire of
somatic genetic alterations when compared with their respective primary tumors.
Several biological phenomena may shape the reported intratumor genetic
heterogeneity observed in breast cancers, including the different mutational
processes and multiple types of genomic instability. Harnessing the emerging
concepts of the diversity of breast cancer genomes and the phenomenon of
intratumor genetic heterogeneity will be essential for the development of optimal
methods for diagnosis, disease monitoring, and the matching of patients to the
drugs that would benefit them the most.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25713166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2015 Feb 25. doi: 10.1002/term.2016. [Epub ahead of
print]

Characterization of putative haematopoietic cells from bovine yolk sac.

Oliveira VC(1), Mançanares CA, Oliveira LJ, Gonçalves NJ, Miglino MA, Perecin F, 
Meirelles FV, Piedrahita J, Ambrósio CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science,
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

The yolk sac is an extra-embryonic membrane that plays an important role in early
embryonic survival. It is the production site for blood cells during embryonic
mammalian development and is a likely source of stem cells. The aim of this study
was to identify and characterize the putative haematopoietic cells from the yolk 
sac of bovine embryos at different stages of gestation. The yolk sac regresses
according to gestational age and embryos are characterized into groups (I-V)
according to the crown-rump measurement. Groups I-III survived in culture longer 
and exhibited the formation of cell clusters, whereas groups IV and V could not
be maintained in culture for an extended period of time. Flow-cytometry analysis 
revealed that groups I-III had similar characteristics, including high expression
levels of the haematopoietic markers CD34, CD90 and CD117. In groups IV and V,
decreases were observed in the expression levels of CD117 and CD34. Cells were
found to be capable of survival post-cryopreservation and exhibited varying
abilities to form colonies in a methylcellulose matrix, depending on gestational 
age. Cytological analysis revealed the presence of blood cells (lymphocytes and
monocytes). Quantitative PCR analysis demonstrated the presence of the
haematopoietic progenitor genes GATA3 and LMO2, but not RUNX1. Thus, we have
successfully isolated and characterized haematopoietic cells from the bovine
embryo yolk sac at varying gestational ages. This study is crucial for the
understanding of the development of the haematopoietic system and the embryonic
function of this organ. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25712733  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


211. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Feb 5;9:26. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00026. eCollection 
2015.

Opportunities and limits of the one gene approach: the ability of Atoh1 to
differentiate and maintain hair cells depends on the molecular context.

Jahan I(1), Pan N(1), Fritzsch B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa Iowa City, IA, USA.

Atoh1 (Math1) was the first gene discovered in ear development that showed no
hair cell (HC) differentiation when absent and could induce HC differentiation
when misexpressed. These data implied that Atoh1 was both necessary and
sufficient for hair cell development. However, other gene mutations also result
in loss of initially forming HCs, notably null mutants for Pou4f3, Barhl1, and
Gfi1. HC development and maintenance also depend on the expression of other genes
(Sox2, Eya1, Gata3, Pax2) and several genes have been identified that can induce 
HCs when misexpressed (Jag1) or knocked out (Lmo4). In the ear Atoh1 is not only 
expressed in HCs but also in some supporting cells and neurons that do not
differentiate into HCs. Simple removal of one gene, Neurod1, can de-repress Atoh1
and turns those neurons into HCs suggesting that Neurod1 blocks Atoh1 function in
neurons. Atoh1 expression in inner pillar cells may also be blocked by too many
Hes/Hey factors but conversion into HCs has only partially been achieved through 
Hes/Hey removal. Detailed analysis of cell cycle exit confirmed an apex to base
cell cycle exit progression of HCs of the organ of Corti. In contrast, Atoh1
expression progresses from the base toward the apex with a variable delay
relative to the cell cycle exit. Most HCs exit the cell cycle and are thus
defined as precursors before Atoh1 is expressed. Atoh1 is a potent
differentiation factor but can differentiate and maintain HCs only in the ear and
when other factors are co-expressed. Upstream factors are essential to regulate
Atoh1 level of expression duration while downstream, co-activated by other
factors, will define the context of Atoh1 action. We suggest that these insights 
need to be taken into consideration and approaches beyond the simple Atoh1
expression need to be designed able to generate the radial and longitudinal
variations in hair cell types for normal function of the organ of Corti.

PMCID: PMC4318345
PMID: 25698932  [PubMed]


212. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Mar;143(3):430-6. doi: 10.1309/AJCP2N1AFXEFOVYE.

Immunohistochemical distinction of primary sweat gland carcinoma and metastatic
breast carcinoma: can it always be accomplished reliably?

Mentrikoski MJ(1), Wick MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Surgical Pathology and Cytopathology, University of
Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville. (2)From the Division of Surgical
Pathology and Cytopathology, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville. mrwick1@usa.net.

OBJECTIVES: Even with adequate history, the distinction of cutaneous metastatic
breast carcinoma from primary sweat gland carcinoma can be difficult. Although
previous studies have attempted to separate these tumors with various
immunohistochemical panels, those series have been limited by small numbers of
patients as well as the inclusion of benign sweat gland tumors.
METHODS: In this analysis, stains for p63, CK5/6, and D2-40 were included, as
well as GATA3 and mammaglobin, in an evaluation of 21 primary sweat gland
carcinomas and 33 examples of cutaneous metastatic breast carcinoma.
RESULTS: Immunoreactivity for p63, CK5/6, D2-40, GATA3, and mammaglobin was
respectively observed in 81%, 71%, 52%, 71%, and 5% of sweat gland carcinomas
compared with 6%, 6%, 6%, 91%, and 45% of metastatic breast carcinomas. These
differences were statistically significant for p63, CK5/6, and D2-40. For the
diagnosis of metastatic breast carcinoma, GATA3 was the most sensitive marker
(91%), but its sensitivity was substantially lower. Mammaglobin was 95% specific 
for breast carcinoma but again suffered from limited sensitivity (45%) in this
context.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that p63 and CK5/6 are specific determinants for 
sweat gland carcinoma in the stated setting. In the absence of those analytes,
metastatic breast carcinoma cannot always be identified to the exclusion of a
primary tumor. This diagnostic scenario continues to require the procurement of a
detailed clinical history regarding the number and duration of skin lesions in
any given case.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25696802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):252-64. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.01.013.

The transcription factor KLF2 restrains CD4<U+207A> T follicular helper cell
differentiation.

Lee JY(1), Skon CN(1), Lee YJ(1), Oh S(2), Taylor JJ(3), Malhotra D(3), Jenkins
MK(3), Rosenfeld MG(2), Hogquist KA(1), Jameson SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN
55414, USA; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute; Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Center for Immunology, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA; Department of Microbiology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (4)Center for
Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. Electronic address: james024@umn.edu.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are essential for efficient B cell responses, yet
the factors that regulate differentiation of this CD4(+) T cell subset are
incompletely understood. Here we found that the KLF2 transcription factor serves 
to restrain Tfh cell generation. Induced KLF2 deficiency in activated CD4(+) T
cells led to increased Tfh cell generation and B cell priming, whereas KLF2
overexpression prevented Tfh cell production. KLF2 promotes expression of the
trafficking receptor S1PR1, and S1PR1 downregulation is essential for efficient
Tfh cell production. However, KLF2 also induced expression of the transcription
factor Blimp-1, which repressed transcription factor Bcl-6 and thereby impaired
Tfh cell differentiation. Furthermore, KLF2 induced expression of the
transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 and enhanced Th1 differentiation. Hence,
our data indicate KLF2 is pivotal for coordinating CD4(+) T cell differentiation 
through two distinct and complementary mechanisms: via control of T cell
localization and by regulation of lineage-defining transcription factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4409658
PMID: 25692701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Apr;25(2):353-62. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.02.005.
Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Telocinobufagin enhances the Th1 immune response and protects against Salmonella 
typhimurium infection.

Wu SC(1), Fu BD(1), Shen HQ(1), Yi PF(1), Zhang LY(1), Lv S(1), Guo X(1), Xia
F(1), Wu YL(1), Wei XB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, No. 5333, Xi'an Road, Changchun, Jilin 130062, PR China.
(2)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, No. 5333, Xi'an Road, Changchun, Jilin 130062, PR China.
Electronic address: weixub13@163.com.

Ideal potential vaccine adjuvants to stimulate a Th1 immune response are urgently
needed to control intracellular infections in clinical applications.
Telocinobufagin (TBG), an active component of Venenum bufonis, exhibits
immunomodulatory activity. Therefore, we investigated whether TBG enhances the
Th1 immune response to ovalbumin (OVA) and formalin-inactivated Salmonella
typhimurium (FIST) in mice. TBG augmented serum OVA- and FIST-specific IgG and
IgG2a and the production of IFN<U+03B3> by antigen-restimulated splenocytes. TBG also
dramatically enhanced splenocyte proliferative responses to concanavalin A,
lipopolysaccharide, and OVA and substantially increased T-bet mRNA levels and the
CD3(+)/CD3(+)CD4(+)/CD3(+)CD8(+) phenotype in splenocytes from OVA-immunized
mice. In in vivo protection studies, TBG significantly decreased the bacterial
burdens in the spleen and prolonged the survival time of FIST-immunized mice
challenged with live S. typhimurium. In vivo neutralization of IFN<U+03B3> with
anti-IFN<U+03B3> mAbs led to a significant reduction in FIST-specific IgG2a and IFN<U+03B3>
levels and in anti-Salmonella effect in TBG/FIST-immunized mice. In conclusion,
these results suggest that TBG enhances a Th1 immune response to control
intracellular infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb;23(1):45-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.01.009.

[mRNA Expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, ROR <U+03B3>t and Foxp3 in peripheral blood of
patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in different stages].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu JJ(1), Chen G(1), Pang NN(1), Guo XH(1), Wang L(1), Zhao F(1), Tan MF(1), Qu
JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830054, China. (2)Center of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi 830054, China. E-mail:
jhuaqu@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: This study was to investigate the mRNA expression of T-bet, GATA-3,
ROR <U+03B3>t and Foxp3 mRNA in peripheral blood of patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) in different stages and explore their potential role in the
pathogenesis and clinical diagnosis.
METHODS: A total of 46 newly diagnosed and untreated patients with CLL was chosen
as patient group, including 16 patients in the stage of Binet A, 15 in the stage 
of Binet B, and 15 in the stage of Binet C; 20 healthy persons were selected as
controls. The quantitative fluorescence PCR was adopted to detect the mRNA
expression of T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and Foxp3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMNC).
RESULTS: (1) The expression of T-bet mRNA in patient group was lower than that in
normal controls (P < 0.05), while the mRNA expression of GATA-3 mRNA, ROR <U+03B3>t,
Foxp3 in CLL patients group were higher than that in normal controls (P < 0.05), 
and the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t/Foxp3 in CLL in patient group were lower 
than that in normal controls(P < 0.05); (2) The later the stage, the higher the
mRNA expression of GATA-3 and Foxp3. The mRNA expression of GATA-3 in stage Binet
B and stage Binet C of CLL patients were higher than that in stage Binet A (P <
0.05),and the mRNA expression of Foxp3 in stage Binet C was higher than that in
stage of Binet A and Binet B (P < 0.05); the later the stage, the lower the ratio
of T-bet/GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t/Foxp3. The ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 in stage of Binet A
CLL patients was higher than that in stage Binet C (P < 0.05) and the ratio of
ROR<U+03B3>t/Foxp3 in stage of Binet A and stage of Binet B were higher than that in
stage Binet C (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study found in the level of transcription factors in CLL
patients that with the process of disease, the balance shifts from Th1/Th2 and
Th17/Treg to Th17 and Treg, and Treg cell may play a critical immunosuppressive
role in the development of CLL.

PMID: 25687044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 13;10(2):e0117304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117304.
eCollection 2015.

Ubiquitin specific protease 21 is dispensable for normal development,
hematopoiesis and lymphocyte differentiation.

Pannu J(1), Belle JI(2), Förster M(2), Duerr CU(3), Shen S(2), Kane L(4),
Harcourt K(4), Fritz JH(3), Clare S(4), Nijnik A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Department of
Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (2)Department of Physiology, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada; Complex Traits Group, McGill University, Montreal, 
Canada. (3)Complex Traits Group, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (4)Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

USP21 is a ubiquitin specific protease that catalyzes protein deubiquitination,
however the identification of its physiological substrates remains challenging.
USP21 is known to deubiquitinate transcription factor GATA3 and death-domain
kinase RIPK1 in vitro, however the in vivo settings where this regulation plays a
biologically significant role remain unknown. In order to determine whether USP21
is an essential and non-redundant regulator of GATA3 or RIPK1 activity in vivo,
we characterized Usp21-deficient mice, focusing on mouse viability and
development, hematopoietic stem cell function, and lymphocyte differentiation.
The Usp21-knockout mice were found to be viable and fertile, with no significant 
dysmorphology, in contrast to the GATA3 and RIPK1 knockout lines that exhibit
embryonic or perinatal lethality. Loss of USP21 also had no effect on
hematopoietic stem cell function, lymphocyte development, or the responses of
antigen presenting cells to TLR and TNFR stimulation. GATA3 levels in
hematopoietic stem cells or T lymphocytes remained unchanged. We observed that
aged Usp21-knockout mice exhibited spontaneous T cell activation, however this
was not linked to altered GATA3 levels in the affected cells. The contrast in the
phenotype of the Usp21-knockout line with the previously characterized GATA3 and 
RIPK1 knockout mice strongly indicates that USP21 is redundant for the regulation
of GATA3 and RIPK1 activity during mouse development, in hematopoietic stem
cells, and in lymphocyte differentiation. The Usp21-deficient mouse line
characterized in this study may serve as a useful tool for the future
characterization of USP21 physiological functions.

PMCID: PMC4332479
PMID: 25680095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Annu Rev Immunol. 2015;33:607-42. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-112032.
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Transcriptional regulation of innate and adaptive lymphocyte lineages.

De Obaldia ME(1), Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

The lymphocyte family has expanded significantly in recent years to include not
only the adaptive lymphocytes (T cells, B cells) and NK cells, but also several
additional innate lymphoid cell (ILC) types. ILCs lack clonally distributed
antigen receptors characteristic of adaptive lymphocytes and instead respond
exclusively to signaling via germline-encoded receptors. ILCs resemble T cells
more closely than any other leukocyte lineage at the transcriptome level and
express many elements of the core T cell transcriptional program, including
Notch, Gata3, Tcf7, and Bcl11b. We present our current understanding of the
shared and distinct transcriptional regulatory mechanisms involved in the
development of adaptive T lymphocytes and closely related ILCs. We discuss the
possibility that a core set of transcriptional regulators common to ILCs and T
cells establish enhancers that enable implementation of closely aligned effector 
pathways. Studies of the transcriptional regulation of lymphopoiesis will support
the development of novel therapeutic approaches to correct early lymphoid
developmental defects and aberrant lymphocyte function.

PMID: 25665079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2966-84. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv035. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

Fine-mapping identifies two additional breast cancer susceptibility loci at
9q31.2.

Orr N, Dudbridge F, Dryden N, Maguire S, Novo D, Perrakis E, Johnson N,
Ghoussaini M, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Apicella C, Stone J, Schmidt MK, Broeks A,
Van't Veer LJ, Hogervorst FB, Fasching PA, Haeberle L, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW,
Gibson L, Aitken Z, Warren H, Sawyer E, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N,
Burwinkel B, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Guénel P, Truong T, Cordina-Duverger
E, Sanchez M, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Benitez J,
Zamora MP, Arias Perez JI, Menéndez P, Anton-Culver H, Neuhausen SL, Brenner H,
Dieffenbach AK, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Hamann U, Brauch H, Justenhoven C, Brüning 
T, Ko YD, Nevanlinna H, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Khan S, Bogdanova N, Dörk T,
Lindblom A, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM,
Chenevix-Trench G, Beesley J, Lambrechts D, Moisse M, Floris G, Beuselinck B,
Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Seibold P, Flesch-Janys D, Radice P, Peterlongo P,
Peissel B, Pensotti V, Couch FJ, Olson JE, Slettedahl S, Vachon C, Giles GG,
Milne RL, McLean C, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Simard 
J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Kristensen V, Alnæs GG, Nord S,
Borresen-Dale AL, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, Long J, Winqvist R,
Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Grip M, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G,
Tchatchou S, Devilee P, Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve CM, Van Asperen CJ, Garcia-Closas 
M, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Czene K, Darabi H, Eriksson M, Klevebring
D, Hooning MJ, Hollestelle A, van Deurzen CH, Kriege M, Hall P, Li J, Liu J,
Humphreys K, Cox A, Cross SS, Reed MW, Pharoah PD, Dunning AM, Shah M, Perkins
BJ, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Ashworth A, Swerdlow
A, Jones M, Schoemaker MJ, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Olswold C, Slager S, Toland
AE, Yannoukakos D, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P,
Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Ishiguro J, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, 
Teo SH, Yip CH, Kang P, Ikram MK, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai H, Kang D, Choi JY,
Park SK, Noh DY, Hartman M, Miao H, Lim WY, Lee SC, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V,
Brennan P, Mckay J, Wu PE, Hou MF, Yu JC, Shen CY, Blot W, Cai Q, Signorello LB, 
Luccarini C, Bayes C, Ahmed S, Maranian M, Healey CS, González-Neira A, Pita G,
Alonso MR, Álvarez N, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Hunter DJ,
Lindstrom S, Dennis J, Michailidou K, Bolla MK, Easton DF, dos Santos Silva I,
Fletcher O, Peto J; GENICA Network; kConFab Investigators; Australian Ovarian
Cancer Study Group.

We recently identified a novel susceptibility variant, rs865686, for
estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer at 9q31.2. Here, we report a
fine-mapping analysis of the 9q31.2 susceptibility locus using 43 160 cases and
42 600 controls of European ancestry ascertained from 52 studies and a further
5795 cases and 6624 controls of Asian ancestry from nine studies. Single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs676256 was most strongly associated with risk in 
Europeans (odds ratios [OR] = 0.90 [0.88-0.92]; P-value = 1.58 × 10(-25)). This
SNP is one of a cluster of highly correlated variants, including rs865686, that
spans ~14.5 kb. We identified two additional independent association signals
demarcated by SNPs rs10816625 (OR = 1.12 [1.08-1.17]; P-value = 7.89 × 10(-09))
and rs13294895 (OR = 1.09 [1.06-1.12]; P-value = 2.97 × 10(-11)). SNP rs10816625,
but not rs13294895, was also associated with risk of breast cancer in Asian
individuals (OR = 1.12 [1.06-1.18]; P-value = 2.77 × 10(-05)). Functional genomic
annotation using data derived from breast cancer cell-line models indicates that 
these SNPs localise to putative enhancer elements that bind known drivers of
hormone-dependent breast cancer, including ER-a, FOXA1 and GATA-3. In vitro
analyses indicate that rs10816625 and rs13294895 have allele-specific effects on 
enhancer activity and suggest chromatin interactions with the KLF4 gene locus.
These results demonstrate the power of dense genotyping in large studies to
identify independent susceptibility variants. Analysis of associations using
subjects with different ancestry, combined with bioinformatic and genomic
characterisation, can provide strong evidence for the likely causative alleles
and their functional basis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4406292
PMID: 25652398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;14:26. doi: 10.1186/s12943-014-0285-x.

Genome-wide analyses identify KLF4 as an important negative regulator in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia through directly inhibiting T-cell associated genes.

Li W(1,)(2), Jiang Z(3,)(4), Li T(5,)(6), Wei X(7,)(8), Zheng Y(9,)(10), Wu
D(11,)(12), Yang L(13,)(14), Chen S(15,)(16), Xu B(17), Zhong M(18), Jiang J(19),
Hu Y(20), Su H(21), Zhang M(22), Huang X(23), Geng S(24), Weng J(25), Du X(26),
Liu P(27), Li Y(28,)(29), Liu H(30), Yao Y(31), Li P(32,)(33).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510530, China. li_wei2011@gibh.ac.cn. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China.
li_wei2011@gibh.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. jiang_zhiwu@gibh.ac.cn.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. jiang_zhiwu@gibh.ac.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan
Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China.
li_tianzhong@gibh.ac.cn. (6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and 
Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China. li_tianzhong@gibh.ac.cn. (7)Key
Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510530, China. wei_xinru@gibh.ac.cn. (8)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China.
wei_xinru@gibh.ac.cn. (9)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. zheng_yi@gibh.ac.cn.
(10)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. zheng_yi@gibh.ac.cn. (11)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan
Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. wu_donghai@gibh.ac.cn.
(12)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. wu_donghai@gibh.ac.cn. (13)Institute of Hematology, Medical
College, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnyanglijian@163.com.
(14)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnyanglijian@163.com. (15)Institute of
Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
jnshaohuachen@163.com. (16)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry
of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. jnshaohuachen@163.com. 
(17)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
510515, Guangzhou, China. xubingzhangjian@126.com. (18)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Nan Fang Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
510515, China. zhongmei@fimmu.com. (19)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. jiang1@hotmail.com. (20)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. yufenghu@hust.edu.cn. (21)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, 
430030, China. suhexiu@hust.edu.cn. (22)Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen University
Town, Shenzhen, 518055, China. minjie.zhang@gmail.com. (23)Peking University
People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of Hematology, No. 11 Xizhimen
South St., Beijing, 100044, China. xjhrm@medmail.com.cn. (24)Department of
Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China.
gsx76@126.com. (25)Department of Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's
Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China. wsswjy@sina.com. (26)Department of
Hematology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 510500, China.
miyadu@hotmail.com. (27)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10
1HH, England, UK. pl2@sanger.ac.uk. (28)Institute of Hematology, Medical College,
Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. yangqiuli@hotmail.com. (29)Key
Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, 510632, China. yangqiuli@hotmail.com. (30)School of Pharmacy, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road,
Wuhan, 430030, China. hudanliu@hust.edu.cn. (31)Drug Discovery Pipeline,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 
Kaiyuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China.
yao_yao@gibh.ac.cn. (32)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Science Park, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.
(33)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
510530, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) induces tumorigenesis or suppresses
tumor growth in a tissue-dependent manner. However, the roles of KLF4 in
hematological malignancies and the mechanisms of action are not fully understood.
METHODS: Inducible KLF4-overexpression Jurkat cell line combined with mouse
models bearing cell-derived xenografts and primary T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) cells from four patients were used to assess the functional role
of KLF4 in T-ALL cells in vitro and in vivo. A genome-wide RNA-seq analysis was
conducted to identify genes regulated by KLF4 in T-ALL cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) PCR was used to determine direct binding sites of KLF4
in T-ALL cells.
RESULTS: Here we reveal that KLF4 induced apoptosis through the BCL2/BCLXL
pathway in human T-ALL cell lines and primary T-ALL specimens. In consistence,
mice engrafted with KLF4-overexpressing T-ALL cells exhibited prolonged survival.
Interestingly, the KLF4-induced apoptosis in T-ALL cells was compromised in
xenografts but the invasion capacity of KLF4-expressing T-ALL cells to hosts was 
dramatically dampened. We found that KLF4 overexpression inhibited T
cell-associated genes including NOTCH1, BCL11B, GATA3, and TCF7. Further
mechanistic studies revealed that KLF4 directly bound to the promoters of NOTCH1,
BCL2, and CXCR4 and suppressed their expression. Additionally, KLF4 induced
SUMOylation and degradation of BCL11B.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that KLF4 as a major transcription factor that
suppresses the expression of T-cell associated genes, thus inhibiting T-ALL
progression.

PMCID: PMC4350611
PMID: 25644173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2014;165(4):229-43. doi: 10.1159/000370067. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Exacerbating factors induce different gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from asthmatics, patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and healthy subjects.

Pniewska E(1), Sokolowska M, Kuprys-Lipinska I, Kacprzak D, Kuna P, Pawliczak R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of
Immunopathology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate Training,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Despite several common phenotypic features, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma differ with regard to their causative 
factors and pathophysiology. Both diseases may be exacerbated by environmental
factors, however, the molecular profiles of disease episodes have not been
comprehensively studied. We identified differences in gene and protein expression
profiles expressed by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COPD patients,
patients with atopic asthma and healthy subjects when challenged with
exacerbating factors in vitro: lipopolysaccharide (LPS), house dust mite (HDM)
and cat allergen.
METHODS: PBMC isolated from patients with severe atopic asthma and COPD, as well 
as healthy subjects were stimulated with rDer p 1 DG, rFel d 1 DG and LPS. The
changes in the expression of 47 genes belonging to five groups (phospholipase A2,
eicosanoids, transcription factors, cytokines and airway remodeling) were studied
using TaqMan low density array cards. Immunoblotting was used to study relative
protein expression.
RESULTS: rDer p 1 significantly up-regulated the expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G6,
PLA2G15, CYSLTR1, LB4R2, PTGS1, PTGS2, FOXP1, GATA3, HDAC2, IREB2, PPARG, STAT4, 
TSLP and CHI3L1 genes in asthmatics in comparison to healthy subjects. LPS
induced significant expression of ANXA1 and LTA4H in asthmatics when compared to 
COPD patients and healthy subjects. SOX6,STAT4 and IL1RL1 were induced in COPD
after LPS stimulation. Analysis of protein expression revealed a pattern similar 
to mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: LPS-induced exacerbation of asthma and COPD is characterized by
differential expression of selected genes in PBMC. HDM allergen changed the
expression profile of inflammatory genes between patients with asthma of atopic
origin and healthy controls.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25634111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2015 Mar 15;164(1-2):93-100. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2015.01.001. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Ribavirin stimulates the immune response of Atlantic salmon.

Rivas-Aravena A(1), Guajardo S(2), Valenzuela B(3), Cartagena J(4), Imarai MI(3),
Spencer E(4), Sandino AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Virología, Centro de Biotecnología Acuícola, Universidad de
Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Departamento de Aplicaciones Nucleares,
Comisión Chilena de Energía Nuclear, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address:
andrea.rivas@usach.cl. (2)Activaq S.A. General del Canto 460, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Laboratorio de Inmunología, Centro de Biotecnología Acuícola, Universidad de
Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (4)Laboratorio de Virología, Centro de
Biotecnología Acuícola, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Laboratorio de Virología, Centro de Biotecnología Acuícola, Universidad de
Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Activaq S.A. General del Canto 460, Santiago,
Chile.

Ribavirin is a synthetic nucleotide analog capable of inhibiting or even
preventing some viral infections in mammals and also in fish. It has been seen by
others that ribavirin by itself is able to stimulate the immune system of
mammals, causing a differentiation of T-cells to T helper 1 cells (Th)-1. In this
work, we evaluated the immune effect of ribavirin in vitro on kidney cells from
Atlantic salmon and in vivo by oral administration of ribavirin to Atlantic
salmon. For this purpose, the transcripts of immune molecules Tbet, GATA3, CD8,
CD4, IFNa, IFN<U+03B3>, IL-4/13, IL-10, IL-12, IL-15 and TGF-B were quantified. The
results show that ribavirin administered orally in food to Atlantic salmon
increased IFN<U+03B3> and CD4 transcripts in the in vivo assays and, in addition,
increased IL-12, IL-15 and CD8 in the in vitro analyses, indicating that the
treatment stimulates a Th1 type response in salmon.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25631788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Apr;45(4):1103-15. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444661. Epub 2015 Feb 
17.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 controls IL-10 expression in CD4(+) effector T-cell
subsets through epigenetic modification of the IL-10 promoter.

Hill EV(1), Ng TH, Burton BR, Oakley CM, Malik K, Wraith DC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The serine/threonine kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) plays an important 
role in balancing pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. We have examined the role
of GSK3 in production of IL-10 by subsets of CD4(+) T helper cells. Treatment of 
naive murine CD4(+) T cells with GSK3 inhibitors did not affect their production 
of IL-10. However, treatment of Th1 and Th2 cells with GSK3 inhibitors
dramatically increased production of IL-10. GSK3 inhibition also led to
upregulation of IL-10 among Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets isolated from human blood.
The encephalitogenic potential of GSK3 inhibitor treated murine Th1 cells was
significantly reduced in adoptive transfer experiments by an IL-10-dependent
mechanism. Analysis of the murine IL-10 promoter in response to inhibition of
GSK3 in Th1 cells showed modification to a transcriptionally active state
indicated by changes in histone H3 acetylation and methylation. Additionally,
GSK3 inhibition increased expression of the transcription factors c-Maf, Nfil3,
and GATA3, correlating with the increase in IL-10. These findings are important
in the context of autoimmune disease since they show that it is possible to
reprogram disease-causing cells through GSK3 inhibition.

© 2015 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4405077
PMID: 25627813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Clin Exp Allergy. 2015 Mar;45(3):644-59. doi: 10.1111/cea.12498.

Respiratory syncytial virus induces indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity: a
potential novel role in the development of allergic disease.

Ajamian F(1), Wu Y, Ebeling C, Ilarraza R, Odemuyiwa SO, Moqbel R, Adamko DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Group, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada;
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Infants that develop severe bronchiolitis due to respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) are at increased risk of developing asthma later in life.
We investigated a potential immunological mechanism for the association between
RSV and the development of allergic inflammation. The enzyme indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) has been reported to induce selective apoptosis of T helper
1 (Th1) cells and contributed to Th2-biased immune responses.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether RSV infection in vitro could induce IDO
expression and bioactivity in human dendritic cells, leading to a Th2-biased
immune response.
METHODS: Human peripheral blood monocytes from healthy adult donors were
isolated, differentiated to dendritic cells (moDC), in vitro. We studied RSV
infection and mechanisms of IDO activation in moDC with subsequent effect on
T-bet expression.
RESULTS: We found that moDC were infected by RSV and that this induced IDO
activation. RSV-induced IDO activity was inhibited by palivizumab, UV
inactivation, TL4R inhibition, and ribavirin. However, blocking endosomal TLR
function with chloroquine did not inhibit IDO activity. Selective inhibitors
suggested that RSV-induced IDO activity was dependent on the retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) related pathway via NF-<U+03BA>B and p38 MAPK. Coculture
of RSV-infected moDC with activated T cells, in a transwell system, suppressed
expression of T-bet (a Th1-associated factor) but not GATA3 (a Th2 regulator).
Inhibition of IDO activity with the competitive inhibitor, 1-methyl tryptophan,
blocked the effect on T-bet expression.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Our data show for the first time that RSV can 
induce the expression and bioactivity of IDO in human moDC, in a virus
replication-dependant fashion. We suggest that RSV activation of IDO could be a
potential mechanism for the development of allergic diseases.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25627660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Nov-Dec;23(10):711-6. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000143.

Uroplakin II (UPII), GATA3, and p40 are Highly Sensitive Markers for the
Differential Diagnosis of Invasive Urothelial Carcinoma.

Hoang LL(1), Tacha D, Bremer RE, Haas TS, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Research and Development, Biocare Medical LLC, Concord, CA
Mercy Hospital & Trauma Center, Mercy Health System, Janesville, WI Department 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN.

Distinguishing between invasive urothelial carcinoma from other genitourinary
lesions such as prostatic and renal carcinomas can be difficult, and may require 
highly sensitive immunohistochemical markers. GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) has 
been reported in a high percentage of urothelial and breast carcinomas. Mouse
monoclonal uroplakin II (UPII) and p40 antibodies have recently been developed
and demonstrated high specificity in urothelial carcinoma. This study evaluated
the immunohistochemical staining sensitivities of UPII, GATA3, p40, and p63 in
the detection of invasive urothelial carcinoma. UPII, GATA3, and p40 were further
tested for specificity in lung, breast, colon, kidney, and prostate cancers. In
all invasive urothelial carcinoma cases, UPII, GATA3, p40, and p63 exhibited
sensitivities of 77.7%, 83.5%, 85.4%, and 80.6%, respectively. The combination of
UPII, GATA3, and p40 antibodies stained 94.2% (97/103) of all invasive urothelial
carcinoma cases, including 92.2% (71/77) of grade 2-3 urothelial carcinomas. In
addition, GATA3 and UPII showed negative staining in lung squamous cell
carcinomas and p40 showed negative staining in breast infiltrating ductal
carcinomas. The combination of UPII, GATA3, and p40 showed negative staining in
lung adenocarcinoma, colon adenocarcinoma, and renal carcinomas. In conclusion,
UPII, GATA3, and p40, when used in combination, are highly sensitive in the
differential diagnosis of invasive urothelial carcinoma.

PMID: 25611245  [PubMed - in process]


225. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;32(12):881-6.

[Involvement of cellular immunity and humoral immunity in mixed allergy induced
by trichloroethylene].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu X(1), Li X(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518055, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether cellular immunity and humoral immunity are
involved in trichlorethylene (TCE)-induced mixed allergy, then provide the
scientific basis for the mechanism of this disease.
METHODS: Guinea pigs and rats were tested for this study by application of guinea
pig maximization test (GPMT), the animals were randomly divided into negative
control, positive control and TCE treatment groups. Animals of these groups were 
administrated with olive oil, 2, 4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), and TCE,
respectively, by intradermal injection. After TCE administration, rat peripheral 
blood samples were collected by flow cytometry to detect lymphocytes CD3<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>, 
CD8<U+207A>. Guinea pig peripheral blood samples were collected to detect the levels of 
IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, and the spleens were taken out from guinea pigs after
various treatment, mRNA expression of GATA3, T-bet, CTLA4 and Foxp3 in
lymphocytes of guinea pig spleen was detected by real-time fluorescent PCR assay.
Additionally, TCE allergic dermatitis patients were selected for the study, the
peripheral blood samples were collected from the TCE patients group and control
group, quantitative PCR was applied to detect mRNA expression of immune-related
genes Foxp3, GATA3, CTLA4, T-bet.
RESULTS: TCE induced obvious skin allergic reaction in guinea pigs, the
sensitization rate was 83.3%, IgG levels in TCE group and positive control
increased significantly. Additionally, mRNA expression levels of GATA3, T-bet,
CTLA4 significantly elevated in TCE group and positive control, but Foxp3 mRNA
levels decreased. The lymphocytes CD3<U+207A> ratio in TCE group and positive control of
rats was higher than that in negative control, we found that there was no
statistical difference of CD4<U+207A>, CD8<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>/CD8<U+207A> between TCE group and negative
control of rats. The mRNA expression levels of Foxp3, GATA3, CTLA4 in TCE
patients increased by 115%, 97%, 241%, respectively as compared with the control,
T-bet levels decreased by 47%when compared with the control.
CONCLUSIONS: TCE could induce obvious changes of cellular immunity and humoral
immunity in guinea pigs, rats, and TCE patients, these findings indicated that
TCE-induced immunological disorder belongs to the mixed allergy with involvment
of cellular immunity and humoral immunity, the mixed allergy might be type IV and
type II allergy.

PMID: 25608891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Feb;19(1):29-32. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2014.12.002.
Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Different staining patterns of ovarian Brenner tumor and the associated mucinous 
tumor.

Roma AA(1), Masand RP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Robert J Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. Electronic address:
romaa@ccf.org. (2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX.

The association of ovarian Brenner tumors and adjacent mucinous tumors is well
known but not completely understood. In this study, we analyzed
immunohistochemical markers on Brenner tumors and their associated mucinous tumor
to explore Mullerian as well as Wolffian and germ cell derivation and determine
if the mucinous component is independent or related to the Brenner tumor. Of 32
consecutive cases of Brenner tumors, 8 were identified with significant mucinous 
component, and 7 additional cases included foci of mucinous epithelium within the
Brenner transitional nests. All Brenner tumors were diffusely positive for GATA3 
and negative for Paired box gene 8, PAX2, and Sal-like protein 4. Interestingly, 
the areas of mucinous epithelium as well as mucinous tumors, intermixed and
adjacent to the Brenner tumor, were negative for all 4 markers; however,
occasional basal-like cells retained expression of GATA3. The immunoprofile of
mucinous tumors associated with Brenner tumors shares the lack of Mullerian
markers PAX2 and Paired box gene 8 with the Brenner tumor but differs in the
expression of GATA3 only in the Brenner tumor component.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25596159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neuroimmunol. 2015 Jan 15;278:90-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.12.007. Epub
2014 Dec 10.

Co-stimulation with TNF receptor superfamily 4/25 antibodies enhances in-vivo
expansion of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T cells (Tregs) in a mouse study for active DNA Aß42
immunotherapy.

Lambracht-Washington D(1), Rosenberg RN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, Alzheimer's Disease Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic
address: doris.lambracht-washington@utsouthwestern.edu. (2)Department of
Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, Alzheimer's Disease Center, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

The study was designed to test DNA Aß42 immunization in mice as alternative
approach for possible active immunotherapy in Alzheimer patients. As results, we 
found polarized Th2 immune responses, efficient Aß42 antibody levels, and
disappearance of antigen specific T cells. In-vivo TNFRSF4/25 antibody
co-stimulation enhanced Aß42 specific T cell responses with initial Th2 expansion
and subsequent development of Aß42 specific CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cells. It showed that
Th2 biased responses due to gene gun immunizations propagate the development of
regulatory T cells. In conclusion, full-length DNA Aß42 immunization into skin
results in a regulatory response with minimal risk of inflammation and
autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4303183
PMID: 25595257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):1281-8. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0098-5.

Blockade of Notch Signalling by <U+03B3>-Secretase Inhibitor in Lung T Cells of
Asthmatic Mice Affects T Cell Differentiation and Pulmonary Inflammation.

Zhou M(1), Cui ZL, Guo XJ, Ren LP, Yang M, Fan ZW, Han RC, Xu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200092, China.

Notch is a single-pass transmembrane receptor protein expressed by T cells, which
contributes to the pathogenesis of asthma through regulation of the development
and differentiation of T cells. <U+03B3>-Secretase inhibitor (GSI) acts as an effective 
blocker of Notch signalling. The present study aimed to investigate the role of
GSI MW167 in T cell differentiation and antigen-induced airway inflammation. An
OVA-induced airway inflammation mouse model was established. Blockade of Notch
signalling was achieved using MW167. The expression of IL-4, IL-5, IFN-<U+03B3>, Notch1 
signalling and pro-inflammatory transcription factors in activated lung T cells
was evaluated. Finally, the therapeutic effect of MW167 was investigated by
haematoxylin and eosin staining, real-time PCR and ELISA. The expression of IL-4 
and IL-5 decreased and that of IFN-<U+03B3> increased significantly, and the protein
expression levels of pro-inflammatory transcription factors reduced in active
lung T cells after administration of MW167, compared to the control group. MW167 
treatment prevented OVA-induced airway inflammation and histological changes. The
serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) levels of IL-4 and IL-5 in
MW167-treated mice decreased significantly, whereas those of IFN-<U+03B3> increased,
relative to the levels in OVA-challenged animals treated with PBS. Our findings
indicate that Notch signalling plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
asthma and that MW167 may be a potential therapeutic target for allergen-induced 
airway inflammation.

PMID: 25586485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jun;135(6):1546-57.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.11.028. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Specific epicutaneous immunotherapy prevents sensitization to new allergens in a 
murine model.

Mondoulet L(1), Dioszeghy V(2), Puteaux E(2), Ligouis M(2), Dhelft V(2), Plaquet 
C(2), Dupont C(3), Benhamou PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)DBV Technologies, Bagneux, France. Electronic address:
lucie.mondoulet@dbv-technologies.com. (2)DBV Technologies, Bagneux, France.
(3)Université Paris Descartes-Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Allergy to cow's milk increases the risk of sensitization to other
foods in young children.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to evaluate the effect of early epicutaneous immunotherapy 
(EPIT) on further sensitization to peanut or house dust mite (HDM) in a murine
model of sensitization to cow's milk.
METHODS: BALB/c mice orally sensitized to milk were epicutaneously treated with a
Viaskin patch (DBV Technologies) loaded with milk proteins for 8 weeks. Mice were
then sensitized to peanut or HDM. After sensitization to peanut, mice were
exposed to a peanut regimen known to induce eosinophilic esophageal inflammation.
After sensitization to HDM, mice were challenged with aerosols to HDM, and airway
hyperresponsiveness was evaluated by using plethysmography. Humoral response was 
also analyzed. The role of regulatory T (Treg) cells was evaluated by adoptively 
transferring Treg cells from milk EPIT-treated mice to naive mice before
sensitization to peanut. Protection against anaphylaxis was also investigated.
Methylation of the promoter region of transcription factors was analyzed by using
PCR assays.
RESULTS: In milk-sensitized mice specific EPIT prevented further sensitization to
peanut or HDM. EPIT significantly modified the humoral response, reduced TH2
cytokine levels, decreased eosinophilic esophageal infiltration, and suppressed
airway hyperresponsiveness. The protective effect was sustained over 2 months.
Moreover, the adoptive transfer of milk EPIT Treg cells completely prevented
sensitization to peanut and peanut-induced anaphylaxis. Milk EPIT enhanced
methylation of the GATA-3 promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that EPIT influences the natural history of
allergy and reduces the risk of further sensitization through a Treg
cell-dependent mechanism.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25583102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hum Pathol. 2015 Mar;46(3):376-83. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.11.009. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

Primary mediastinal seminomas: a comprehensive immunohistochemical study with a
focus on novel markers.

Weissferdt A(1), Rodriguez-Canales J(2), Liu H(2), Fujimoto J(2), Wistuba II(2), 
Moran CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030.
Electronic address: aweissferdt@mdanderson.org. (2)Department of Translational
Molecular Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (3)Department 
of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030.

Primary mediastinal seminomas are unusual tumors that can present in a pure form 
or as part of a mixed germ cell tumor. Contrary to testicular seminomas, little
is known about the expression of novel immunohistochemical markers in mediastinal
seminomas. This study investigates the immunohistochemical features of these
tumors with a focus on novel markers. Thirty-two cases of primary mediastinal
seminomas were reviewed; and representative whole-tissue sections were selected
for immunohistochemical studies using antibodies directed against high molecular 
weight cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6), low molecular weight cytokeratin (CAM5.2),
octamer-binding transcription factor 3/4 (OCT3/4), spalt-like transcription
factor 4 (SALL4), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3), sry-related HMG box 2 (SOX2), 
SOX17, human T cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (TCL1), glypican 3, melanoma associated
antigen C2 (MAGEC2), and paired box gene 8 (Pax8). The percentage of positive
tumor cells as well as the intensity of staining was evaluated and scored.
Thirty-one cases (97%) expressed SOX17, whereas 29 cases (91%) were positive for 
OCT3/4 and SALL4, respectively. Twenty-eight cases (88%) expressed MAGEC2 and
CAM5.2, respectively. Two cases (6%) were positive for Pax8, and a single case
(3%) was positive for TCL1. None of the cases stained with CK5/6, GATA-3, SOX2,
or glypican 3. Similar to testicular seminomas, mediastinal seminomas show
consistent expression of OCT3/4, SALL4, SOX17, and MAGEC2 and are negative for
SOX2, glypican 3, GATA-3, and CK5/6. Pax8 positivity is only inconsistently
identified in mediastinal seminomas. Contrary to their testicular counterparts,
mediastinal tumors show diffuse expression of low-molecular-weight cytokeratin in
up to 90% of cases and are commonly negative for TCL1. Although there is some
immunohistochemical overlap between testicular and mediastinal seminomas,
considerable differences also exist and should be acknowledged when dealing with 
these tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jan;31(1):72-6.

[Th2 differentiation features of Mycobacterium tuberculosis heat resistant
antigen-activated human <U+03B3>dT cells and the regulation of transcription factor
T-bet/GATA-3 on differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu A(1), Lv H(2), Zhang L(2), Hu J(2), Wang F(2), Li B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital, Bengbu Medical
College, Bengbu 233004; Department of Immunology, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 
233030, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital,
Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233004, China. (3)Department of Immunology, Bengbu
Medical College, Bengbu 233030; Anhui Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity,
Bengbu 233030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate Th2 differentiation features of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis heat resistant antigens (MTB-HAg)-activated human <U+03B3>dT cells and the 
regulation of transcription factor T-box expression in T cells (T-bet) and
GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) on differentiation.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with MTB-HAg 
to generate MTB-HAg-activated T cells (MTBAT) and expanded in the neutral
condition or Th2 polarizing condition. After restimulation for 6 hours with
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA, 10 ng/mL), ionomycin (500 ng/mL) and monensin
(2.5 µmol/L), intracellular cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4) of <U+03B3>dT cells and aßT cells
among MTBAT were detected by four-color fluorescence mAb staining combined with
flow cytometry. The highly purified <U+03B3>dT cells and CD4<U+207A> T cells were sorted by
flow cytometer from MTBAT that were cultured in neutral and Th2 polarizing
conditions for 28 days. The expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in purified <U+03B3>dT 
cells and CD4<U+207A> T cells were determined by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
technique.
RESULTS: <U+03B3>dT cells among MTBAT cultured in the neutral or Th2 polarizing
condition predominantly produced IFN-<U+03B3>, whereas the percentage of IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> aßT
cells significantly decreased in the Th2 polarizing condition as the culture time
went by. Compared with the neutral condition, Th0 type (IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> IL-4<U+207A>) <U+03B3>dT cells
significantly increased, and Th2 type (IFN-<U+03B3><U+207B> IL-4<U+207A>) aßT cells also significantly
increased in the Th2 polarizing condition. RT-PCR showed that mRNA expression of 
T-bet was still at a high level in <U+03B3>dT cells that were expanded in the Th2
polarizing condition, but at a low level in Th2 polarized CD4<U+207A> T cells. Moreover,
the mRNA expressions of GATA-3 in both Th2 polarized <U+03B3>dT cells and CD4<U+207A>T cells
were up-regulated.
CONCLUSION: In the Th2 polarizing condition, the majority of <U+03B3>dT cells in MTBAT
still remained Th1 profile, whereas the portion of <U+03B3>dT cells differentiated into 
Th0 type cells. Both transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3 failed to display a
fully cross-regulation function in Th2 polarized <U+03B3>dT cells.

PMID: 25575062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015 Jan 8;7(5). pii: a016337. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a016337.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells in health and disease.

Kim BS(1), Artis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110 Center for the Study of Itch, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110. (2)Weill Cornell
Medical College, Cornell University, New York, New York 10021.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) play critical roles in anti-helminth
immunity, airway epithelial repair, and metabolic homeostasis. Recently, these
cells have also emerged as key players in the development of allergic
inflammation at multiple barrier surfaces. ILC2s arise from common lymphoid
progenitors in the bone marrow, are dependent on the transcription factors RORa, 
GATA3, and TCF-1, and produce the type 2 cytokines interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5,
IL-9, and/or IL-13. The epithelial cell-derived cytokines IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP 
regulate the activation and effector functions of ILC2s, and recent studies
suggest that their responsiveness to these cytokines and other factors may depend
on their tissue environment. In this review, we focus on recent advances in our
understanding of the various factors that regulate ILC2 function in the context
of immunity, inflammation, and tissue repair across multiple organ systems.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 25573713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Nov;45(6):941-5.

[Regulation of Thl/Th2 cells by T cell-mediated transcription factor in rats with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CY(1), Liu XG, Wang CB, Ji QR, Fang L, Li Ze geng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine T box expressed in T cells (T bet), GATA binding
protein-3 (GATA 3), and retinoid-related orphan nuclear receptor gammat
(RORgammat) in rats with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Thirty rats were randomly divided into a control and a COPD group. The
COPD model was established through smoking and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) tracheal 
instillation. Pulmonary function of the rats was measured 28 d after the
establishment of the COPD model by a spirometer. Enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay was performed to detect serum <U+03B3> interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin (IL)-4, and
IL-17. The expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, and RORgammat protein in lung tissues
were determined by Western blot.
RESULTS: Compared with the controls, the COPD rats had decreased pulmonary
function and expression of serum IL-4, and increased INF-<U+03B3>, IL- 17, Th1/Th2,
T-bet, T bet /GATA-3, and RORgammat protein (P<0. 05). Forced expiratory volume
in 0. 3 seconds (FEV 0.3) was negatively correlated with INF <U+03B3> and T-bet/GATA-3. 
Forced vital capacity (FVC) was positively correlated with IL 4. FEV0.3/FVC was
negatively correlated with Thl/Th2, T-bet and T-bet/GATA-3. Peak expiratory flow 
(PEF) was negatively correlated with IL-17, T bet, and RORgammat (P<0. 05).
Thl/Th2 was positively correlated with T bet/GATA-3. IL-17 was positively
correlated with RORgammat. T bet/GATA-3 was positively correlated with RORgammat 
(P<0. 05).
CONCLUSION: Imbalanced regulation of T bet / GATA 3 and RORgammat on Th1/Th2 and 
Th17 cells is associated with the occurrence of COPD.

PMID: 25571720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cytokine. 2015 Mar;72(1):31-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.12.001. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Hepatocarcinoma cell-derived hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) induces
regulatory T cells.

Sun AM(1), Li CG(2), Zhang YQ(1), Lin SM(1), Niu HR(1), Shi YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiation Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. (2)Ultrasound Diagnosis, Nanfang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China. (3)Departments of Radiation
Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
Electronic address: yurshengshi@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: It is suggested that regulatory immune cells play a critical
role in cancer cell growth by facilitating cancer cells to escape from the immune
surveillance. The generation of the immune regulatory cells in cancer has not
been fully understood yet. This study aims to investigate the role of the
hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) in the generation of regulatory T cells
(Treg).
METHODS: CCL-9.1 cells (A mouse hepatoma cell line), were cultured. The
expression of HDGF in CCL-9.1 cells was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR and
Western blotting. The generation of Foxp3(+) T cells was assessed by cell culture
and flow cytometry. The immune suppressor function of the Foxp3(+) T cells on
CD8(+) T cell activities was assessed by the carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl
ester (CFSE)-dilution assay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The results showed that exposure to PolyIC markedly increased the
expression of HDGF in CCL-9.1 cells. Coculture of CCL-9.1 cells and CD4(+)
CD25(-) T cells in the presence of PolyIC generated the Forkhead box protein
(Foxp)3(+) T cells. The exposure to HDGF increased the expression of Foxp3 and
decreased the expression of GATA3 in CD4(+) T cells. After activation, the
Foxp3(+) T cells suppressed the CD8(+) T cell proliferation and the release of
the cytotoxic cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver cancer cell-derived HDGF can induce Foxp3(+) T cells; the
latter has the immune suppressor functions on CD8(+) T cell activities.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25569374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Jan 8;9(1):e3414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003414.
eCollection 2015.

Hyperreactive onchocerciasis is characterized by a combination of Th17-Th2 immune
responses and reduced regulatory T cells.

Katawa G(1), Layland LE(2), Debrah AY(3), von Horn C(2), Batsa L(4), Kwarteng
A(2), Arriens S(2), W Taylor D(5), Specht S(2), Hoerauf A(2), Adjobimey T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology (IMMIP),
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Advanced School of Medical Biology and
Food Technology (ESTBA), University of Lomé, Lomé, Togo. (2)Institute of Medical 
Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology (IMMIP), University Hospital Bonn,
Bonn, Germany. (3)Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research in Tropical Medicine
(KCCR), Kumasi, Ghana; Faculty of Allied Health Sciences and School of Medical
Sciences of Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
(4)Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research in Tropical Medicine (KCCR), Kumasi, 
Ghana. (5)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Clinical manifestations in onchocerciasis range from generalized onchocerciasis
(GEO) to the rare but severe hyperreactive (HO)/sowda form. Since disease
pathogenesis is associated with host inflammatory reactions, we investigated
whether Th17 responses could be related to aggravated pathology in HO. Using flow
cytometry, filarial-specific cytokine responses and PCR arrays, we compared the
immune cell profiles, including Th subsets, in individuals presenting the two
polar forms of infection and endemic normals (EN). In addition to elevated
frequencies of memory CD4+ T cells, individuals with HO showed accentuated Th17
and Th2 profiles but decreased CD4+CD25hiFoxp3+ regulatory T cells. These
profiles included increased IL-17A+, IL-4+, RORC2+ and GATA3+CD4+ T cell
populations. Flow cytometry data was further confirmed using a PCR array since
Th17-related genes (IL-17 family members, IL-6, IL-1ß and IL-22) and Th2-related 
(IL-4, IL-13, STAT6) genes were all significantly up-regulated in HO individuals.
In addition, stronger Onchocerca volvulus-specific Th2 responses, especially
IL-13, were observed in vitro in hyperreactive individuals when compared to GEO
or EN groups. This study provides initial evidence that elevated frequencies of
Th17 and Th2 cells form part of the immune network instigating the development of
severe onchocerciasis.

PMCID: PMC4288720
PMID: 25569210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. BMB Rep. 2015 Mar;48(3):178-83.

Heat shock protein X purified from Mycobacterium tuberculosis enhances the
efficacy of dendritic cells-based immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic
asthma.

Kim HY(1), Kang HK(2), Cho J(3), Jung ID(4), Yoon GY(4), Lee MG(5), Shin SJ(6),
Park WS(7), Park JH(8), Ryu SW(9), Park YM(4), You JC(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Medical Research Institute of Pusan National University Hospital, Pusan 602-739, 
Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Pusan
National University, Pusan 602-739, Korea. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Konkuk 
University Hospital, Seoul 380-701, Korea. (4)Department of Immunology, Lab of
Dendritic Cell Differentiation & Regulation, KU open innovation center and School
of Medicine, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701, Korea. (5)Department of
Physiology, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul 136-705, Korea.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Institute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.
(7)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University,
Chuncheon 200-701, Korea. (8)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine,
Konyang University, Daejeon 302-711, Korea. (9)Cell Signaling and Bioimaging
Laboratory, Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701,
Korea. (10)National Research Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701,
Korea.

Dendritic cells play an important role in determining whether naïve T cells
mature into either Th1 or Th2 cells. We determined whether heat-shock protein X
(HspX) purified from Mycobacterium tuberculosis regulates the Th1/Th2 immune
response in an ovalbumin (OVA)-induced murine model of asthma. HspX increased
interferon-gamma, IL-17A, -12 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß production
and T-bet gene expression but reduced IL-13 production and GATA-3 gene
expression. HspX also inhibited asthmatic reactions as demonstrated by an
increase in the number of eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid,
inflammatory cell infiltration in lung tissues, airway luminal narrowing, and
airway hyper-responsiveness. Furthermore, HspX enhanced OVA-induced decrease of
regulatory T cells in the mediastinal lymph nodes. This study provides evidence
that HspX plays critical roles in the amelioration of asthmatic inflammation in
mice. These findings provide new insights into the immunotherapeutic role of HspX
with respect to its effects on a murine model of asthma.

PMCID: PMC4453021
PMID: 25560695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Infect. 2015 May;70(5):445-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 Dec
31.

Transcriptomic correlates of organ failure extent in sepsis.

Almansa R(1), Heredia-Rodríguez M(2), Gomez-Sanchez E(3), Andaluz-Ojeda D(4),
Iglesias V(5), Rico L(6), Ortega A(7), Gomez-Pesquera E(8), Liu P(9), Aragón
M(10), Eiros JM(11), Jiménez-Sousa MÁ(12), Resino S(13), Gómez-Herreras I(14),
Bermejo-Martín JF(15), Tamayo E(16).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital
Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: ralmansa@saludcastillayleon.es. (2)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: maria_her_05@hotmail.com. (3)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en
Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de
Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
esthergzam@hotmail.com. (4)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos 
(BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida 
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Medicina Intensiva,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: davidandaluz78@yahoo.es. (5)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: viglesiasl@saludcastillayleon.es. (6)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: lrico@saludcastillayleon.es. (7)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: aortegaa@saludcastillayleon.es. (8)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: egp29@hotmail.com. (9)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: liupili@hotmail.com. (10)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: mrt.aragon@gmail.com. (11)Dpto de Microbiología, Universidad de
Valladolid, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 7, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic
address: jmeirosbouza@gmail.com. (12)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de Infección Viral e
Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: jimenezsousa@yahoo.es. (13)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica
en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de
Infección Viral e Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: salvador.resino@gmail.com. (14)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: jgomez012001@yahoo.es. (15)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados 
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la
Investigación, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
jfbermejo@saludcastillayleon.es. (16)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: tamayo@med.uva.es.

OBJECTIVES: Sepsis is characterised by the frequent presence of organ failure and
marked immunologic alterations. We studied the association between the extent of 
organ failure and the transcriptomic response of septic patients.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles in the blood of 74 surgical patients with
sepsis were compared with those of 30 surgical patients with no sepsis.
Differentially expressed genes were assessed for their correlation with the
sequential organ failure (SOFA) score.
RESULTS: The expression levels of a group of genes participating in the cell
cycle (HIST1H1C, CKS2, CCNA2, CDK1, CCNB2, CIT, CCNB1, AURKA, RAD51), neutrophil 
protease activity (ELANE, ADORA3, MPO, MMP8, CTSG), IL-1R and IL-18R response
correlated directly with SOFA and mortality. Genes involved in T cell (LCK, CD3G,
CD3D, ZAP70, ICOS, CD3E, CD28, IL2RB, CD8B, CD8A, CD40LG, IL23A, CCL5, SH2D1A,
ITK, CD247, TBX21, GATA3, CCR7, LEF1, STAT4) and NK cell immunity (CD244, KLRK1, 
KLRD1) were inversely associated with SOFA and mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The extent of organ failure in sepsis correlates directly with the
existence of imbalanced innate and adaptive responses at the transcriptomic
level. Quantification of the expression levels of the genes identified here could
contribute to the simultaneous assessment of disease severity and immunological
alterations in sepsis.

Copyright © 2014 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Clin Invest. 2015 Feb;125(2):571-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI75183. Epub 2015 Jan 2.

TLR4 genotype and environmental LPS mediate RSV bronchiolitis through Th2
polarization.

Caballero MT, Serra ME, Acosta PL, Marzec J, Gibbons L, Salim M, Rodriguez A,
Reynaldi A, Garcia A, Bado D, Buchholz UJ, Hijano DR, Coviello S, Newcomb D,
Bellabarba M, Ferolla FM, Libster R, Berenstein A, Siniawaski S, Blumetti V,
Echavarria M, Pinto L, Lawrence A, Ossorio MF, Grosman A, Mateu CG, Bayle C,
Dericco A, Pellegrini M, Igarza I, Repetto HA, Grimaldi LA, Gudapati P, Polack
NR, Althabe F, Shi M, Ferrero F, Bergel E, Stein RT, Peebles RS, Boothby M,
Kleeberger SR, Polack FP.

While 30%-70% of RSV-infected infants develop bronchiolitis, 2% require
hospitalization. It is not clear why disease severity differs among healthy,
full-term infants; however, virus titers, inflammation, and Th2 bias are proposed
explanations. While TLR4 is associated with these disease phenotypes, the role of
this receptor in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) pathogenesis is controversial.
Here, we evaluated the interaction between TLR4 and environmental factors in RSV 
disease and defined the immune mediators associated with severe illness. Two
independent populations of infants with RSV bronchiolitis revealed that the
severity of RSV infection is determined by the TLR4 genotype of the individual
and by environmental exposure to LPS. RSV-infected infants with severe disease
exhibited a high GATA3/T-bet ratio, which manifested as a high IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> ratio
in respiratory secretions. The IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> ratio present in infants with severe
RSV is indicative of Th2 polarization. Murine models of RSV infection confirmed
that LPS exposure, Tlr4 genotype, and Th2 polarization influence disease
phenotypes. Together, the results of this study identify environmental and
genetic factors that influence RSV pathogenesis and reveal that a high IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3>
ratio is associated with severe disease. Moreover, these molecules should be
explored as potential targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4319428
PMID: 25555213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Med Sci. 2015 Jan 1;12(1):7-16. doi: 10.7150/ijms.8352. eCollection 2015.

The expression levels of transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in 
peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL) of patients with liver cancer and their
significance.

Lin ZW(1), Wu LX(2), Xie Y(1), Ou X(1), Tian PK(1), Liu XP(1), Min J(3), Wang
J(3), Chen RF(3), Chen YJ(3), Liu C(3), Ye H(3), Ou QJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of HepatobiliaryLaparoscope-Surgery, Peking University Shenzhen 
Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518036, China; (2)2. Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, The Central People Hospital of Huizhou City, Huizhou, Guangdong, China
516001; (3)3. Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery of Sun Yat-Sen Memorial
Hospital Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of transcriptional factors (TFs) T-bet,
GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to evaluate the correlation between the
imbalances of Th1/Th2, Th17/Treg at the expression levels and liver cancer
Methods: The peripheral venous blood was drawn from 20 HCC-patients (HCC-group)
and 20 health participants (C-group). The expression levels of Th1, Th2 and Th17 
and the major Treg-specific TFs T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in the PBMC were
measured with quantitative real-time PCR(RT-qPCR).
RESULTS: The mRNA level of Th1-specific TF T-bet in HCC-group was significantly
lower than that of C-group (52.34±34.07 VS 104.01±56.00, P<0.01); the mRNA level 
of Th2-specifc TF, GATA-3, in HCC group was significantly higher than that in
C-group (1.38±1.15 VS 0.58±0.65, P<0.05) and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA ratio was
significantly lower in HCC-group than in C-group (86.01±116.71 VS 461.88±708.81, 
P<0.05). The mRNA level of Th17-specific TF ROR<U+03B3>t in HCC-group was significantly 
higher than that of C-group (72.32±32.82 VS 33.07±22.86, P<0.01). Treg-specific
TF FOXP3 mRNA level was significant higher in HCC-group than in C-group
(3.17±1.59 VS 1.39±1.13, P<0.01) CONCLUSION: T-bet mRNA level was reduced whereas
GATA-3 mRNA level was increased and T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was significantly reduced 
in PBMC, indicating that Th1/Th2 ratio was of imbalance at TF levels in PBMC of
HCC, displaying Th2 thrift phenomena. The mRNA levels of ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in PBMC 
of HCC were significantly increased, indicating the existence of a predominant
phenomenon of Th17- and Treg-expressing PBMC in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4278870
PMID: 25552913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Feb;19(1):6-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2014.12.001.
Epub 2014 Dec 5.

GATA3 expression in morphologic subtypes of breast carcinoma: a comparison with
gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 and mammaglobin.

Wendroth SM(1), Mentrikoski MJ(1), Wick MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, VA. Electronic address: mrw9c@virginia.edu.

GATA3 is a transcription factor, which is involved in the growth and
differentiation of several human tissues. Immunohistochemical staining for this
marker has proven to be useful in recognizing a number of tumors, most notably
those in the urinary tract and breasts. To date, no study has specifically
assessed the distribution of GATA3 among different histomorphologic subtypes of
breast carcinoma. The surgical pathology archive at our institution was searched,
to retrieve cases of breast carcinomas of the following microscopic types-ductal,
lobular, mucinous, metaplastic, medullary, apocrine, signet-ring cell, and
micropapillary. Tissue microarrays were created, with four 0.6-mm punch specimens
from each case. The tissue microarrays were cut at a 5-µm thickness and stained
with monoclonal antibodies to GATA3 (Biocare Medical Inc, Concord, CA),
mammaglobin (Dako, Carpinteria, CA), and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15
(Dako). Tumors were considered to be positive for those markers if more than 5%
of the cells were labeled. Of 55 ductal adenocarcinomas, 51 (92.7%) expressed
GATA3. All 4 GATA3-negative tumors were Nottingham grade III lesions that were
also nonreactive for estrogen receptor protein. GATA3 was present in 28 (96.6%)
of 29 lobular adenocarcinomas, 10 (90.9%) of 11 apocrine adenocarcinomas, 10
(83.3%) of 12 medullary carcinomas, 5 (55.5%) of 9 metaplastic carcinomas, and 1 
of 2 signet-ring cell carcinomas. Mucinous carcinomas (23 cases) and
micropapillary carcinomas (12 cases) uniformly and strongly labeled for GATA3.
GATA3 equaled or surpassed the sensitivity of mammaglobin and gross cystic
disease fluid protein 15 in all histologic subgroups of breast cancer in the
study. Although most ductal adenocarcinomas were labeled for GATA3, it was absent
in high-grade tumors that also lacked estrogen receptor protein. Favorable
prognosis types of breast carcinoma (eg, mucinous carcinoma) and aggressive
variants such as micropapillary carcinoma were equally reactive for this marker. 
A proportion of medullary and metaplastic carcinomas was GATA3 negative (17% and 
44%, respectively). Thus, those pathologic entities cannot be excluded
diagnostically by an absence of GATA3 immunoreactivity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25544392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan 8;96(1):5-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.009. Epub 2014
Dec 18.

Fine-scale mapping of the 5q11.2 breast cancer locus reveals at least three
independent risk variants regulating MAP3K1.

Glubb DM, Maranian MJ, Michailidou K, Pooley KA, Meyer KB, Kar S, Carlebur S,
O'Reilly M, Betts JA, Hillman KM, Kaufmann S, Beesley J, Canisius S, Hopper JL,
Southey MC, Tsimiklis H, Apicella C, Schmidt MK, Broeks A, Hogervorst FB, van der
Schoot CE, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P, Fasching
PA, Ruebner M, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Peto J, dos-Santos-Silva I, Fletcher O,
Johnson N, Pharoah PD, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Dennis J, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin 
MJ, Miller N, Burwinkel B, Marme F, Yang R, Surowy H, Guénel P, Truong T,
Menegaux F, Sanchez M, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H,
González-Neira A, Benitez J, Zamora MP, Arias Perez JI, Anton-Culver H, Neuhausen
SL, Brenner H, Dieffenbach AK, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK,
Brauch H, Ko YD, Brüning T; GENICA Network, Nevanlinna H, Muranen TA, Aittomäki
K, Blomqvist C, Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Tanaka H, Dörk T, Bogdanova NV, Helbig 
S, Lindblom A, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM;
kConFab Investigators, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, Lambrechts D,
Zhao H, Weltens C, van Limbergen E, Chang-Claude J, Flesch-Janys D, Rudolph A,
Seibold P, Radice P, Peterlongo P, Barile M, Capra F, Couch FJ, Olson JE,
Hallberg E, Vachon C, Giles GG, Milne RL, McLean C, Haiman CA, Henderson BE,
Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Simard J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Teo SH,
Yip CH, See MH, Cornes B, Cheng CY, Ikram MK, Kristensen V; Norwegian Breast
Cancer Study, Zheng W, Halverson SL, Shrubsole M, Long J, Winqvist R, Pylkäs K,
Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Kauppila S, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G, Tchatchou S,
Devilee P, Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve C, Van Asperen CJ, García-Closas M, Figueroa J,
Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Czene K, Klevebring D, Darabi H, Eriksson M, Hooning MJ,
Hollestelle A, Martens JW, Collée JM, Hall P, Li J, Humphreys K, Shu XO, Lu W,
Gao YT, Cai H, Cox A, Cross SS, Reed MW, Blot W, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Shah M,
Ghoussaini M, Kang D, Choi JY, Park SK, Noh DY, Hartman M, Miao H, Lim WY, Tang
A, Hamann U, Torres D, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska K, Durda K, Sangrajrang
S, Gaborieau V, Brennan P, McKay J, Olswold C, Slager S, Toland AE, Yannoukakos
D, Shen CY, Wu PE, Yu JC, Hou MF, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Jones M, Pita G,
Alonso MR, Álvarez N, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Luccarini C,
Baynes C, Ahmed S, Healey CS, Brown MA, Ponder BA, Chenevix-Trench G, Thompson
DJ, Edwards SL, Easton DF, Dunning AM, French JD.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed SNP rs889312 on 5q11.2 to
be associated with breast cancer risk in women of European ancestry. In an
attempt to identify the biologically relevant variants, we analyzed 909 genetic
variants across 5q11.2 in 103,991 breast cancer individuals and control
individuals from 52 studies in the Breast Cancer Association Consortium. Multiple
logistic regression analyses identified three independent risk signals: the
strongest associations were with 15 correlated variants (iCHAV1), where the minor
allele of the best candidate, rs62355902, associated with significantly increased
risks of both estrogen-receptor-positive (ER(+): odds ratio [OR] = 1.24, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.21-1.27, ptrend = 5.7 × 10(-44)) and
estrogen-receptor-negative (ER(-): OR = 1.10, 95% CI = 1.05-1.15, ptrend = 3.0 × 
10(-4)) tumors. After adjustment for rs62355902, we found evidence of association
of a further 173 variants (iCHAV2) containing three subsets with a range of
effects (the strongest was rs113317823 [pcond = 1.61 × 10(-5)]) and five variants
composing iCHAV3 (lead rs11949391; ER(+): OR = 0.90, 95% CI = 0.87-0.93, pcond = 
1.4 × 10(-4)). Twenty-six percent of the prioritized candidate variants coincided
with four putative regulatory elements that interact with the MAP3K1 promoter
through chromatin looping and affect MAP3K1 promoter activity. Functional
analysis indicated that the cancer risk alleles of four candidates (rs74345699
and rs62355900 [iCHAV1], rs16886397 [iCHAV2a], and rs17432750 [iCHAV3]) increased
MAP3K1 transcriptional activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed 
diminished GATA3 binding to the minor (cancer-protective) allele of rs17432750,
indicating a mechanism for its action. We propose that the cancer risk alleles
act to increase MAP3K1 expression in vivo and might promote breast cancer cell
survival.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4289692
PMID: 25529635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 19;9(12):e115554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115554.
eCollection 2014.

Cross-fostering increases TH1/TH2 expression in a prenatal dexamethasone exposure
rat model.

Kuo HC(1), Guo MM(1), Liu SF(2), Chen CC(1), Sheen JM(1), Yu HR(1), Tiao MM(1),
Tain YL(1), Huang LT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan; Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Therapy and Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital, and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure has been reported to increase allergy
potential in childhood possibly by interference with normal immunological
development in utero. This study investigated the effects of prenatal
dexamethasone on T helper cell immune responses in a rat model.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either dexamethasone 0.1 mg/kg/day or normal
saline from gestational day 14-21. Off-springs were cared for by their biological
mother, or cross-fostered by the opposing group. Spleen and blood samples were
collected at post-natal day 7 and 120 and tested for mRNA expression and plasma
cytokine levels of Th1/Th2/Th17 immune response.
RESULTS: Both Th1 (T-bet) and Th2 (GATA-3) mRNA expression were shown to have a
significant increase in the prenatal dexamethasone exposure group at day 120
(p<0.05). The plasma levels for Th1 (IFN<U+03B3> and IL-2) and Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, IL-13)
were found to have no significant differences between the two group (p>0.05). The
mRNA expression of Th17 (ROR<U+03B3>t) showed a significant decrease at post-natal day
120 as well as the plasma level of IL-17A at day 7 (11.21±1.67 vs. 6.23±1.06
pg/ml, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02). Cross-fostering by a dexamethasone exposed mother resulted in a
significant increase in Th1/Th2 mRNA expression (p<0.05) and decrease of Th17.
CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure increased Th1, Th2 and decreased
Th17 expression. Cross-fostering by a dexamethasone exposed mother results in
more prominent increase of Th1 and Th2 expression.

PMCID: PMC4272273
PMID: 25526616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(28):e309. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000309.

DNA methylation profile of genes involved in inflammation and autoimmunity in
inflammatory bowel disease.

Karatzas PS(1), Mantzaris GJ, Safioleas M, Gazouli M.

Author information: 
(1)From the 1st Department of Gastroenterology, Evaggelismos Hospital, Athens,
Greece (PSK, GJM); 4th Department of Surgery, Attikon University Hospital,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece (MS); and Department of Basic Medical
Sciences, Laboratory of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece (MG).

The contribution of epigenetic alterations to disease pathogenesis is emerging as
a research priority. In this study, we aimed to seek DNA methylation changes in
peripheral blood and tissue biopsies from patients with inflammatory bowel
disease. The promoter methylation status of genes involved in inflammation and
autoimmunity was profiled using the Human Inflammatory Response and Autoimmunity 
EpiTect Methyl II Signature PCR Array profiles. Methylation was considered to be 
hypermethylated if >20% according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The
microarrays were validated with Quantitative Real-time PCR. Regarding Crohn
disease (CD) no gene appeared hypermethylated compared to healthy controls. In
ulcerative colitis (UC) 5 genes (CXCL14, CXCL5, GATA3, IL17C, and IL4R) were
hypermethylated compared to healthy controls. Some of the examined genes show
different methylation patterns between CD and UC. Concerning tissue samples we
found that all hypermethylated genes appear the same methylation pattern and
confirmed a moderate-strong correlation between methylation levels in colon
biopsies and peripheral blood (Pearson coefficients r=0.089-0.779, and
r=0.023-0.353, respectively). The epigenetic changes observed in this study
indicate that CD and UC exhibit specific DNA methylation signatures with
potential clinical applications in IBD non-invasive diagnosis and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4603097
PMID: 25526479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(28):e192. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000192.

PROX1 gene is differentially expressed in oral cancer and reduces cellular
proliferation.

Rodrigues MF(1), de Oliveira Rodini C, de Aquino Xavier FC, Paiva KB, Severino P,
Moyses RA, López RM, DeCicco R, Rocha LA, Carvalho MB, Tajara EH, Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Estomatology (MFSDR, LAR, FDN), School of Dentistry;
Department of Biochemistry (KBP), Chemistry Institute; Department of Head and
Neck Surgery (RAM), School of Medicine; Department of Epidemiology (RML), Public 
Health; Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology (EHT), Institute of
Biosciences, University of São Paulo; Albert Einstein Research and Education
Institute (PS), Albert Einstein Israelita Hospital, Center for Experimental
Research; Department of Head and Neck Surgery (RDC), Arnaldo Vieira de Carvalho
Cancer Institute; Department of Head and Neck Surgery (MBC), Heliopolis Hospital 
Complex, São Paulo; Department of Estomatology (FCdAX), School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador; Department of Histology (CdOR), School of 
Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru; and Department of Molecular Biology
(EHT), School of Medicine, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.

Homeobox genes are a family of transcription factors that play a pivotal role in 
embryogenesis. Prospero homeobox 1 (PROX1) has been shown to function as a tumor 
suppressor gene or oncogene in various types of cancer, including oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC). We have previously identified PROX1 as a downregulated
gene in OSCC. The aim of this study is to clarify the underlying mechanism by
which PROX1 regulates tumorigenicity of OSCC cells. PROX1 mRNA and protein
expression levels were first investigated in 40 samples of OSCC and in nontumor
margins. Methylation and amplification analysis was also performed to assess the 
epigenetic and genetic mechanisms involved in controlling PROX1 expression. OSCC 
cell line SCC9 was also transfected to stably express the PROX1 gene. Next,
SCC9-PROX1-overexpressing cells and controls were subjected to proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion assays in vitro. OSCC samples
showed reduced PROX1 expression levels compared with nontumor margins. PROX1
amplification was associated with better overall survival. PROX1 overexpression
reduces cell proliferation and downregulates cyclin D1. PROX1-overexpressing
cells also exhibited reduced CK18 and CK19 expression and transcriptionally
altered the expression of WISP3, GATA3, NOTCH1, and E2F1. Our results suggest
that PROX1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene in oral carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4603077
PMID: 25526434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2014 Dec;11 Suppl 5:S263-70. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201403-097AW.

Type-2 innate lymphoid cells in asthma and allergy.

McKenzie AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Type-2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) belong to an expanding family of innate
lymphocytes that provide a potent source of immune effector cytokines at the
initiation of immune responses. ILC2 arise, under the control of the
transcription factors RORa and GATA3, from lymphoid progenitors in the bone
marrow, to secrete type-2 cytokines including IL-5 and IL-13. Using experimental 
models, ILC2 have been implicated in allergic diseases, such as asthma and atopic
dermatitis, but also in metabolic homeostasis. Furthermore, recent reports have
indicated that ILC2 not only play roles at the initiation of type-2 immunity but 
can also contribute to chronic pathology, such as fibrosis, and can impact on the
priming of the adaptive T-cell response. The identification of ILC2 in patients
with allergic dermatitis and allergic rhinitis indicates that these cells may
represent new therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4298972
PMID: 25525730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Dyn. 2015 Feb;244(2):157-67. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24241. Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Collective cell migration of the nephric duct requires FGF signaling.

Attia L(1), Schneider J, Yelin R, Schultheiss TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: During the course of development, the vertebrate nephric duct (ND)
extends and migrates from the place of its initial formation, adjacent to the
anterior somites, until it inserts into the bladder or cloaca in the posterior
region of the embryo. The molecular mechanisms that guide ND migration are poorly
understood.
RESULTS: A novel Gata3-enhancer-Gfp-based chick embryo live imaging system was
developed that permits documentation of ND migration at the individual cell level
for the first time. FGF Receptors and FGF response genes are expressed in the ND,
and FGF ligands are expressed in surrounding tissues. FGF receptor inhibition
blocked nephric duct migration. Individual inhibitors of the Erk, p38, or Jnk
pathways did not affect duct migration, but inhibition of all three pathways
together did inhibit migration of the duct. A localized source of FGF8 placed
adjacent to the nephric duct did not affect the duct migration path.
CONCLUSIONS: FGF signaling acts as a "motor" that is required for duct migration,
but other signals are needed to determine the directionality of the duct
migration pathway. Developmental Dynamics 244:157-167, 2015. © 2014 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25516335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Immunol Methods. 2015 Feb;417:45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2014.12.005. Epub 2014 
Dec 13.

Potentiation of antigen-specific antibody production by peptides derived from
Ag85B of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Kato M(1), Hanyu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Peak Co., Ltd., 584-70 Shimonojo, Takasaki 370-0854, Japan. (2)Molecular
Composite Medicine Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi,
Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan. Electronic address: y.hanyu@aist.go.jp.

To generate high-titer monoclonal antibodies, strong immuno-stimulation must be
used for eliciting an intense cellular immune response. Here, we report that
antigen-specific antibody production was potentiated by Peptide-25 derived from
Ag85B of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and that the production of antigen-specific 
IgG1 in particular was markedly potentiated; specifically, this occurred because 
the use of Peptide-25 resulted in an increase in the number of antigen-specific
antibody-producing cells. We studied the activation of T cells by the peptide by 
examining gene expression. The observed expression pattern of GATA-3 and T-bet
suggests that the peptide modulates the Th1/Th2 balance during immunization. This
potentiation, which was remarkably high in BALB/c mice, could be applied in the
immunization performed for monoclonal antibody production in vivo and in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25514091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Yonsei Med J. 2015 Jan;56(1):300-3. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2015.56.1.300.

The first Korean case of HDR syndrome confirmed by clinical and molecular
investigation.

Cheon CK(1), Kim GH(2), Yoo HW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Children's Hospital, Pusan
National University School of Medicine, Yangsan, Korea.; Research Institute for
Convergence of Biomedical Science and Technology, Pusan National University
Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, Korea. chongkun72@hanmail.net. (2)Medical Genetics
Clinic and Laboratory, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome is a rare
condition inherited as autosomal dominant trait and characterized by
hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia. HDR syndrome is 
caused by haploinsufficiency of the GATA3 gene located on chromosome 10p15. Here,
we report the case of a 32-day-old Korean male with HDR syndrome. He was
presented due to repeated seizures over previous 3 days. The patient was born
after 40 weeks of gestation with birth weight of 2930 g, and was the first-born
baby of healthy Korean parents. Hypoparathyroidism was first noticed due to
seizure. A multicystic left dysplastic kidney and vesicoureteral reflux were
detected by ultrasound after birth. Auditory brainstem response (ABR) testing
revealed that the patient had moderate sensorineural deafness, with hearing
losses of 80 dB at the mid and higher frequencies for both ears. Echocardiography
finding revealed secundum atrial septal deftect. Based on biochemical results and
clinical findings, a presumptive diagnosis of HDR syndrome was made. GATA3
mutation analysis identified a heterozygous deletion, c.153del (p.Phe51Leufs*144)
in exon 1 causing a frameshift mutation, which is a novel de novo mutation.
Therefore, we suggest that HDR syndrome should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis in symptomatic or asymptomatic patients with hypoparathyroidism, and
that renal ultrasound or ABR testing be performed to prevent a missed diagnosis. 
This is the first report on Korean patient with confirmed HDR syndrome with novel
mutation.

PMCID: PMC4276771
PMID: 25510779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 Nov-Dec;47(6):1004-10.

[Regulation of the genes expression of CD4+ T-lymphocytes differentiation
transcription factors by galectin-3 in vitro].

[Article in Russian]

Vasil'eva OA, Iakushina VD, Riazantseva NV, Novitskii VV, Tashireva LA, Starikova
EG, Zima AP, Prokhorenko TS, Krasnova TIu, Nebesnaia IS.

Now a number of CD4+ T-lymphocytes, known as Th1, Th2, Treg and Th17, is
currently identified and well- studied. The methods basing on the targeted
regulation of differentiation process of the Th-lymphocytes that carry out the
immune response polarization attract an attention of scientists dealing with a
correction of immune-mediated. In the present study, endogenous
beta-galactoside-binding protein of the lectin family, galectin-3, was
investigated as a regulator of T-cell homeostasis. A galectin-3 is known to be
actively produced by tumor cells in malignant transformation and able to
influence the processes of signal transduction, cell-cell cooperation and the
implementation of programmed death. As cell differentiation processes are
directly connected with the regulation of gene expression, we investigated the
effect of recombinant galectin-3 on expression of mRNA of transcription.factors, 
which guide the differentiation of CD4+ lymphocytes. The study was performed on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy individuals. The gene expression
levels were evaluated by a real-time PCR. In the experiments in vitro, it has
been first found the recombinant galectin-3 (0.5 mg/mL) up-regulating the
expression of transcription factors Gata-3 and Rorc mRNAs and down-regulating the
mRNA expression of transcription factors T-bet and FoxP3. Up to a concentration
of 1 mg/mL recombinant galectin-3 stimulates Th-cells by dose-dependent manner,
whereas at higher concentrations stimulating effect weakens, and inhibiting
action starts prevailing. Thus, one can suppose that galectin-3 through
regulation of lymphocytes differentiation promote development of allergic,
autoimmune and neoplastic diseases that allows us to consider the galectin-3 as
a.potential target for therapy of these diseases.

PMID: 25509862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Nat Immunol. 2015 Feb;16(2):197-206. doi: 10.1038/ni.3053. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Dynamic expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 by regulatory T
cells maintains immunotolerance.

Yu F(1), Sharma S(1), Edwards J(1), Feigenbaum L(2), Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)Laboratory
Animal Sciences Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) can express the transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3, but the function of this expression and whether such cells represent
stable subsets is still unknown. By using various reporter tools, we found that
the expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in Treg cells was dynamically influenced by
the cytokine environment. Treg cell-specific deletion of the gene encoding either
T-bet (Tbx21) or GATA-3 (Gata3) alone did not result in loss of Treg cell
function; however, mice with combined deficiency in both genes in Treg cells
developed severe autoimmune-like diseases. Loss of Treg cell function correlated 
with upregulation of expression of the transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>t and reduced
expression of the transcription factor Foxp3. Thus, in the steady state,
activated Treg cells transiently upregulated either T-bet or GATA-3 to maintain T
cell homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4297509
PMID: 25501630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 9;9(12):e113485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113485.
eCollection 2014.

Ets and GATA transcription factors play a critical role in PMA-mediated
repression of the ckß promoter via the protein kinase C signaling pathway.

Kuan CS(1), Yee YH(1), See Too WC(1), Few LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 16150
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Choline kinase is the most upstream enzyme in the CDP-choline
pathway. It catalyzes the phosphorylation of choline to phosphorylcholine in the 
presence of ATP and Mg2+ during the biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine, the
major phospholipid in eukaryotic cell membranes. In humans, choline kinase (CK)
is encoded by two separate genes, cka and ckß, which produce three isoforms,
CKa1, CKa2, and CKß. Previous studies have associated ckß with muscle
development; however, the molecular mechanism underlying the transcriptional
regulation of ckß has never been elucidated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this report, the distal promoter region of the
ckß gene was characterized. Mutational analysis of the promoter sequence and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that Ets and GATA
transcription factors were essential for the repression of ckß promoter activity.
Supershift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays further identified
that GATA3 but not GATA2 was bound to the GATA site of ckß promoter. In addition,
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) decreased ckß promoter activity through Ets
and GATA elements. PMA also decreased the ckß mRNA and protein levels about 12
hours after the promoter activity was down-regulated. EMSA further revealed that 
PMA treatment increased the binding of both Ets and GATA transcription factors to
their respective DNA elements. The PMA-mediated repressive effect was abolished
by chronic PMA treatment and by treatment with the PKC inhibitor PKC412, but not 
the PKC inhibitor Go 6983, suggesting PKCe or PKC<U+03B7> as the PKC isozyme involved in
the PMA-mediated repression of ckß promoter. Further confirmation by using PKC
isozyme specific inhibitors identified PKCe as the isozyme that mediated the PMA 
repression of ckß promoter.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: These results demonstrate the participation of the PKC
signaling pathway in the regulation of ckß gene transcription by Ets and GATA
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4260826
PMID: 25490397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Brain Behav Immun. 2015 Mar;45:219-32. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.11.016. Epub 2014 
Dec 5.

Immunoendocrine dysbalance during uncontrolled T. cruzi infection is associated
with the acquisition of a Th-1-like phenotype by Foxp3(+) T cells.

González FB(1), Villar SR(1), Fernández Bussy R(1), Martin GH(2), Pérol L(3),
Manarin R(1), Spinelli SV(1), Pilon C(4), Cohen JL(5), Bottasso OA(1), Piaggio
E(6), Pérez AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)IDICER-CONICET, Institute of Clinical and Experimental Immunology of Rosario
and Immunology Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, National University of
Rosario, Argentina. (2)INSERM U955, Equipe 21, Créteil, France. (3)INSERM U932,
26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; Institut Curie, Section Recherche, 26 rue
d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. (4)Université Paris-Est, UMR_S955, UPEC, Créteil,
France. (5)INSERM U955, Equipe 21, Créteil, France; Université Paris-Est,
UMR_S955, UPEC, Créteil, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Henri-Mondor - A. Chenevier,
CIC-BT-504, Créteil, France. (6)INSERM U932, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France;
Institut Curie, Section Recherche, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; INSERM
Center of Clinical Investigation (CBT507 IGR-Curie), 75005 Paris, France.
Electronic address: eliane.piaggio@curie.fr. (7)IDICER-CONICET, Institute of
Clinical and Experimental Immunology of Rosario and Immunology Institute, Faculty
of Medical Sciences, National University of Rosario, Argentina. Electronic
address: perez_anarosa@yahoo.com.ar.

We previously showed that Trypanosomacruzi infection in C57BL/6 mice results in a
lethal infection linked to unbalanced pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators
production. Here, we examined the dynamics of CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) 
cells within this inflammatory and highly Th1-polarized environment. Treg cells
showed a reduced proliferation rate and their frequency is progressively reduced 
along infection compared to effector T (Teff) cells. Also, a higher fraction of
Treg cells showed a naïve phenotype, meanwhile Teff cells were mostly of the
effector memory type. T. cruzi infection was associated with the production of
pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, notably IL-27p28, and with the induction of
T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> expression in Treg cells. Furthermore, endogenous glucocorticoids
released in response to T. cruzi-driven immune activation were crucial to sustain
the Treg/Teff cell balance. Notably, IL-2 plus dexamethasone combined treatment
before infection was associated with increased Treg cell proliferation and
expression of GATA-3, IL-4 and IL-10, and increased mice survival time. Overall, 
our results indicate that therapies aimed at specifically boosting Treg cells,
which during T. cruzi infection are overwhelmed by the effector immune response, 
represent new opportunities for the treatment of Chagas disease, which is
actually only based on parasite-targeted chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25483139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 6;16(6):491. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0491-x.

Progesterone receptor activation downregulates GATA3 by transcriptional
repression and increased protein turnover promoting breast tumor growth.

Izzo F(1), Mercogliano F(2), Venturutti L(3), Tkach M(4), Inurrigarro G(5),
Schillaci R(6), Cerchietti L(7), Elizalde PV(8), Proietti CJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de
Obligado 2490, Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. fizzo13@gmail.com. (2)Instituto
de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490,
Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. florenciamercogliano@gmail.com. (3)Instituto
de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490,
Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. leaventurutti@gmail.com. (4)Instituto de
Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490,
Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. mercedestkach@gmail.com. (5)Sanatorio Mater
Dei, Buenos Aires, Argentina. gloriainurri@yahoo.com.ar. (6)Instituto de Biología
y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490, Buenos Aires, 
1428 ADN, Argentina. rschillaci@ibyme.conicet.gov.ar. (7)Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, 10021, USA. lec2010@med.cornell.edu. (8)Instituto de
Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490,
Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. patriciaelizalde@ibyme.conicet.gov.ar.
(9)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME), CONICET, Vuelta de
Obligado 2490, Buenos Aires, 1428 ADN, Argentina. cproietti@ibyme.conicet.gov.ar.

INTRODUCTION: The transcription factor GATA3 is involved in mammary gland
development and is crucial for the maintenance of the differentiated status of
luminal epithelial cells. The role of GATA3 in breast cancer as a tumor
suppressor has been established, although insights into the mechanism of GATA3
expression loss are still required.
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were conducted to study progestin
modulation of recruitment of transcription factors to GATA3 promoter. We
performed western blot and reverse RT-qPCR experiments to explore progestin
regulation of GATA3 protein and mRNA expression respectively. Confocal microscopy
and in vitro phosphorylation studies were conducted to examine progestin capacity
to induce GATA3 serine phosphorylation in its 308 residue. GATA3 participation in
progestin-induced breast cancer growth was addressed in in vitro proliferation
and in vivo tumor growth experiments.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that progestin-activated progesterone
receptor (PR) reduces GATA3 expression through regulation at the transcriptional 
and post-translational levels in breast cancer cells. In the former mechanism,
the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is co-recruited with
activated PR to a putative progesterone response element in the GATA3 proximal
promoter, increasing H3K27me3 levels and inducing chromatin compaction, resulting
in decreased GATA3 mRNA levels. This transcriptional regulation is coupled with
increased GATA3 protein turnover through progestin-induced GATA3 phosphorylation 
at serine 308 followed by 26S proteasome-mediated degradation. Both molecular
mechanisms converge to accomplish decreased GATA3 expression levels in breast
cancer cells upon PR activation. In addition, we demonstrated that decreased
GATA3 levels are required for progestin-induced upregulation of cyclin A2, which 
mediates the G1 to S phase transition of the cell cycle and was reported to be
associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Finally, we showed that
downregulation of GATA3 is required for progestin stimulation of both in vitro
cell proliferation and in vivo tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we reveal that progestin-induced PR activation
leads to loss of GATA3 expression in breast cancer cells through transcriptional 
and post-translational regulation. Importantly, we demonstrate that GATA3
downregulation is required for progestin-induced upregulation of cyclin A2 and
for progestin-induced in vitro and in vivo breast cancer cell growth.

PMCID: PMC4303201
PMID: 25479686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 2015 Jan 22;125(4):680-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-595744. Epub 2014 Dec
2.

A genome-wide association study of susceptibility to acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in adolescents and young adults.

Perez-Andreu V(1), Roberts KG(2), Xu H(3), Smith C(1), Zhang H(1), Yang W(1),
Harvey RC(4), Payne-Turner D(2), Devidas M(5), Cheng IM(6), Carroll WL(7),
Heerema NA(8), Carroll AJ(9), Raetz EA(10), Gastier-Foster JM(11), Marcucci
G(12), Bloomfield CD(12), Mrózek K(12), Kohlschmidt J(13), Stock W(14), Kornblau 
SM(15), Konopleva M(16), Paietta E(17), Rowe JM(18), Luger SM(19), Tallman
MS(20), Dean M(21), Burchard EG(22), Torgerson DG(22), Yue F(23), Wang Y(23), Pui
CH(24), Jeha S(24), Relling MV(1), Evans WE(1), Gerhard DS(25), Loh ML(26),
Willman CL(6), Hunger SP(27), Mullighan CG(2), Yang JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and. (2)Department of Pathology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; (3)Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China
Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China;
(4)University of New Mexico Cancer Center, Albuquerque, NM; (5)Department of
Biostatistics, Colleges of Medicine, Public Health & Health Professions,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL; (6)Cancer Research and Treatment Center, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM; (7)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer
Center, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY; (8)Department
of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH;
(9)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL;
(10)Huntsman Cancer Institute, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT;
(11)The Ohio State University, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH;
(12)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH;
(13)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH;
Alliance of Clinical Trials in Oncology Statistics and Data Center, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester; (14)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL; (15)Section of Molecular Hematology & Therapy,
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX; (16)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; 
(17)Department of Medicine (Oncology), Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Yeshiva University, New York, NY; (18)Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel;
(19)Hematologic Malignancies Program, Hematology-Oncology Division, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; (20)Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; (21)Laboratory of
Experimental Immunology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD; (22)Department
of Bioengineering & Therapeutic Science and Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; (23)Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey,
PA; (24)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
TN; (25)Office of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD;
(26)Department of Pediatrics and the Helen Diller Family Cancer Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; and. (27)School of
Medicine and Children's Hospital, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in adolescents and young adults (AYA) is
characterized by distinct presenting features and inferior prognosis compared
with pediatric ALL. We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to
comprehensively identify inherited genetic variants associated with
susceptibility to AYA ALL. In the discovery GWAS, we compared genotype frequency 
at 635<U+2009>297 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 308 AYA ALL cases and 6,661 
non-ALL controls by using a logistic regression model with genetic ancestry as a 
covariate. SNPs that reached P = 5 × 10(-8) in GWAS were tested in an independent
cohort of 162 AYA ALL cases and 5,755 non-ALL controls. We identified a single
genome-wide significant susceptibility locus in GATA3: rs3824662, odds ratio
(OR), 1.77 (P = 2.8 × 10(-10)) and rs3781093, OR, 1.73 (P = 3.2 × 10(-9)). These 
findings were validated in the replication cohort. The risk allele at rs3824662
was most frequent in Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like ALL but also conferred
susceptibility to non-Ph-like ALL in AYAs. In 1,827 non-selected ALL cases, the
risk allele frequency at this SNP was positively correlated with age at diagnosis
(P = 6.29 × 10(-11)). Our results from this first GWAS of AYA ALL susceptibility 
point to unique biology underlying leukemogenesis and potentially distinct
disease etiology by age group.

PMCID: PMC4304112
PMID: 25468567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neuroimmunol. 2014 Dec 15;277(1-2):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.10.004. 
Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Pregnancy level of estrogen attenuates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
in both ovariectomized and pregnant C57BL/6 mice through expansion of Treg and
Th2 cells.

Haghmorad D(1), Amini AA(2), Mahmoudi MB(3), Rastin M(4), Hosseini M(5), Mahmoudi
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, BuAli Research Institute, Department of Immunology
and Allergy, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad,
Iran; Student Research Committee, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences,
Mashhad, Iran. (2)Inflammation and Inflammatory Diseases Research Center,
Department of Immunology and Allergy, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran; Student Research Committee, Mashhad University
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (3)Department of Genetics, Shahid Sadoughi
University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran. (4)Immunology Research Center, BuAli 
Research Institute, Department of Immunology and Allergy, School of Medicine,
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (5)Neurocognitive Research
Center, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad,
Iran. (6)Immunology Research Center, BuAli Research Institute, Department of
Immunology and Allergy, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: Mahmoudim@mums.ac.ir.

Pregnancy suppressive effect on autoimmune diseases including Multiple Sclerosis 
and Rheumatoid Arthritis may result from high levels of sex steroids such as
estrogen and estriol. This study was designed to reveal the molecular and
cellular mechanisms underlying the effect of estrogen on MS alleviation. Female
C57BL/6 mice were immunized with MOG35-55. Clinical scores and other relevant
parameters were monitored daily. Brain and spinal cord histology was performed to
measure lymphocyte infiltration and central nervous system demyelination.
Th1/Th2/Th17 and Treg cell profiles were determined through ELISA, flow
cytometry, and real-time PCR. Transcription factor expression levels in the CNS
were assessed by real-time PCR and T cell differentiation was explored through
flow cytometry examination. Pregnancy and pregnancy level of estrogen alleviated 
clinical manifestations in EAE induced mice, reduced CNS demyelination and cell
infiltration, suppressed spleen T cell proliferation, enhanced production of
anti-inflammatory cytokines in splenocytes and increased the percentage of Th2
and Treg cells. Furthermore, the results of real-time PCR for transcription
factors and related cytokines of Th1/Th2/Th17 and Treg cells in CNS showed
reduced expression levels of Th1 and Th17 transcription factors, including T-bet 
and ROR-<U+03B3>t, and decreased Th1 and Th17 cytokines including IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-17
and IL-23. These results are the first to indicate that pregnancy and pregnancy
level of estrogen ameliorate the EAE condition by favoring Treg and Th2
differentiation through induced expression of Foxp3 and GATA3 in the CNS.
Moreover, pregnancy and pregnancy level of estrogen decreased mRNA levels of
T-bet and ROR-<U+03B3>t in the CNS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25457839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Dec;50(18):3230-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.10.012. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

PTEN/PIK3CA genes are frequently mutated in spontaneous and medroxyprogesterone
acetate-accelerated 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene-induced mammary tumours of
tree shrews.

Xia HJ(1), He BL(2), Wang CY(3), Zhang HL(1), Ge GZ(4), Zhang YX(1), Lv LB(1),
Jiao JL(2), Chen C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China. (2)Department of Laboratory
Animal Science, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China; Department of Pathology, First
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan 650032, China;
Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Kunming, Yunnan 650204, China. (4)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming
University of Science and Technology, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China; Key
Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and
Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan
650223, China. Electronic address: chenc@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

Tree shrew has increasingly become an attractive experimental animal model for
human diseases, particularly for breast cancer due to spontaneous breast tumours 
and their close relationship to primates and by extension to humans. However,
neither normal mammary glands nor breast tumours have been well characterised in 
the Chinese tree shrew (Tupaia belangeri chinensis). In this study, normal
mammary glands from four different developmental stages and 18 spontaneous breast
tumours were analysed. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed that normal mammary gland morphology and
structures of tree shrews were quite similar to those found in humans.
Spontaneous breast tumours of tree shrews were identified as being intraductal
papilloma, papillary carcinoma, and invasive ductal carcinoma with or without
lung metastasis. To further analyse breast cancer tumours among tree shrews, 40
3-4 month-old female tree shrews were orally administrated 20 mg
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) or peanut oil thrice, and then, 15 of these
DMBA administrated tree shrews were implanted with medroxyprogesterone acetate
(MPA) pellets. DMBA was shown to induce breast tumours (12%) while the addition
of MPA increased the tumour incidence (50%). Of these, three induced breast
tumours were intraductal papillary carcinomas and one was invasive ductal
carcinoma (IDC). The PTEN/PIK3CA (phosphatase and tensin
homologue/phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit
alpha), but not TP53 and GATA3, genes are frequently mutated in breast tumours,
and the PTEN/PIK3CA gene mutation status correlated with the expression of pAKT
in tree shrew breast tumours. These results suggest that tree shrews may be a
promising animal model for a subset of human breast cancers with PTEN/PIK3CA gene
mutations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25457635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Hepatol. 2015 Mar;62(3):563-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.10.034. Epub 2014 Oct 
31.

Recipient T cell TIM-3 and hepatocyte galectin-9 signalling protects mouse liver 
transplants against ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Liu Y(1), Ji H(2), Zhang Y(1), Shen X(2), Gao F(2), He X(3), Li GA(2), Busuttil
RW(2), Kuchroo VK(4), Kupiec-Weglinski JW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Surgery, Division of 
Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Dumont-UCLA
Transplant Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation, Department of 
Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Division of Liver and
Pancreas Transplantation, Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine 
at University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of
Gastroenterology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Dumont-UCLA Transplant
Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation, Department of Surgery,
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California-Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: jkupiec@mednet.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: By binding to T cell immunoglobulin mucin-3 (TIM-3) on
activated Th1 cells, galectin-9 (Gal-9) negatively regulates Th1-type
alloimmunity. Although T cells contribute to hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury 
(IRI), it is unknown whether negative T cell-dependent TIM-3 co-stimulation may
rescue IR-stressed orthotopic liver transplants from innate immunity-driven
inflammation.
METHODS: We used wild type (WT) and TIM-3 transgenic (Tg) mice (C57BL/6) as liver
donors and recipients in a clinically-relevant model of hepatic cold storage (20 
h at 4°C in UW solution) and syngeneic orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT).
RESULTS: Orthotopic liver transplants in WT or TIM-3Tg<U+2192>TIM-3Tg groups were
resistant against IR-stress, evidenced by preserved hepatocellular function
(serum ALT levels) and liver architecture (Suzuki's score). In contrast,
orthotopic liver transplants in WT or TIM-3Tg<U+2192>WT groups were susceptible to IRI. 
TIM-3 induction in circulating CD4+ T cells of the recipient: (1) depressed
T-bet/IFN-<U+03B3>, while amplifying GATA3 and IL-4/IL-10 expression in orthotopic liver
transplants; (2) promoted T cell exhaustion (PD-1, LAG-3) phenotype; and (3)
depressed neutrophil and macrophage infiltration/function in orthotopic liver
transplants. In parallel studies, we documented for the first time that Gal-9, a 
natural TIM-3 ligand, was produced primarily by and released from IR-stressed
hepatocytes, both in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, exogenous recombinant Gal-9
(rGal-9) potentiated liver resistance against IRI by depressing T cell activation
and promoting apoptosis of CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Harnessing TIM-3/Gal-9 signalling at the T cell-hepatocyte interface
facilitates homeostasis in IR-stressed orthotopic liver transplants. Enhancing
anti-oxidant hepatocyte Gal-9 potentiates liver IR-resistance. Negative
regulation by recipient TIM-3+CD4+ cells provides evidence for cytoprotective
functions of a discrete T cell subset, which should be spared when applying T
cell-targeted immunosuppression in transplant recipients.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336640
PMID: 25450716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):157-69. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.001. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Recombinant goldfish thrombopoietin up-regulates expression of genes involved in 
thrombocyte development and synergizes with kit ligand A to promote progenitor
cell proliferation and colony formation.

Katakura F(1), Katzenback BA(1), Belosevic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada; School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: mike.belosevic@ualberta.ca.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the principal regulator of thrombopoiesis and promotes
the proliferation, differentiation and maturation of megakaryocytic progenitor
cells in mammals. In this study we report on the molecular and functional
characterization of goldfish TPO. Quantitative expression analysis of goldfish
tpo revealed the highest mRNA levels in heart, followed by spleen, liver, brain, 
intestine and kidney tissues. Significant decrease of tpo and c-mpl expressions
in goldfish primary kidney macrophage (PKM) cultures, as progenitor to macrophage
development progressed, indicates that TPO is not involved in monopoiesis.
Recombinant goldfish TPO (rgTPO) alone did not induce significant proliferation
of progenitor cells, but TPO in cooperation with recombinant goldfish kit ligand 
A (rgKITLA) supported proliferation of progenitor cells in a dose-dependent
manner. In response to rgTPO or a combination of rgTPO and rgKITLA, the mRNA
levels of thrombopoietic markers cd41 and c-mpl as well as thrombo/erythropoietic
transcription factors gata1 and lmo2 in sorted progenitor cells were
up-regulated, while the mRNA levels of granulopoietic markers (cebpa and gcsfr)
and the lymphoid transcription factor gata3 were down-regulated. Furthermore,
rgTPO and rgKITLA synergistically stimulated thrombocytic colony-formation. Our
results demonstrate that goldfish TPO has similar functions to mammalian TPO as a
regulator of thrombopoiesis, and suggests a highly conserved molecular mechanism 
of thrombocyte development throughout evolution of vertebrates.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jan;46(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.007. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

Utility of uroplakin II expression as a marker of urothelial carcinoma.

Tian W(1), Guner G(1), Miyamoto H(1), Cimino-Mathews A(1), Gonzalez-Roibon N(1), 
Argani P(1), Li X(1), Sharma R(1), Subhawong AP(1), Rezaei K(2), Bivalacqua
TJ(1), Epstein JI(1), Bishop JA(1), Netto GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21231. (2)George Washington
University, Washington DC, 20037. (3)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
21231. Electronic address: gnetto1@jhmi.edu.

Uroplakins are markers of terminally differentiated urothelium. Uroplakin II
(UPII) is a newly described sensitive marker for urothelial carcinoma (UC). The
expression profile of UPII in different types of UC and its utility in the
diagnostic setting are needed. We evaluated UPII expression in bladder tissue
microarrays, including urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential (n = 8),
low-grade papillary UC (n = 72), noninvasive high-grade papillary UC (n = 77), UC
in situ (n = 27), and invasive high-grade UC (INVUC) (n = 122). UPII expression
in 52 breast carcinomas and 38 high-grade prostate adenocarcinomas was also
assessed. UPII expression was compared with GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) and
estrogen receptor for its role in facilitating the differential diagnosis of the 
above 3 types of malignancy. UPII labeling was seen in 83.0% of UC overall,
including 95.7% of noninvasive UC and 65.6% of INVUC. UPII labeling was not found
in any breast and prostate carcinomas. In comparison, GATA3 labeling was seen in 
91.6% of all UCs, including 96.4% of noninvasive UCs and 85.1% of INVUC, with
stronger intensity and extent compared with UPII (P < .005). GATA3 labeled 2 (5%)
of 38 high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma. Estrogen receptor nuclear labeling was 
seen in 13.0% of UCs and 12.5% of prostate carcinomas. UPII was highly specific
(100%) but only moderately sensitive for UC and can therefore be a potentially
useful marker to identify urothelial lineage and help distinguish UC from
prostate cancer or, in conjunction with GATA3, from metastatic breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25449628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Feb;135(2):425-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.09.005. 
Epub 2014 Oct 19.

DNA-dependent protein kinase inhibition blocks asthma in mice and modulates human
endothelial and CD4<U+207A> T-cell function without causing severe combined
immunodeficiency.

Ghonim MA(1), Pyakurel K(2), Ju J(2), Rodriguez PC(2), Lammi MR(3), Davis C(2),
Abughazleh MQ(2), Mansy MS(4), Naura AS(5), Boulares AH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, La;
Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. (2)Stanley S. Scott
Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, La. (3)Pulmonary and
Critical Care Section, LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, La. (4)Faculty of
Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. (5)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center,
LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, La. Electronic address: anaura@pu.ac.in.
(6)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, La.
Electronic address: hboulr@lsuhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: We reported that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is critical
for the expression of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B-dependent genes in TNF-a-treated
glioblastoma cells, suggesting an involvement in inflammatory diseases.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate the role of DNA-PK in asthma.
METHODS: Cell culture and ovalbumin (OVA)- or house dust mite-based murine asthma
models were used in this study.
RESULTS: DNA-PK was essential for monocyte adhesion to TNF-a-treated endothelial 
cells. Administration of the DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 reduced airway eosinophilia,
mucus hypersecretion, airway hyperresponsiveness, and OVA-specific IgE production
in mice prechallenged with OVA. Such effects correlated with a marked reduction
in lung vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 expression and production of several
cytokines, including IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, eotaxin, IL-2, and IL-12 and the
chemokines monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 and keratinocyte-derived chemokine,
with a negligible effect on IL-10/IFN-<U+03B3> production. DNA-PK inhibition by gene
heterozygosity of the 450-kDa catalytic subunit of the kinase (DNA-PKcs(+/-))
also prevented manifestation of asthma-like traits. These results were confirmed 
in a chronic model of asthma by using house dust mite, a human allergen.
Remarkably, such protection occurred without causing severe combined
immunodeficiency. Adoptive transfer of TH2-skewed OT-II wild-type CD4(+) T cells 
reversed IgE and TH2 cytokine production but not airway hyperresponsiveness in
OVA-challenged DNA-PKcs(+/-) mice. DNA-PK inhibition reduced IL-4, IL-5, IL-13,
eotaxin, IL-8, and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 production without
affecting IL-2, IL-12, IFN-<U+03B3>, and interferon-inducible protein 10 production in
CD3/CD28-stimulated human CD4(+) T cells, potentially by blocking expression of
Gata3. These effects occurred without significant reductions in T-cell
proliferation. In mouse CD4(+) T cells in vitro DNA-PK inhibition severely
blocked CD3/CD28-induced Gata3 and T-bet expression in CD4(+) T cells and
prevented differentiation of TH1 and TH2 cells under respective TH1- and
TH2-skewing conditions.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest DNA-PK as a novel determinant of asthma and a
potential target for the treatment of the disease.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323872
PMID: 25441643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015 Jan;72(1):159-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.09.022. Epub 
2014 Oct 18.

Expression of helper T cell master regulators in inflammatory dermatoses and
primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas: diagnostic implications.

Hsi AC(1), Lee SJ(2), Rosman IS(3), Carson KR(4), Kelley A(1), Viele V(1), Pang
X(5), Musiek A(2), Schaffer A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (2)Division of Dermatology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (3)Washington
University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Division of Dermatology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (4)Division of Medical
Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(5)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri.
(6)Washington University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Division of Dermatology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Electronic
address: aschaffer@path.wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a neoplasm of skin-homing CD4(+) helper T
(TH) lymphocytes with dysregulation of TH1 and TH2 immunity. Diagnosis of MF is
challenging, as there is significant morphologic overlap with other dermatologic 
entities.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated diagnostic utility of TH1- and TH2-specific markers,
T-bet, and GATA-3, respectively, in MF and its reactive and neoplastic mimics.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for CD3/T-bet and CD3/GATA-3 was performed 
on inflammatory dermatoses (n = 56), MF (n = 37), Sezary syndrome (SS; n = 8),
and cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma (C-ALCL; n = 14).
RESULTS: Inflammatory dermatoses showed epidermal T cells predominantly
expressing GATA-3, except psoriasis, which exhibited a mixed GATA-3/T-bet
staining. In contrast, neoplastic T cells in patch stage MF showed markedly
increased T-bet positivity with minimal GATA-3 expression. Plaque stage MF had
a mixed T-bet/GATA-3 phenotype, whereas tumor stage MF and SS exhibited diffuse
GATA-3 expression. C-ALCL lacked significant staining for both markers.
LIMITATIONS: Sample size was relatively small.
CONCLUSIONS: A predominance of T-bet(+) T cells in the epidermis support patch
stage MF over dermatitis. A predominance of GATA-3(+) T cells in the dermis
support CD30(+) MF with large cell transformation over C-ALCL. These stains
do not allow distinction between dermatitis and cutaneous infiltrates of SS.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25440432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Nov 19;7(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s13039-014-0082-7. eCollection
2014.

Large cryptic genomic rearrangements with apparently normal karyotypes detected
by array-CGH.

Di Gregorio E(1), Savin E(2), Biamino E(3), Belligni EF(3), Naretto VG(2),
D'Alessandro G(2), Gai G(2), Fiocchi F(2), Calcia A(4), Mancini C(4), Giorgio
E(4), Cavalieri S(1), Talarico F(2), Pappi P(2), Gandione M(5), Grosso M(6),
Asnaghi V(6), Restagno G(6), Mandrile G(7), Botta G(8), Silengo MC(3), Grosso
E(2), Ferrero GB(3), Brusco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, via Santena 19, 10126
Torino, Italy ; Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical
Genetics Unit, Turin, Italy. (2)Città della Salute e della Scienza University
Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Turin, Italy. (3)Department of Public Health and
Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, Italy. (4)Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Torino, via Santena 19, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuropsychiatry, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Città della Salute e della Scienza
University Hospital, Turin, Italy. (7)Medical Genetics unit, San Luigi University
Hospital, Orbassano, Italy ; Department Clinical and Biological Sciences,
University of Torino, Torino, Italy. (8)Department of Pathology, Città della
Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Conventional karyotyping (550 bands resolution) is able to identify
chromosomal aberrations >5-10 Mb, which represent a known cause of intellectual
disability/developmental delay (ID/DD) and/or multiple congenital anomalies
(MCA). Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has increased the
diagnostic yield of 15-20%.
RESULTS: In a cohort of 700 ID/DD cases with or without MCA, including 15
prenatal diagnoses, we identified a subgroup of seven patients with a normal
karyotype and a large complex rearrangement detected by array-CGH (at least 6,
and up to 18 Mb). FISH analysis could be performed on six cases and showed that
rearrangements were translocation derivatives, indistinguishable from a normal
karyotype as they involved a similar band pattern and size. Five were inherited
from a parent with a balanced translocation, whereas two were apparently de novo.
Genes spanning the rearrangements could be associated with some phenotypic
features in three cases (case 3: DOCK8; case 4: GATA3, AKR1C4; case 6: AS/PWS
deletion, CHRNA7), and in two, likely disease genes were present (case 5: NR2F2, 
TP63, IGF1R; case 7: CDON). Three of our cases were prenatal diagnoses with an
apparently normal karyotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Large complex rearrangements of up to 18 Mb, involving chromosomal
regions with similar size and band appearance may be overlooked by conventional
karyotyping. Array-CGH allows a precise chromosomal diagnosis and recurrence risk
definition, further confirming this analysis as a first tier approach to clarify 
molecular bases of ID/DD and/or MCA. In prenatal tests, array-CGH is confirmed as
an important tool to avoid false negative results due to karyotype intrinsic
limit of detection.

PMCID: PMC4247713
PMID: 25435912  [PubMed]


263. BMC Genomics. 2014 Nov 27;15:1028. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1028.

Visualisation of the T cell differentiation programme by Canonical Correspondence
Analysis of transcriptomes.

Ono M(1), Tanaka RJ, Kano M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. m.ono@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Currently, in the era of post-genomics, immunology is facing a
challenging problem to translate mutant phenotypes into gene functions based on
high-throughput data, while taking into account the classifications and functions
of immune cells, which requires new methods.
RESULTS: Here we propose a novel application of a multidimensional analysis,
Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA), to reveal the molecular characteristics 
of undefined cells in terms of cellular differentiation programmes by analysing
two transcriptomic datasets. Using two independent datasets, whether RNA-seq or
microarray data, CCA successfully visualised the cross-level relationships
between genes, cells, and differentiation programmes, and thereby identified the 
immunological features of mutant cells (Gata3-KO T cells and Stat3-KO T cells) in
a data-oriented manner. With a new concept, differentiation variable, CCA
provides an automatic classification of cell samples, which had a high
sensitivity and a comparable performance to other classification methods. In
addition, we elaborate how CCA results can be interpreted, and reveal the
features of CCA in comparison with other visualisation techniques.
CONCLUSIONS: CCA is a visualisation tool with a classification ability to reveal 
the cross-level relationships of genes, cells and differentiation programmes.
This can be used for characterising the functional defect of cells of interest
(e.g. mutant cells) in the context of cellular differentiation. The proposed
approach fits with common hypothesis-oriented studies in immunology, and can be
used for a wide range of molecular and genomic studies on cellular
differentiation mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4258272
PMID: 25428805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Histopathology. 2015 Jul;67(1):96-105. doi: 10.1111/his.12625. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

GATA-binding protein 3, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 and mammaglobin
have distinct prognostic implications in different invasive breast carcinoma
subgroups.

Ni YB(1), Tsang JY(1), Chan SK(2), Tse GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (2)Department of
Pathology, Kwong Wah Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

AIMS: To evaluate the prognostic significance of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3),
gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15) and mammaglobin (MGB) in
invasive breast carcinomas (IBCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: GATA-3, GCDFP-15 and MGB were expressed in 37.9% (370/976), 
26.0% (254/978) and 35.3% (348/986) of this cohort of 1017 IBCs, respectively.
GCDFP-15 was an independent favourable prognostic factor in all cases
[disease-free survival (DFS), hazard ratio (HR) 0.587, P = 0.049; overall
survival (OS), HR 0.512, P = 0.049], as well as in oestrogen receptor
(ER)-negative (DFS, HR 0.353, P = 0.012; OS, HR 0.310, P = 0.017) and
HER2-positive (DFS, HR 0.279, P = 0.036; OS, HR 0.235, P = 0.050) cases; it also 
refined the prognostication of molecular apocrine cancers. GATA-3 and MGB did not
show any prognostic significance.
CONCLUSIONS: The commonly used breast carcinoma biomarkers vary in their
prognostic implications. GCDFP-15 independently indicated a favourable prognosis,
especially in ER-negative, HER2-positive and molecular apocrine cancers. GATA-3
and MGB were not associated with outcome.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25425335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 20;5:e1527. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.490.

Identification of Creb3l4 as an essential negative regulator of adipogenesis.

Kim TH(1), Jo SH(2), Choi H(1), Park JM(1), Kim MY(1), Nojima H(3), Kim JW(1),
Ahn YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic
of Korea [2] Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Molecular
Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Understanding the molecular networks that regulate adipogenesis is crucial for
combating obesity. However, the identity and molecular actions of negative
regulators that regulate the early development of adipocytes remain poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated the role of CREB3L4, a member of the
CREB3-like family, in the regulation of adiposity. Constitutive overexpression of
CREB3L4 resulted in the inhibition of adipocyte differentiation, whereas
knockdown of Creb3l4 expression caused differentiation of preadipocytes into
mature adipocytes, bypassing the mitotic clonal expansion step. In 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, Creb3l4 knockdown resulted in increased expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>2) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBPa), either by increasing the protein stability of C/EBPß or by decreasing
the expression of GATA3, a negative regulator of PPAR<U+03B3>2 expression. Consequently,
increased PPAR<U+03B3>2 and C/EBPa levels induced adipocyte differentiation, even in the
presence of minimal hormonal inducer. Thus, it can be speculated that CREB3L4 has
a role as gatekeeper, inhibiting adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Moreover, 
adipocytes of Creb3l4-knockout mice showed hyperplasia caused by increased
adipogenesis, and exhibited improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity,
as compared with littermate wild-type mice. These results raise the possibility
that Creb3l4 could be a useful therapeutic target in the fight against obesity
and metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4260748
PMID: 25412305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 20;16(6):464. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0464-0.

Shift in GATA3 functions, and GATA3 mutations, control progression and clinical
presentation in breast cancer.

Cohen H(1), Ben-Hamo R(2), Gidoni M(3), Yitzhaki I(4), Kozol R(5), Zilberberg
A(6), Efroni S(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University,
Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel. helit.c@gmail.com. (2)The Mina and Everard Goodman
Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel.
rotem@systemsbiomed.org. (3)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Science,
Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel. moriahcohen@gmail.com. (4)The Mina
and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
52900, Israel. ilana.brt@gmail.com. (5)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of
Life Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel. renko1989@gmail.com.
(6)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University,
Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel. alona.zilberberg@gmail.com. (7)The Mina and Everard
Goodman Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel.
sol.efroni@biu.ac.il.

INTRODUCTION: GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a regulator of mammary luminal
cell differentiation, and an estrogen receptor (ER) associated marker in breast
cancer. Tumor suppressor functions of GATA3 have been demonstrated primarily in
basal-like breast cancers. Here, we focused on its function in luminal breast
cancer, where GATA3 is frequently mutated, and its levels are significantly
elevated.
METHODS: GATA3 target genes were identified in normal- and luminal cancer-
mammary cells by ChIP-seq, followed by examination of the effects of GATA3
expressions and mutations on tumorigenesis-associated genes and processes.
Additionally, mutations and expression data of luminal breast cancer patients
from The Cancer Genome Atlas were analyzed to characterize genetic signatures
associated with GATA3 mutations.
RESULTS: We show that some GATA3 effects shift from tumor suppressing to tumor
promoting during tumorigenesis, with deregulation of three genes, BCL2, DACH1,
THSD4, representing major GATA3-controlled processes in cancer progression. In
addition, we identify an altered activity of mutant GATA3, and distinct
associated genetic signatures. These signatures depend on the functional domain
mutated; and, for a specific subgroup, are shared with basal-like breast cancer
patients, who are a clinical group with regard to considerations of mode of
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The GATA3 dependent mechanisms may call for special considerations
for proper prognosis and treatment of patients.

PMCID: PMC4303202
PMID: 25410484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 1;194(1):223-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401985. Epub 2014 Nov
17.

Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 regulates invariant NKT cell development 
and function independent of promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger.

Prevot N(1), Pyaram K(1), Bischoff E(1), Sen JM(2), Powell JD(3), Chang CH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; (2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology,
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224; 
and. (3)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231. (4)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
48109; heechang@umich.edu.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) senses and incorporates different
environmental cues via the two signaling complexes mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and
mTORC2. As a result, mTOR controls cell growth and survival, and also shapes
different effector functions of the cells including immune cells such as T cells.
We demonstrate in this article that invariant NKT (iNKT) cell development is
controlled by mTORC2 in a cell-intrinsic manner. In mice deficient in mTORC2
signaling because of the conditional deletion of the Rictor gene, iNKT cell
numbers were reduced in the thymus and periphery. This is caused by decreased
proliferation of stage 1 iNKT cells and poor development through subsequent
stages. Functionally, iNKT cells devoid of mTORC2 signaling showed reduced number
of IL-4-expressing cells, which correlated with a decrease in the transcription
factor GATA-3-expressing cells. However, promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger
(PLZF), a critical transcription factor for iNKT cell development, is expressed
at a similar level in mTORC2-deficient iNKT cells compared with that in the wild 
type iNKT cells. Furthermore, cellular localization of PLZF was not altered in
the absence of mTOR2 signaling. Thus, our study reveals the PLZF-independent
mechanisms of the development and function of iNKT cells regulated by mTORC2.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4315517
PMID: 25404366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):995-1002. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0063-3.

Alterations of T helper lymphocyte subpopulations in sepsis, severe sepsis, and
septic shock: a prospective observational study.

Li J(1), Li M, Su L, Wang H, Xiao K, Deng J, Jia Y, Han G, Xie L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Chinese PLA General Hospital, NO.28
Fuxing Road, Haidian District, 100853, Beijing, China.

Circulating lymphocyte number was significantly decreased in patients with
sepsis. However, it remains unknown which severity phase (sepsis, severe sepsis, 
and septic shock) does it develop and what happen on each subpopulation. Eight
patients with differing severities of sepsis (31 sepses, 33 severe sepses, and 16
septic shocks) were enrolled. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) of Th1, Th2, and Th17; regulatory T (Treg) cell-specific transcription
factor T-bet; GATA-3; RORgammat (ROR<U+03B3>t); forkhead box P3 (FOXP3); and IL-17 mRNA 
were performed, and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to
detect serum interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-10. In this study, the Th1, Th2,
Treg transcription factors, and related cytokines IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-10 levels
of sepsis and severe sepsis patients in peripheral blood were significantly
higher than those of the normal controls. Except for IL-17, the T-bet, GATA-3,
and IFN-<U+03B3> levels of septic shock patients were lower than those of sepsis
patients. We also observed that the proportions of Th17/Treg in the sepsis and
septic shock groups were inversed. From the above, the inflammatory response
especially the adaptive immune response is still activated in sepsis and severe
sepsis, but significant immunosuppression was developed in septic shock. In
addition, the proportion of Th17/Treg inversed may be associated with the illness
aggravation of patients with sepsis.

PMID: 25403265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Case Rep Pathol. 2014;2014:781318. doi: 10.1155/2014/781318. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Metastatic carcinoma occurring in a gastric hyperplastic polyp mimicking primary 
gastric cancer: the first reported case.

Groisman GM(1), Depsames R(2), Ovadia B(2), Meir A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, 38100 Hadera, Israel.
(2)Institute of Gastroenterology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, 38100 Hadera,
Israel.

Hyperplastic polyps of the stomach are regarded as benign. However, in rare cases
they may contain incipient primary carcinomas. To our knowledge, breast carcinoma
metastatic to a gastric hyperplastic polyp has not yet been reported. We describe
the case of a 69-year-old woman to whom a gastric polyp was endoscopically
excised. The patient had previously undergone a right mastectomy for mixed,
invasive ductal and lobular carcinoma 5 years earlier. Histological sections from
the gastric lesion showed typical features of hyperplastic polyp with foci of
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma including signet ring cells infiltrating the
lamina propria. The histologic findings were consistent with a primary gastric
cancer. However, the carcinoma cells were immunopositive for estrogen and
progesterone receptors and GATA3 and negative for CDX2, Hep Par 1, and MUC5AC.
E-cadherin showed membranous reactivity in some of the carcinoma cells while in
others it was negative. Accordingly, metastatic mixed, lobular and ductal breast 
carcinoma was diagnosed. We conclude that metastatic adenocarcinoma mimicking
primary gastric cancer can be rarely encountered in hyperplastic gastric polyps.

PMCID: PMC4221967
PMID: 25400965  [PubMed]


270. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Dec 15;190(12):1383-94. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201403-0601OC.

IL-6 receptor a defines effector memory CD8+ T cells producing Th2 cytokines and 
expanding in asthma.

Lee N(1), You S, Shin MS, Lee WW, Kang KS, Kim SH, Kim WU, Homer RJ, Kang MJ,
Montgomery RR, Dela Cruz CS, Shaw AC, Lee PJ, Chupp GL, Hwang D, Kang I.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Internal Medicine and.

RATIONALE: Cytokine receptors can be markers defining different T-cell subsets
and considered as therapeutic targets. The association of IL-6 and IL-6 receptor 
a (IL-6Ra) with asthma was reported, suggesting their involvement in asthma.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether and how IL-6Ra defines a distinct effector
memory (EM) CD8+ T-cell population in health and disease.
METHODS: EM CD8+ T cells expressing IL-6Ra (IL-6Ra(high)) were identified in
human peripheral blood and analyzed for function, gene, and transcription factor 
expression. The relationship of these cells with asthma was determined using
blood and sputum.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A unique population of IL-6Ra(high) EM CD8+ T
cells was found in peripheral blood. These cells that potently proliferated,
survived, and produced high levels of the Th2-type cytokines IL-5 and IL-13 had
increased levels of GATA3 and decreased levels of T-bet and Blimp-1 in comparison
with other EM CD8+ T cells. In fact, GATA3 was required for IL-6Ra expression.
Patients with asthma had an increased frequency of IL-6Ra(high) EM CD8+ T cells
in peripheral blood compared with healthy control subjects. Also, IL-6Ra(high) EM
CD8+ T cells exclusively produced IL-5 and IL-13 in response to asthma-associated
respiratory syncytial virus and bacterial superantigens.
CONCLUSIONS: Human IL-6Ra(high) EM CD8+ T cells is a unique cell subset that may 
serve as a reservoir for effector CD8+ T cells, particularly the ones producing
Th2-type cytokines, and expand in asthma.

PMCID: PMC4299645
PMID: 25390970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e109996. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109996.
eCollection 2014.

Low-molecular-weight heparin and unfractionated heparin decrease Th-1, 2, and 17 
expressions.

Huang JN(1), Tsai MC(1), Fang SL(2), Chang MD(2), Wu YR(2), Tsai JJ(3), Fu LS(4),
Lin HK(1), Chen YJ(1), Li TW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Department, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan,
Republic of China. (2)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing
Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan,
Republic of China. (4)Pediatric Department, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Pediatrics, National Yang-Ming
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the effects of T helper cell differentiation in a
mite-allergic animal model treated with inhaled heparins of different molecular
weight.
METHOD: BALB/c mice were divided into four groups: 1. Control, 2. Mite
intratracheal (mIT), 3. Inhaled heparin (hIN), 4. Inhaled low-molecular-weight
heparin (lmwhIN). Groups 2, 3, and 4 were sensitized twice with Der p allergen
subcutaneously on day 1 and day 8. Der p allergen was administered
intratracheally on day 15. Groups 3 and 4 were treated with heparin or
low-molecular-weight (lmw) heparin intranasally from day 1 to 22. Splenocytes
from sacrificed mice stimulated with 16 µg/ml of Der p were cultured for 72
hours. Supernatants of splenocyte were collected to analyze the effect of
Interleukin (IL)17-A/F, Interferon(IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-13, and IL-10. Serum was also
collected for Der P-specific IgE level on day 23. Total RNA was extracted from
spleen tissue for mRNA expression. Gene expression of Foxp3, IL-10 IFN-<U+03B3>, GATA3, 
IL-5, and ROR<U+03B3>t were analyzed.
RESULTS: Both hIN and lmwhIN groups had lower serum IgE level than that of the
mIT group (both p<0.0001). Both hIN and lmwhIN groups showed significantly
decreased transcripts of GATA-3, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-5, and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in their spleen.
Regarding the supernatant of splenocyte culture stimulated with Der p, compared
with the mIT group, there were significant decreases in IL-17A/F, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4,
IL-13, and IL-10 secretion in inhaled hIN and lmwhIN groups.
CONCLUSIONS: From this balb/c mice study, the analyses of mRNA and cytokines
revealed that both intranasal heparin and lmw heparin treatment decreased the
expression of Th1, Th2, and Th17 in spleen. The underlying mechanism(s) warrant
further studies.

PMCID: PMC4217718
PMID: 25364825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Immunology. 2015 Apr;144(4):668-76. doi: 10.1111/imm.12419.

Interleukin-21 suppresses the differentiation and functions of T helper 2 cells.

Lin PY(1), Jen HY, Chiang BL, Sheu F, Chuang YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

T helper type 2 (Th2) cells, which produce interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, 
control immunity to all forms of allergic inflammatory responses. Interleukin-21 
(IL-21) reduces allergic symptoms in murine models and inhibits IL-4-induced IgE 
secretion by B cells. However, whether or not IL-21 directly affects Th2 cells,
which leads to reduced allergic symptoms, is unclear. In this study, we
investigated the effects of IL-21 on the differentiation and effector functions
of Th2 cells. We found that IL-21 reduced the number of differentiated Th2 cells 
and these Th2 cells showed a diminished Th2 cytokine production. Interleukin-21
suppressed Th2 cytokine production of already polarized Th2 cells by
down-regulation of transcription factor GATA-3. It also induced apoptosis of Th2 
cells with decreased anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2. Intranasal administration of
IL-21 at the beginning of ovalbumin (OVA) sensitization or before OVA challenge
decreased Th2 cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of OVA/alum-immunized
allergic mice. In addition, the inhibitory effects of IL-21 on Th2 effector
functions can also be found in allergic patients. Our results demonstrate that
IL-21 suppresses the development of Th2 cells and functions of polarized Th2
cells. Hence, the administration of IL-21 may be considered for use as a
preventive and therapeutic approach when dealing with Th2-mediated allergic
diseases.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4368173
PMID: 25351608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Feb;11(2):881-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2809. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Essential role of GATA3 in regulation of differentiation and cell proliferation
in SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells.

Peng H(1), Ke XX(2), Hu R(2), Yang L(2), Cui H(2), Wei Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing
400716, P.R. China.

Neuroblastoma is a common solid malignant tumor of the sympathetic nervous
system, which contributes to 15% of cancer-related mortality in children. The
differentiation status of neuroblastoma is correlated with clinical outcome, and 
the induction of differentiation thus constitutes a therapeutic approach in this 
disease. However, the molecular mechanisms that control the differentiation of
neuroblastoma remain poorly understood. The present study aimed to define whether
GATA3 is involved in the differentiation of neuroblastoma cells. The results
demonstrated that GATA3 is a prognostic marker for survival in patients with
neuroblastoma, and that high-level GATA3 expression is associated with increased 
self-renewal and proliferation of neuroblastoma cells. Retinoic acid treatment
led to GATA3 downregulation together with neuronal differentiation, suppression
of cell proliferation and inhibition of tumorigenecity in neuroblastoma cells.
These findings suggest that GATA3 is a key regulator of neuroblastoma
differentiation, and provide a novel potential therapeutic strategy for the
induction of neuroblastoma differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4262502
PMID: 25351211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Stem Cell Rev. 2015 Jun;11(3):394-407. doi: 10.1007/s12015-014-9558-4.

Amniotic membrane mesenchymal cells-derived factors skew T cell polarization
toward Treg and downregulate Th1 and Th17 cells subsets.

Pianta S(1), Bonassi Signoroni P, Muradore I, Rodrigues MF, Rossi D, Silini A,
Parolini O.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Ricerca E. Menni, Fondazione Poliambulanza-Istituto Ospedaliero, Via
Bissolati, 57, I-25124, Brescia, Italy.

We previously demonstrated that cells derived from the mesenchymal layer of the
human amniotic membrane (hAMSC) and their conditioned medium (CM-hAMSC) modulate 
lymphocyte proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. In order to understand the
mechanisms involved in immune regulation exerted by hAMSC, we analyzed the
effects of CM-hAMSC on T-cell polarization towards Th1, Th2, Th17, and
T-regulatory (Treg) subsets. We show that CM-hAMSC equally suppresses the
proliferation of both CD4(+) T-helper (Th) and CD8(+) cytotoxic T-lymphocytes.
Moreover, we prove that the CM-hAMSC inhibitory ability affects both central
(CD45RO(+)CD62L(+)) and effector memory (CD45RO(+)CD62L(-)) subsets. We evaluated
the phenotype of CD4(+) cells in the MLR setting and showed that CM-hAMSC
significantly reduced the expression of markers associated to the Th1
(T-bet(+)CD119(+)) and Th17 (ROR<U+03B3>t(+)CD161(+)) populations, while having no
effect on the Th2 population (GATA3(+)CD193(+)/GATA3(+)CD294(+)cells). T-cell
subset modulation was substantiated through the analysis of cytokine release for 
6 days during co-culture with alloreactive T-cells, whereby we observed a
decrease in specific subset-related cytokines, such as a decrease in
pro-inflammatory, Th1-related (TNFa, IFN<U+03B3>, IL-1ß), Th2 (IL-5, IL-6), Th9 (IL-9), 
and Th17 (IL-17A, IL-22). Furthermore, CM-hAMSC significantly induced the Treg
compartment, as shown by an induction of proliferating CD4(+)FoxP3(+) cells, and 
an increase of CD25(+)FoxP3(+) and CD39(+)FoxP3(+) Treg in the CD4(+) population.
Induction of Treg cells was corroborated by the increased secretion of TGF-ß.
Taken together, these data strengthen the findings regarding the immunomodulatory
properties of CM-hAMSC derived from human amniotic membrane MSC, and in
particular provide insights into their effect on regulation of T cell
polarization.

PMCID: PMC4451472
PMID: 25348066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;74(24):7406-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1188. Epub 
2014 Oct 22.

Differentiation and loss of malignant character of spontaneous pulmonary
metastases in patient-derived breast cancer models.

Bockhorn J(1), Prat A(2), Chang YF(3), Liu X(4), Huang S(4), Shang M(5),
Nwachukwu C(6), Gomez-Vega MJ(6), Harrell JC(7), Olopade OI(6), Perou CM(7), Liu 
H(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University, Stanford,
California. (2)Translational Genomics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology 
(VHIO), Barcelona, Spain. Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clínic,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)The Ben May Department for Cancer 
Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (4)Deparment of
Pathology, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, and National Center for Regenerative
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Illinois Institute
of Technology, Chicago, Illinois. (6)Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics,
Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(7)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (8)Deparment of Pathology, Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and National Center for Regenerative Medicine, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. hliu@case.edu.

Patient-derived human-in-mouse xenograft models of breast cancer (PDX models)
that exhibit spontaneous lung metastases offer a potentially powerful model of
cancer metastasis. In this study, we evaluated the malignant character of lung
micrometastases that emerge in such models after orthotopic implantation of human
breast tumor cells into the mouse mammary fat pad. Interestingly, relative to the
parental primary breast tumors, the lung metastasis (met)-derived mammary tumors 
exhibited a slower growth rate and a reduced metastatic potential with a more
differentiated epithelial status. Epigenetic correlates were determined by gene
array analyses. Lung met-derived tumors displayed differential expression of
negative regulators of cell proliferation and metabolism and positive regulators 
of mammary epithelial differentiation. Clinically, this signature correlated with
breast tumor subtypes. We identified hsa-miR-138 (miR-138) as a novel regulator
of invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells, acting 
by directly targeting the polycomb epigenetic regulator EZH2. Mechanistic
investigations showed that GATA3 transcriptionally controlled miR-138 levels in
lung metastases. Notably, the miR-138 activity signature served as a novel
independent prognostic marker for patient survival beyond traditional pathologic 
variables, intrinsic subtypes, or a proliferation gene signature. Our results
highlight the loss of malignant character in some lung micrometastatic lesions
and the epigenetic regulation of this phenotype.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4310213
PMID: 25339353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Nov 6;15(5):619-33. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

BMP signaling and its pSMAD1/5 target genes differentially regulate hair follicle
stem cell lineages.

Genander M(1), Cook PJ(2), Ramsköld D(3), Keyes BE(1), Mertz AF(1), Sandberg
R(3), Fuchs E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden; Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development,
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic
address: fuchslb@rockefeller.edu.

Hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs) and their transit amplifying cell (TAC) progeny 
sense BMPs at defined stages of the hair cycle to control their proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we exploit the distinct spatial and temporal localizations
of these cells to selectively ablate BMP signaling in each compartment and
examine its functional role. We find that BMP signaling is required for HFSC
quiescence and to promote TAC differentiation along different lineages as the
hair cycle progresses. We also combine in vivo genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation and deep-sequencing, transcriptional profiling, and
loss-of-function genetics to define BMP-regulated genes. We show that some
pSMAD1/5 targets, like Gata3, function specifically in TAC lineage-progression.
Others, like Id1 and Id3, function in both HFSCs and TACs, but in distinct ways. 
Our study therefore illustrates the complex differential roles that a key
signaling pathway can play in regulation of closely related stem/progenitor cells
within the context of their overall niche.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4276600
PMID: 25312496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 13;9(10):e109337. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109337.
eCollection 2014.

Augmentation of the antibody response of Atlantic salmon by oral administration
of alginate-encapsulated IPNV antigens.

Chen L(1), Klaric G(2), Wadsworth S(3), Jayasinghe S(4), Kuo TY(5), Evensen Ø(1),
Mutoloki S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic Medicine, Norwegian University of
Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway. (2)EWOS Innovation AS, Sandnes, Norway; Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)EWOS Innovation AS, Sandnes, Norway. (4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom. (5)Department of Animal
Science/Institute of Biotechnology, National Ilan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The objective of the present study was to assess the effect of
alginate-encapsulated infectious pancreatic necrosis virus antigens in inducing
the immune response of Atlantic salmon as booster vaccines. One year after
intraperitoneal injection with an oil-adjuvanted vaccine, post-smolts were orally
boosted either by 1) alginate-encapsulated IPNV antigens (ENCAP); 2) soluble
antigens (UNENCAP) or 3) untreated feed (control). This was done twice, seven
weeks apart. Sampling was done twice, firstly at 7 weeks post 1st oral boost and 
the 2nd, at 4 weeks after the 2nd oral boost. Samples included serum, head
kidney, spleen and hindgut. Serum antibodies were analyzed by ELISA while tissues
were used to assess the expression of IgM, IgT, CD4, GATA3, FOXP3, TGF-ß and
IL-10 genes by quantitative PCR. Compared to controls, fish fed with ENCAP had a 
significant increase (p<0.04) in serum antibodies following the 1st boost but not
after the 2nd boost. This coincided with significant up-regulation of CD4 and
GATA3 genes. In contrast, serum antibodies in the UNENCAP group decreased both
after the 1st and 2nd oral boosts. This was associated with significant
up-regulation of FOXP3, TGF-ß and IL-10 genes. The expression of IgT was not
induced in the hindgut after the 1st oral boost but was significantly
up-regulated following the 2nd one. CD4 and GATA3 mRNA expressions exhibited a
similar pattern to IgT in the hindgut. IgM mRNA expression on the other hand was 
not differentially regulated at any of the times examined. Our findings suggest
that 1) Parenteral prime with oil-adjuvanted vaccines followed by oral boost with
ENCAP results in augmentation of the systemic immune response; 2) Symmetrical
prime and boost (mucosal) with ENCAP results in augmentation of mucosal immune
response and 3) Symmetrical priming and boosting (mucosal) with soluble antigens 
results in the induction of systemic immune tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4195674
PMID: 25310804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Respir J. 2014 Oct 13. doi: 10.1111/crj.12227. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase inhibitor regulates the balance of Th17/Treg in allergic
asthma.

Hou X(1), Wan H, Ai X, Shi Y, Ni Y, Tang W, Shi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The aim of this study is to investigate the expression
pattern of histone deacetylase 9 in peripheral blood of patients with allergic
asthma and its regulatory effect on the balance of Th17/Treg cells involved in
the pathogenesis of asthma.
METHODS: flap-Ub promoter-GFP-WRE vector was used to construct the
Jurkat-HA-FOXP3 cell line. After histone deacetylase inhibitor-trichostatin A
(TSA) treatment, FOXP3 and ROR<U+03B3>t expression were detected by real-time-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). BALB/c mice were randomly assigned to control group, TSA
treatment and the asthma group. Serum Immunoglobulin E (IgE) was detected with
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), airway inflammation in lung tissue
evaluated by haematoxylin/eosin staining, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
cell number and differential counted, interleukin (IL)-17A and TGF-ß
concentrations in BALF measured with ELISA, and expression of ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3
messenger RNA (mRNA)measured by RT-PCR. Forty-seven patients with asthma were
recruited and assigned to intermittent, mild and moderate-severe group. GATA3,
IL-4, histone deacetylases (HDAC) 9 mRNA expression level were measured by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After TSA treatment, FOXP3 mRNA level was upregulated, while ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA 
level was downregulated. FOXP3 protein level was also upregulated by TSA. In
vivo, TSA treatment can inhibit IL-17 but promote transforming growth factor-beta
production in the BALF of asthma mice, and inhibited the expression of Th17 cells
and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in lung; also can promote Foxp3 mRNA expression. GATA3, IL-4 mRNA 
expression levels were upregulated in patients with asthma than the healthy
control. HDAC9 mRNA expression level was associated with the severity of disease.
CONCLUSION: The histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA can regulate the balance of
Th17/Treg in asthma by regulating the activity of histone deacetylase.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25307458  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


279. Cell. 2014 Oct 9;159(2):358-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027.

Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment of a mega transcription factor
complex.

Liu Z(1), Merkurjev D(2), Yang F(3), Li W(3), Oh S(4), Friedman MJ(3), Song X(5),
Zhang F(3), Ma Q(2), Ohgi KA(3), Krones A(3), Rosenfeld MG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
z9liu@ucsd.edu. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine,
School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA;
Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and System Biology, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Graduate Program in Biological Sciences, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; CAS Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease and
School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230027, China. (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
Electronic address: mrosenfeld@ucsd.edu.

Enhancers provide critical information directing cell-type-specific
transcriptional programs, regulated by binding of signal-dependent transcription 
factors and their associated cofactors. Here, we report that the most strongly
activated estrogen (E2)-responsive enhancers are characterized by
trans-recruitment and in situ assembly of a large 1-2 MDa complex of diverse
DNA-binding transcription factors by ERa at ERE-containing enhancers. We refer to
enhancers recruiting these factors as mega transcription factor-bound in trans
(MegaTrans) enhancers. The MegaTrans complex is a signature of the most potent
functional enhancers and is required for activation of enhancer RNA transcription
and recruitment of coactivators, including p300 and Med1. The MegaTrans complex
functions, in part, by recruiting specific enzymatic machinery, exemplified by
DNA-dependent protein kinase. Thus, MegaTrans-containing enhancers represent a
cohort of functional enhancers that mediate a broad and important transcriptional
program and provide a molecular explanation for transcription factor clustering
and hotspots noted in the genome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4465761
PMID: 25303530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Oct 9;10(10):e1003884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003884. 
eCollection 2014.

Reconstruction of the gene regulatory network involved in the sonic hedgehog
pathway with a potential role in early development of the mouse brain.

Liu J(1), Wang X(1), Li J(1), Wang H(1), Wei G(1), Yan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes of
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is crucial for pattern formation in
early central nervous system development. By systematically analyzing
high-throughput in situ hybridization data of E11.5 mouse brain, we found that
Shh and its receptor Ptch1 define two adjacent mutually exclusive gene expression
domains: Shh+Ptch1- and Shh-Ptch1+. These two domains are associated respectively
with Foxa2 and Gata3, two transcription factors that play key roles in specifying
them. Gata3 ChIP-seq experiments and RNA-seq assays on Gata3-knockdown cells
revealed that Gata3 up-regulates the genes that are enriched in the Shh-Ptch1+
domain. Important Gata3 targets include Slit2 and Slit3, which are involved in
the process of axon guidance, as well as Slc18a1, Th and Qdpr, which are
associated with neurotransmitter synthesis and release. By contrast, Foxa2 both
up-regulates the genes expressed in the Shh+Ptch1- domain and down-regulates the 
genes characteristic of the Shh-Ptch1+ domain. From these and other data, we were
able to reconstruct a gene regulatory network governing both domains. Our work
provides the first genome-wide characterization of the gene regulatory network
involved in the Shh pathway that underlies pattern formation in the early mouse
brain.

PMCID: PMC4191885
PMID: 25299227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;398(1-2):245-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2227-8. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

The effects of galectin-1 on the gene expression of the transcription factors
TBX21, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RORC.

Yakushina VD(1), Vasil'eva OA, Ryazantseva NV, Novitsky VV, Tashireva LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Laboratory Medicine, Department of
Pathophysiology, Science and Educational Center of Molecular Medicine, Siberian
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia, yakushinavd@mail.ru.

CD4(+) T cells orchestrate the immune response by differentiating into T helper
(Th) or regulatory (Treg) cell subsets that secrete distinct sets of cytokines.
They also play a critical role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity, asthma,
allergy and, likely, cancer. The mechanisms involved in the regulation of CD4(+) 
T cell homeostasis by galectin-1 remain poorly characterized. To investigate
whether galectin-1 modulates the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells, the effects
of galectin-1 on the mRNA expression levels of TBX21, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RORC in
activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells were examined. The expression levels
of GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA were up-regulated after treatment with 1.0 µg/ml
galectin-1 and were unchanged (for GATA-3) or slightly elevated (for FOXP3)
compared with untreated cells when 2.0 µg/ml galectin-1 was added. At the same
time, at both concentrations of galectin-1, we observed reduced TBX21 and RORC
mRNA expression levels. These findings support the concept that galectin-1 skews 
the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells towards Th2 and Treg cells.

PMID: 25292313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hum Pathol. 2014 Dec;45(12):2417-22. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.08.003. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Ovarian Brenner tumors and Walthard nests: a histologic and immunohistochemical
study.

Roma AA(1), Masand RP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 44195. Electronic address:
romaa@ccf.org. (2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030.

Brenner tumors are composed of urothelial/transitional-type epithelium and,
hence, are morphologically similar to Walthard nests and tubal/mesothelial
transitional metaplasia. In this study, we analyzed immunohistochemical markers
on Brenner tumors to explore Müllerian as well as Wolffian and germ cell
derivation. We also attempted to explore their possible association with
tubal/paratubal Walthard nests/transitional metaplasia, using the same
immunostains. Thirty-two consecutive cases of Brenner tumors were identified.
Thirteen (43%) of the patients had Walthard nests in the tubal/periovarian soft
tissue. All Brenner tumors were diffusely positive for GATA3 (strongly positive
in 30/32 and weakly positive in the remaining 2) and negative for PAX8, PAX2, and
SALL4. Similarly, all Walthard nests were positive for GATA3, whereas only 3
(23%) of 13 showed occasional PAX8 expression; all were negative for PAX2 and
SALL4. In our study, more than 40% of Brenner tumors had associated Walthard
nests. The similar morphology and immunoprofile of Brenner tumors and Walthard
nests suggest a probable link between Brenner tumors and Walthard nests. Two
additional cases presented highlight small transitional lesions involving the
ovary: a possible precursor lesion or the initial steps of Brenner tumor
formation. Brenner tumors and most Walthard nests lacked staining for Müllerian
(PAX8 and PAX2) and germ cell tumor markers (SALL4).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25281026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2014 Nov;33(6):624-9. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000088.

Mesonephric carcinosarcoma involving uterine cervix and vagina: report of 2 cases
with immunohistochemical positivity For PAX2, PAX8, and GATA-3.

Roma AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio.

Mesonephric carcinomas are rare tumors predominantly arising in the uterine
cervix from mesonephric remnants. Although the tumor has classic morphologic
features, some cases can mimic Müllerian adenocarcinoma and be misdiagnosed,
especially those with significant ductal pattern. Moreover, there is an overlap
in immunohistochemical results with endometrial and endocervical carcinomas. In
this study, we report 2 cases of mesonephric carcinosarcoma, originally diagnosed
as Müllerian carcinomas, 1 presenting in the vagina; review immunohistochemical
results including positivity for GATA-3, not previously reported and comment on
the proposed panel of PAX8, p16, and estrogen receptors as discriminators of
Müllerian adenocarcinoma (endocervical or endometrial) versus mesonephric
carcinoma.

PMID: 25272303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;92(5):397-405. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0008. Epub 2014 
Sep 2.

Astragalus membranaceus modulates Th1/2 immune balance and activates PPAR<U+03B3> in a
murine asthma model.

Chen SM(1), Tsai YS, Lee SW, Liu YH, Liao SK, Chang WW, Tsai PJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Astragalus membranaceus, a traditional Chinese herb, has been used to improve
airway inflammation and asthma. The present study investigated whether A.
membranaceus has immunotherapeutic effects on asthma, a chronic inflammatory
mucosal disease that is associated with excess production of IgE, eosinophilia, T
helper 2 (Th2) cytokines, and bronchial hyperresponsiveness. An ovalbumin
(OVA)-induced, chronic inflammatory airway murine asthma model was used to
examine the status of pulmonary inflammation after the administration of A.
membranaceus. The IgE levels in serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed a
tendency to decrease after the administration of A. membranaceus. The number of
eosinophils decreased and infiltration of inflammatory cells and collagen
deposition declined in lung sections after A. membranaceus administration. The
RNA and protein levels of Th2 cytokines and the ratio of the GATA3/T-bet mRNA
levels decreased after A. membranaceus treatment. Furthermore, the mRNA level of 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), a nuclear hormone receptor,
increased in the lung tissues of A. membranaceus-treated mice. Finally, an A.
membranaceus water extract activated PPAR<U+03B3> activity in either human embryonic
kidney 293 (HEK293) or A549 cells in a PPAR<U+03B3>-responsive element-containing
luciferase reporter assay. These results indicate that A. membranaceus has an
inhibitory effect on airway inflammation in a murine model of asthma through
modulating the imbalanced relationship between Th1 and Th2 cytokines.

PMID: 25264079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Immunology. 2015 May;145(1):11-23. doi: 10.1111/imm.12393.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 controls the stability of regulatory T cells
by intrinsic and extrinsic pathways.

Sawant DV(1), Wu H, Yao W, Sehra S, Kaplan MH, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells are essential to maintain immune homeostasis, 
yet controversy exists about the stability of this cell population.
Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6(-/-) ) mice develop severe and spontaneous T helper type 2
(Th2) inflammation and Bcl6-deficient Treg cells are ineffective at controlling
Th2 responses. We used a lineage tracing approach to analyse the fate of Treg
cells in these mice. In the periphery of Bcl6(-/-) mice, increased numbers of
Foxp3-negative 'exTreg' cells were found, particularly in the CD25(+) population.
ExTreg cells from Bcl6(-/-) mice expressed increased interleukin-17 (IL-17) and
extremely elevated levels of Th2 cytokines compared with wild-type exTreg cells. 
Although Treg cells normally express only low levels of cytokines, Treg cells
from Bcl6(-/-) mice secreted higher levels of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13 and IL-17 than
wild-type conventional T cells. Next, Treg-specific conditional Bcl6-deficient
(Bcl6(Foxp3-/-) ) mice were analysed. Bcl6(Foxp3-/-) mice do not develop
inflammatory disease, indicating a requirement for non-Treg cells for
inflammation in Bcl6(-/-) mice, and have normal numbers of exTreg cells. We
induced Th2-type allergic airway inflammation in Bcl6(Foxp3-/-) mice, and found
that while exTreg cytokine expression was normal, Bcl6-deficient Treg cells
expressed higher levels of the Th2-specific regulator Gata3 than Bcl6(+) Treg
cells. Bcl6(Foxp3-/-) mice had increased numbers of Th2 cells after induction of 
airway inflammation and increased T cells in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
These data show both Treg-intrinsic and Treg-extrinsic roles for Bcl6 in
controlling Treg cell stability and Th2 inflammation, and support the idea that
Bcl6 expression in Treg cells is critical for controlling Th2 responses.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4405320 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25262912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:181-207. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_7.

Differentiation, regulation and function of Th9 cells.

Jia L(1), Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control Research of Ministry of Education, 
Zhongshan School of Medicine, Institute of Immunology, Sun Yat-Sen University,
74th, Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Naïve CD4(+) T cells are activated and differentiate to distinct lineages of T
helper (Th) cells, which are involved in physiological and pathological processes
by obtaining the potential to produce different lineage-specific cytokines that
mediate adaptive immunity. In the past decade, our knowledge of Th cells has been
significantly expanded with the findings of new lineages. Interleukin (IL)-9
producing T cells are recently identified. In consideration of the ability to
preferentially secret IL-9, these cells are termed Th9 cells. Given the multiple 
function of IL-9, Th9 cells participate in the lesion of many diseases, such as
allergic inflammation, tumor, and parasitosis. In this chapter, we will focus on 
the cytokines, co-stimulatory factors, and transcriptional signaling pathways,
which regulate Th9 cells development as well as stability, plasticity, and the
multiple roles of Th9 cells in vivo.

PMID: 25261208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:45-65. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_3.

Th1/Th2 cell's function in immune system.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y, Gu W, He L, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

CD4+ T helper cells regulate appropriate cellular and humoral immune responses to
a wide range of pathogens and get involved in many diseases progress. The balance
of the earliest determined CD4+ T helper cell subsets, Th1 and Th2, play an
important role in allergy and autoimmune diseases. During the research, Animal
models in immunology research are necessary and always the powerful tools for the
basic scientific research. With the new sequence technologies, the finding of key
gene mutation in Th1/Th2 cells has been proved to be related to human diseases.
Here, we review four animal models about four key genes in Th1/Th2 cells to
introduce the balance between Th1/Th2 cells. Furthermore, the related genetic
mutations in human diseases and the new therapies are reviewed in this chapter,
which show the importance of Th1/Th2 cells in human diseases further.

PMID: 25261204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:15-44. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_2.

TH1/TH2 cell differentiation and molecular signals.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y, Gu W, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Erratum in
    Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:E1-2.

The distinctive differentiated states of the CD4+ T helper cells are determined
by the set of transcription factors and the genes transcribed by the
transcription factors. In vitro induction models, the major determinants of the
cytokines present during the T-cell receptor (TCR)-mediated activation process.
IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express T-bet and STAT4 and
differentiate to TH1 cells, while IL-4 make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express
STAT6 and GATA3 and differentiated to TH2 cells. Even through T-bet and GATA3 are
master regulators for TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. There are many other
transcription factors, such as RUNX family proteins, IRF4, Dec2, Gfi1, Hlx, and
JunB that can impair TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. In recent years, noncoding
RNAs (microRNA and long noncoding RNA) join in the crowd. The leukocytes should
migrate to the right place to show their impact. There are some successful
strategies, which are revealed to targeting chemokines and their receptors, that 
have been developed to treat human immune-related diseases.

PMID: 25261203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31373-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.579839. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

Absent, small or homeotic 2-like protein (ASH2L) enhances the transcription of
the estrogen receptor a gene through GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3).

Qi J(1), Huo L(2), Zhu YT(3), Zhu YJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Maternal and Child Hospital of Shaanxi Province, Xian, Shaanxi,
China. (2)the Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and. (3)the Department
of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611. (4)the Department of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611 y-zhu2@northwestern.edu.

ASH2L is a component of MLL complexes that confer H3K4 trimethylation. The ASH2L 
gene is located at 8q11-12, which is often amplified in breast cancers. We found 
that increased ASH2L expression, which can result from gene amplification, is
often correlated with increased ERa expression in both breast cancer cell lines
and primary breast cancers. Forced expression of ASH2L induced ERa expression in 
mammary epithelial cells, whereas depletion of ASH2L suppressed ERa expression in
breast cancer cells. To understand the mechanism by which ASH2L regulates ERa
expression, we identified GATA3 as the binding protein of ASH2L. ASH2L was shown 
to potentiate the transcriptional activity of GATA3. ASH2L was recruited to the
enhancer of the ERa gene through GATA3 to promote ERa transcription. This study
established that ASH2L enhances ERa expression as a coactivator of GATA3 in
breast cancers.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223337
PMID: 25258321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Oral Pathol Med. 2015 Jul;44(6):444-8. doi: 10.1111/jop.12253. Epub 2014 Sep
25.

Aberrant expression of caspase 14 in salivary gland carcinomas.

Lemound J(1), Stucki-Koch A(2), Stoetzer M(1), Kokemüller H(1), Gellrich NC(1),
Kreipe H(2), Hussein K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniomaxillofacial Surgery, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Caspase 14 is reduced in adenocarcinomas of the stomach and colon. In
contrast, breast and lung adenocarcinomas frequently show an overexpression of
caspase 14. Salivary gland adenocarcinomas have not been evaluated for potential 
aberrant caspase 14 expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Samples from salivary gland carcinomas (n = 43) were
analysed by immunohistochemistry (caspase 14, filaggrin, GATA3 and Ki67) and
fluorescence in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Caspase 14 is not expressed in normal salivary glands, while in a
subfraction of carcinomas (32%) an aberrant expression was found. Filaggrin could
not be detected. Caspase 14 staining was not associated with tumour
dedifferentiation, GATA3 expression or amplification of gene locus 19p13.
CONCLUSION: In summary, aberrant expression of caspase 14 can be found in a
subfraction of salivary gland carcinomas but could not be used as a biomarker for
a specific carcinoma subtype of the salivary gland.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25257949  [PubMed - in process]


291. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Sep 25;8(9):e3191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003191.
eCollection 2014.

Strong type 1, but impaired type 2, immune responses contribute to Orientia
tsutsugamushi-induced pathology in mice.

Soong L(1), Wang H(2), Shelite TR(1), Liang Y(2), Mendell NL(3), Sun J(2), Gong
B(3), Valbuena GA(3), Bouyer DH(3), Walker DH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Pathology, Center for
Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Center for Tropical Diseases, Sealy 
Center for Vaccine Development, Institute of Human Infections and Immunity,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology, Center
for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Center for Tropical Diseases,
Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, Institute of Human Infections and Immunity,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Scrub typhus is a neglected, but important, tropical disease, which puts
one-third of the world's population at risk. The disease is caused by Orientia
tsutsugamushi, an obligately intracellular Gram-negative bacterium. Dysregulation
in immune responses is known to contribute to disease pathogenesis; however, the 
nature and molecular basis of immune alterations are poorly defined. This study
made use of a newly developed murine model of severe scrub typhus and focused on 
innate regulators and vascular growth factors in O. tsutsugamushi-infected liver,
lungs and spleen. We found no activation or even reduction in base-line
expression for multiple molecules (IL-7, IL-4, IL-13, GATA3, ROR-<U+03B3>t, and CXCL12) 
at 2, 6 and 10 days post-infection. This selective impairment in type 2-related
immune responses correlated with a significant activation of the genes for IL-1ß,
IL-6, IL-10, TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, as well as CXCR3- and CXCR1-related chemokines in
inflamed tissues. The elevated angiopoietin (Ang)-2 expression and Ang-2/Ang-1
ratios suggested excessive inflammation and the loss of endothelial integrity.
These alterations, together with extensive recruitment of myeloperoxidase
(MPO)-expressing neutrophils and the influx of CD3+ T cells, contributed to acute
tissue damage and animal death. This is the first report of selective alterations
in a panel of immune regulators during early O. tsutsugamushi infection in
intravenously inoculated C57BL/6 mice. Our findings shed new light on the
pathogenic mechanisms associated with severe scrub typhus and suggest potential
targets for therapeutic investigation.

PMCID: PMC4177881
PMID: 25254971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Clin Epigenetics. 2014 Sep 19;6(1):17. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-6-17. eCollection
2014.

Oral contraceptives modify the effect of GATA3 polymorphisms on the risk of
asthma at the age of 18 years via DNA methylation.

Guthikonda K(1), Zhang H(1), Nolan VG(1), Soto-Ramírez N(1), Ziyab AH(2), Ewart
S(3), Arshad HS(4), Patil V(4), Holloway JW(5), Lockett GA(6), Karmaus W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Environmental Health, School of
Public Health, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA. (2)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Arnold School of Public Health, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA. (3)Department of Large Animal Clinical
Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA. (4)Clinical and
Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, and NIHR Respiratory Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK ; The David Hide Asthma
and Allergy Research Centre, Isle of Wight, UK. (5)Clinical and Experimental
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, and NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK ; Human Development and Health,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. (6)Human
Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of asthma in girls increases after puberty. Previous
studies have detected associations between sex hormones and asthma, as well as
between sex hormones and T helper 2 (Th2) asthma-typical immune responses.
Therefore, we hypothesized that exogenous or endogenous sex hormone exposure
(represented by oral contraceptive pill (OCP) use and early menarche,
respectively) are associated with DNA methylation (DNA-M) of the Th2
transcription factor gene, GATA3, in turn affecting the risk of asthma in girls, 
possibly in interaction with genetic variants. Blood samples were collected from 
245 female participants aged 18 years randomly selected for methylation analysis 
from the Isle of Wight birth cohort, UK. Information on use of OCPs, age at
menarche, and concurrent asthma were assessed by questionnaire. Genome-wide DNA-M
was determined using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 beadchip. In a
first stage, we tested the interaction between sex hormone exposure and genetic
variants on DNA-M of specific cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites. In a second
stage, we determined whether these CpG sites interact with genetic variants in
GATA3 to explain the risk of asthma.
RESULTS: Interactions between OCP use and seven single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of GATA3 were analyzed for 14 CpG sites (stage 1). The interaction between
OCP use and SNP rs1269486 was found to be associated with the methylation level
of cg17124583 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002, false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). DNA-M of
this same CpG site was also influenced by the interaction between age at menarche
and rs1269486 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0017). In stage 2, we found that cg17124583 modified the
association of SNP rs422628 with asthma risk at the age of 18 years (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006,
FDR adjusted P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). Subjects with genotype AG showed an increase in average
risk ratio (RR) from 0.31 (95% CI: 0.10 to 0.8) to 11.65 (95% CI: 1.71 to 79.5)
when methylation level increased from 0.02 to 0.12, relative to genotype AA.
CONCLUSION: A two-stage model consisting of genetic variants in the GATA3 gene,
OCP use, age at menarche, and DNA-M may explain how sex hormones in women can
increase the asthma prevalence after puberty.

PMCID: PMC4171400
PMID: 25250096  [PubMed]


293. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3646-57. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444848. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

The adaptor protein SAP regulates type II NKT-cell development, cytokine
production, and cytotoxicity against lymphoma.

Weng X(1), Liao CM, Bagchi S, Cardell SL, Stein PL, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells represent a unique lineage of immunoregulatory T cells 
that are divided into two groups, type I and type II, based on their TCR usage.
Because there are no specific tools to identify type II NKT cells, little is
known about their developmental requirements and functional regulation. In our
previous study, we showed that signaling lymphocytic activation molecule
associated protein (SAP) is essential for the development of type II NKT cells.
Here, using a type II NKT-cell TCR transgenic mouse model, we demonstrated that
CD1d-expressing hematopoietic cells, but not thymic epithelial cells, meditate
efficient selection of type II NKT cells. Furthermore, we showed that SAP
regulates type II NKT-cell development by controlling early growth response 2
protein and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger expression. SAP-deficient 24aß
transgenic T cells (24aß T cells) exhibited an immature phenotype with reduced
Th2 cytokine-producing capacity and diminished cytotoxicity to CD1d-expressing
lymphoma cells. The impaired IL-4 production by SAP-deficient 24aß T cells was
associated with reduced IFN regulatory factor 4 and GATA-3 induction following
TCR stimulation. Collectively, these data suggest that SAP is critical for
regulating type II NKT cell responses. Aberrant responses of these T cells may
contribute to the immune dysregulation observed in X-linked lymphoproliferative
disease caused by mutations in SAP.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4261009
PMID: 25236978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 6;4(5):461-73. eCollection 2014.

GATA3 in the urinary bladder: suppression of neoplastic transformation and
down-regulation by androgens.

Li Y(1), Ishiguro H(2), Kawahara T(2), Miyamoto Y(3), Izumi K(3), Miyamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center Rochester, NY, USA ; Department of Urology, 2nd Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine Hangzhou, China. (2)Departments 
of Pathology and Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, 
MD, USA ; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, USA.

Recent evidence suggests the involvement of sex hormone receptors in bladder
cancer initiation, while precise functions of androgens and estrogens in the
carcinogenesis step remain poorly understood. We recently found down-regulation
of GATA3, a zinc-finger transcription factor and a new urothelial marker, in
bladder cancer, which also correlated with expression status of androgen receptor
(AR) and estrogen receptors (ERs). We here assessed whether GATA3 acted as a
suppressor of bladder tumorigenesis and sex hormones exerted an influence on
GATA3 in non-neoplastic urothelial cells. Androgen (R1881, dihydrotestosterone)
treatment in SVHUC immortalized normal urothelial cells stably expressing AR
(SVHUC-AR) decreased GATA3 expression at both mRNA and protein levels, which was 
abolished by anti-androgens. Conversely, 17ß-estradiol treatment increased it in 
SVHUC-control endogenously expressing ERß. GATA3 levels were also found to be
higher in intact female mouse bladders compared with intact males, and
orchiectomy/ovariectomy augmented/reduced GATA3 expression, respectively, which
was at least partially restored by dihydrotestosterone/17ß-estradiol supplement. 
Additionally, GATA3 silencing via short hairpin RNA (shRNA) promoted cell
proliferation of SVHUC with exposure to a chemical carcinogen
3-methylcholanthrene. In vitro transformation assay with 3-methylcholanthrene
then showed a significantly higher number of colonies in SVHUC-AR/GATA3-shRNA,
compared with control SVHUC, and R1881 further induced colony formation. GATA3
knockdown also resulted in down-regulation of the molecules that play a
protective role in bladder tumorigenesis (i.e. UGT1A, PTEN, p53, p21) and
up-regulation of oncogenic genes (i.e. c-myc, cyclin D1, cyclin D3, cyclin E,
FGFR3). Thus, GATA3 likely prevented neoplastic transformation of urothelial
cells. Furthermore, sex hormone signals contrary regulated GATA3 in the bladder. 
These findings may offer not only a molecular basis for the gender-specific
difference in bladder cancer incidence but also great potential for androgen
deprivation as a chemopreventive option for tumor recurrence.

PMCID: PMC4163611
PMID: 25232488  [PubMed]


295. Chin J Cancer. 2014 Oct;33(10):501-10. doi: 10.5732/cjc.014.10066. Epub 2014 Sep 
16.

Differential expression of genes involved in the epigenetic regulation of cell
identity in normal human mammary cell commitment and differentiation.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P, Oriana S, Biganzoli E, Ambrogi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, Milan 20133,
Italy; danila.coradini@gmail.com.

The establishment and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell identity depends on 
the activity of a group of proteins, collectively called maintenance proteins,
that act as epigenetic regulators of gene transcription through DNA methylation, 
histone modification, and chromatin remodeling. Increasing evidence indicates
that dysregulation of these crucial proteins may disrupt epithelial cell
integrity and trigger breast tumor initiation. Therefore, we explored in silico
the expression pattern of a panel of 369 genes known to be involved in the
establishment and maintenance of epithelial cell identity and mammary gland
remodeling in cell subpopulations isolated from normal human mammary tissue and
selectively enriched in their content of bipotent progenitors, committed luminal 
progenitors, and differentiated myoepithelial or differentiated luminal cells.
The results indicated that, compared to bipotent cells, differentiated
myoepithelial and luminal subpopulations were both characterized by the
differential expression of 4 genes involved in cell identity maintenance: CBX6
and PCGF2, encoding proteins belonging to the Polycomb group, and SMARCD3 and
SMARCE1, encoding proteins belonging to the Trithorax group. In addition to these
common genes, the myoepithelial phenotype was associated with the differential
expression of HDAC1, which encodes histone deacetylase 1, whereas the luminal
phenotype was associated with the differential expression of SMARCA4 and HAT1,
which encode a Trithorax protein and histone acetylase 1, respectively. The
luminal compartment was further characterized by the overexpression of ALDH1A3
and GATA3, and the down-regulation of NOTCH4 and CCNB1, with the latter
suggesting a block in cell cycle progression at the G2 phase. In contrast,
myoepithelial differentiation was associated with the overexpression of MYC and
the down-regulation of CCNE1, with the latter suggesting a block in cell cycle
progression at the G1 phase.

PMCID: PMC4198753
PMID: 25223915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Immunol Lett. 2014 Nov;162(1 Pt A):217-22. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.09.002. Epub
2014 Sep 8.

Up-regulation of Galectin-9 in vivo results in immunosuppressive effects and
prolongs survival of liver allograft in rats.

Liu YM(1), Chen Y(2), Li JZ(3), Gong JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 
76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China. Electronic address:
ncisgibbs@163.com. (2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary Surgery and
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China. Electronic
address: doctorcy007@163.com. (3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary
Surgery and Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China.
Electronic address: vitamin198305@163.com. (4)Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Hepatobiliary Surgery and Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010,
China. Electronic address: gongjianping11@126.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute rejection is still a major cause of graft
dysfunction and would jeopardize recipients' post-transplantation survival.
Current studies demonstrate that Galectin-9 (Gal-9) is associated with
down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, thus, possesses a negative immune 
regulatory role. However, the specific role of Gal-9 in liver transplant remains 
unknown.
METHODS: To establish acute rejection models of rat liver transplantation
(Lewis-BN, n = 45), recipients were randomly divided into following three groups:
the transfected group (n = 15); the blank plasmid group (n = 15); and the control
group (n = 15). The transfected group was perfused with Ad-galectin-9 through the
portal vein during the cold ischemia period. The blank plasmid group was perfused
with non-target vector, and the control group was perfused with saline. The acute
rejection was assayed by pathological examination; Gal-9, T-bet, ROR<U+03B3>t, GATA3 and
Foxp3 mRNA expression was detected by real-time PCR; Western blots and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed to measure IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-10 and
IL-17 expression.
RESULTS: The pathological change of the transfected group was ameliorated than
that of the other two groups. The Gal-9 mRNA level in the transfected group was
much higher than that in the other two groups (*P < 0.05); T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA
levels were significantly lower in the transfected group than in the other two
groups while GATA3 and Foxp3 were not shown statistics significances (*P < 0.05).
The IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 levels in the transfected group were significantly lower than
in the other two groups (*P < 0.05 for both protein and serum levels).
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of Gal-9 in vivo turns immune system toward
immnuosuppression and prolongs rats liver allograft survival by the diminishment 
of Th1/Th17.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Jan;39(1):101-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000315.

GATA-3 expression in trophoblastic tissues: an immunohistochemical study of 445
cases, including diagnostic utility.

Banet N(1), Gown AM, Shih IeM, Kay Li Q, Roden RB, Nucci MR, Cheng L, Przybycin
CG, Nasseri-Nik N, Wu LS, Netto GJ, Ronnett BM, Vang R.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Division of Gynecologic Pathology §§Department of
Pathology, Division of Urologic Pathology Departments of Gynecology & Obstetrics
§Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Hospital
<U+2225>Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Bayview Hospital Department of
International Health, Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD PhenoPath Laboratories, Seattle, WA
¶Department of Pathology, Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA #Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN **Robert J.
Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, The Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH Department of Pathology, South Miami Hospital, Baptist Health,
South Miami, FL.

Immunohistochemical expression of GATA-3 is seen predominantly in non-neoplastic 
bladder and breast epithelium and their respective carcinomas; however, data on
expression in normal and lesional trophoblastic tissues are limited.
Immunohistochemical staining for GATA-3 was assessed in a range of
normal/lesional trophoblastic tissues and tumors in the differential diagnosis
(n=445), including nonmolar products of conceptions/second and third trimester
placentas/ectopic pregnancies, hydatidiform moles, placental site nodules,
normal/exaggerated implantation sites, choriocarcinomas, epithelioid
trophoblastic tumors, placental site trophoblastic tumors, atypical smooth muscle
tumors (including leiomyosarcoma), and cervical and pulmonary squamous cell
carcinomas. The extent of expression (0 to 4+) and intensity (weak to strong)
were recorded. All cases with developing trophoblast/non-neoplastic trophoblastic
proliferation and 81% of trophoblastic neoplasms were positive. Of all
non-neoplastic trophoblast cell types, expression was observed in cytotrophoblast
in 89% of cases, syncytiotrophoblast in 50%, intermediate trophoblast in 100%,
and villous trophoblastic columns in 100%. Increasing gestational age was
associated with a decrease in extent/intensity of expression in non-neoplastic
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast, whereas intermediate trophoblast
maintained diffuse and strong expression from early to late gestation (P<0.0001).
Eighty-nine percent of normal/exaggerated implantation sites showed 3+ or 4+
expression, whereas staining in 55% of placental site nodules was 1+ or 2+.
Staining for GATA-3 was present in 78% of choriocarcinomas, 95% of epithelioid
trophoblastic tumors, and 71% of placental site trophoblastic tumors. Although
the number of choriocarcinomas and placental site trophoblastic tumors that
showed a spectrum of expression ranging from negative to diffuse was relatively
evenly distributed, 81% of epithelioid trophoblastic tumors had 3+ or 4+
staining. None of the atypical smooth muscle tumors and 3% of squamous cell
carcinomas were positive, all of which exhibited weak staining. We conclude that 
GATA-3 is frequently expressed in normal and lesional trophoblastic tissues. It
is also differentially expressed in intermediate trophoblast and
cytotrophoblast/syncytiotrophoblast, which varies according to time during
pregnancy. This study expands the spectrum of neoplasms known to express GATA-3. 
Thus, recognition of expression in trophoblastic tumors is important, because it 
can present a diagnostic pitfall in the assessment of suspected metastatic
bladder or breast carcinomas involving the gynecologic tract. In the evaluation
of diagnostically problematic tumors for which trophoblastic neoplasms are in the
differential diagnosis, such as leiomyosarcoma and squamous cell carcinoma,
GATA-3 can be included as part of an immunohistochemical panel particularly when 
other trophoblastic markers are either not available or yield ambiguous results.

PMCID: PMC4268033
PMID: 25188865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3596-604. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444963. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

CD4(+) FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells suppress fatal T helper 2 cell immunity during
pulmonary fungal infection.

Schulze B(1), Piehler D, Eschke M, von Buttlar H, Köhler G, Sparwasser T, Alber
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology/Molecular Pathogenesis, Center for Biotechnology and
Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

The opportunistic fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans causes lung
inflammation and fatal meningitis in immunocompromised patients. Regulatory T
(Treg) cells play an important role in controlling immunity and homeostasis.
However, their functional role during fungal infection is largely unknown. In
this study, we investigated the role of Treg cells during experimental murine
pulmonary C. neoformans infection. We show that the number of CD4(+) FoxP3(+)
Treg cells in the lung increases significantly within the first 4 weeks after
intranasal infection of BALB/c wild-type mice. To define the function of Treg
cells we used DEREG mice allowing selective depletion of CD4(+) FoxP3(+) Treg
cells by application of diphtheria toxin. In Treg cell-depleted mice, stronger
pulmonary allergic inflammation with enhanced mucus production and pronounced
eosinophilia, increased IgE production, and elevated fungal lung burden were
found. This was accompanied by higher frequencies of GATA-3(+) T helper (Th) 2
cells with elevated capacity to produce interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13. In
contrast, only a mild increase in the Th1-associated immune response unrelated to
the fungal infection was observed. In conclusion, the data demonstrate that
during fungal infection pulmonary Treg cells are induced and preferentially
suppress Th2 cells thereby mediating enhanced fungal control.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25187063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3470-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301663. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

GATA-3 dose-dependent checkpoints in early T cell commitment.

Scripture-Adams DD(1), Damle SS(1), Li L(1), Elihu KJ(1), Qin S(1), Arias AM(1), 
Butler RR 3rd(1), Champhekar A(1), Zhang JA(1), Rothenberg EV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125. (2)Division of Biology and Biological
Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
evroth@its.caltech.edu.

GATA-3 expression is crucial for T cell development and peaks during commitment
to the T cell lineage, midway through the CD4(-)CD8(-) (double-negative [DN])
stages 1-3. We used RNA interference and conditional deletion to reduce GATA-3
protein acutely at specific points during T cell differentiation in vitro. Even
moderate GATA-3 reduction killed DN1 cells, delayed progression to the DN2 stage,
skewed DN2 gene regulation, and blocked appearance of the DN3 phenotype. Although
a Bcl-2 transgene rescued DN1 survival and improved DN2 cell generation, it did
not restore DN3 differentiation. Gene expression analyses (quantitative PCR, RNA 
sequencing) showed that GATA-3-deficient DN2 cells quickly upregulated genes,
including Spi1 (PU.1) and Bcl11a, and downregulated genes, including Cpa3, Ets1, 
Zfpm1, Bcl11b, Il9r, and Il17rb with gene-specific kinetics and dose
dependencies. These targets could mediate two distinct roles played by GATA-3 in 
lineage commitment, as revealed by removing wild-type or GATA-3-deficient early T
lineage cells from environmental Notch signals. GATA-3 worked as a potent
repressor of B cell potential even at low expression levels, so that only full
deletion of GATA-3 enabled pro-T cells to reveal B cell potential. The ability of
GATA-3 to block B cell development did not require T lineage commitment factor
Bcl11b. In prethymic multipotent precursors, however, titration of GATA-3
activity using tamoxifen-inducible GATA-3 showed that GATA-3 inhibits B and
myeloid developmental alternatives at different threshold doses. Furthermore,
differential impacts of a GATA-3 obligate repressor construct imply that B and
myeloid development are inhibited through distinct transcriptional mechanisms.
Thus, the pattern of GATA-3 expression sequentially produces B lineage exclusion,
T lineage progression, and myeloid-lineage exclusion for commitment.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4170028
PMID: 25172496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Nov;23(1):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.08.016.
Epub 2014 Sep 6.

Allergic manifestation by black gram (Vigna mungo) proteins in allergic patients,
BALB/c mice and RBL-2H3 cells.

Verma AK(1), Kumar S(2), Sharma A(1), Kumar D(2), Roy R(1), Gupta RK(2),
Chaudhari BP(3), Giridhar BH(4), Das M(1), Dwivedi PD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Food, Drug and Chemical Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research (CSIR-IITR), MG Marg-80, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226001, India; Academy
of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. (2)Food, Drug
and Chemical Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research
(CSIR-IITR), MG Marg-80, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226001, India. (3)Central
Pathology Laboratory, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR),
M.G. Marg, Post Box No. 80, Lucknow 226 001, India. (4)Department of TB, Chest & 
Respiratory Diseases, KS Hegde Medical Academy, Mangalore, India. (5)Food, Drug
and Chemical Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research
(CSIR-IITR), MG Marg-80, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226001, India; Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. Electronic address:
pddwivedi@yahoo.com.

The prevalence of black gram (Vigna mungo) induced allergic reactions are
reported from several parts of the world including Asia and Australia. But, a
thorough exploration of the allergic reactions induced by black gram proteins is 
still lacking. Therefore, efforts have been made to explore black gram allergy
using in vivo and in vitro approaches. In this study, Simulated Gastric Fluid
(SGF) assay and IgE immunoblotting were carried out to identify clinically
relevant allergens of black gram. BALB/c mice and RBL-2H3 cells were used for
elucidation of allergenic reactions of black gram proteins. Further, this study
was extended to screen black gram sensitive patients among nasobronchial allergic
patients on the basis of clinical history, skin prick test (SPT), specific IgE
levels and IgE immunoblotting. Enhanced levels of specific IgE, IgG1/IgG2a (p <
0.05), histamine (p < 0.05), clinical symptoms, pathological indications in the
lungs, intestine and spleen were evident in black gram sensitized BALB/c mice.
Moreover, the expression of Th2 cytokine transcripts and GATA-3/T-bet ratio was
found enhanced in the treated group. In vitro studies on RBL-2H3 cells,showed
increased release of ß-hexosaminidase (p < 0.05), histamine (p < 0.05), cysteinyl
leukotriene (p<0.05) and prostaglandin D2 (p < 0.05). Further, 8.5% of screened
patients were found allergic to black gram and concomitant sensitization with
other allergens has shown the possibility of further enhancement in allergenic
problem. Conclusively, the present study suggested that black gram consumption
may be responsible for inducing immediate type of allergic sensitization in
susceptible subjects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Pharmacology. 2014;94(1-2):51-9. doi: 10.1159/000362843. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Protective effects of astragaloside IV against ovalbumin-induced lung
inflammation are regulated/mediated by T-bet/GATA-3.

Qiu YY(1), Zhu JX, Bian T, Gao F, Qian XF, Du Q, Yuan MY, Sun H, Shi LZ, Yu MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, China.

Bronchial asthma is characterized by chronic lung inflammation, airway
hyperresponsiveness, and airway remodelling. Astragaloside IV
(3-O-ß-D-xylopyranosyl-6-O-ß-D-glucopyranosyl-cycloastragenol, AST), the primary 
pure saponin isolated from the root of Astragalus membranaceus, is an effective
compound with distinct pharmacological effects including anti-inflammation,
immunoregulation, and antifibrosis. However, the effect of AST on asthma remains 
unclear. In the present study, in the murine model of asthma, the airway
hyperresponsiveness was relieved after treatment with AST, accompanied by a
reduction of inflammatory cells. In addition, the levels of IL-4 and IL-5
decreased, while the IFN-<U+03B3> level increased, in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The 
compound also significantly inhibited the synthesis of GATA-3-encoding mRNA and
protein in addition to increasing the synthesis of T-bet-encoding mRNA and
protein in both lung tissues and CD4+ T cells. Our findings indicate that AST
treatment inhibits ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation by modulating the key
master switches GATA-3 and T-bet, which results in committing T helper cells to a
Th1 phenotype.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25171656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e106318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106318.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of circulating microRNA expression in patients with a
ventricular septal defect.

Li D(1), Ji L(2), Liu L(3), Liu Y(2), Hou H(2), Yu K(2), Sun Q(2), Zhao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, China; School of Public Health,
Taishan Medical University, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (2)School of Public
Health, Taishan Medical University, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (3)Tai'an
Children's Hospital, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (4)Department of
Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

OBJECTIVES: Ventricular septal defect (VSD), one of the most common types of
congenital heart disease (CHD), results from a combination of environmental and
genetic factors. Recent studies demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved
in development of CHD. This study was to characterize the expression of miRNAs
that might be involved in the development or reflect the consequences of VSD.
METHODS: MiRNA microarray analysis and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) were employed to determine the miRNA expression profile from 3 
patients with VSD and 3 VSD-free controls. 3 target gene databases were employed 
to predict the target genes of differentially expressed miRNAs. miRNAs that were 
generally consensus across the three databases were selected and then
independently validated using real time PCR in plasma samples from 20 VSD
patients and 15 VSD-free controls. Target genes of validated 8 miRNAs were
predicted using bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: 36 differentially expressed miRNAs were found in the patients with VSD
and the VSD-free controls. Compared with VSD-free controls, expression of 15
miRNAs were up-regulated and 21 miRNAs were downregulated in the VSD group. 15
miRNAs were selected based on database analysis results and expression levels of 
8 miRNAs were validated. The results of the real time PCR were consistent with
those of the microarray analysis. Gene ontology analysis indicated that the top
target genes were mainly related to cardiac right ventricle morphogenesis.
NOTCH1, HAND1, ZFPM2, and GATA3 were predicted as targets of hsa-let-7e-5p,
hsa-miR-222-3p and hsa-miR-433.
CONCLUSION: We report for the first time the circulating miRNA profile for
patients with VSD and showed that 7 miRNAs were downregulated and 1 upregulated
when matched to VSD-free controls. Analysis revealed target genes involved in
cardiac development were probably regulated by these miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4148428
PMID: 25165856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014 Sep;29 Suppl 4:iv55-62. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfu195.

Genetics of calcium homeostasis in humans: continuum between monogenic diseases
and continuous phenotypes.

Bonny O(1), Bochud M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service of Nephrology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (2)Community Prevention Unit, Institute for Social and Preventive
Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Extracellular calcium participates in several key physiological functions, such
as control of blood coagulation, bone calcification or muscle contraction.
Calcium homeostasis in humans is regulated in part by genetic factors, as
illustrated by rare monogenic diseases characterized by hypo or hypercalcaemia.
Both serum calcium and urinary calcium excretion are heritable continuous traits 
in humans. Serum calcium levels are tightly regulated by two main hormonal
systems, i.e. parathyroid hormone and vitamin D, which are themselves also
influenced by genetic factors. Recent technological advances in molecular biology
allow for the screening of the human genome at an unprecedented level of detail
and using hypothesis-free approaches, such as genome-wide association studies
(GWAS). GWAS identified novel loci for calcium-related phenotypes (i.e. serum
calcium and 25-OH vitamin D) that shed new light on the biology of calcium in
humans. The substantial overlap (i.e. CYP24A1, CASR, GATA3; CYP2R1) between genes
involved in rare monogenic diseases and genes located within loci identified in
GWAS suggests a genetic and phenotypic continuum between monogenic diseases of
calcium homeostasis and slight disturbances of calcium homeostasis in the general
population. Future studies using whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing will
further advance our understanding of the genetic architecture of calcium
homeostasis in humans. These findings will likely provide new insight into the
complex mechanisms involved in calcium homeostasis and hopefully lead to novel
preventive and therapeutic approaches. Keyword: calcium, monogenic, genome-wide
association studies, genetics.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25165186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):7729-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3684-6. Epub 2014 
Aug 26.

Keratin 19 expression correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer.

Kabir NN(1), Rönnstrand L, Kazi JU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biochemistry, KN Biomedical Research Institute,
Barisal, Bangladesh.

Breast cancer expression profiling has been used for determining biomarkers.
Using gene expression profiles of 2,400 patients we identified keratin 19 (KRT19)
as a highly deregulated gene in breast cancer. KRT19 expression is independent of
patient race but correlates with disease grade, and ER, PR or HER2 expression.
Expression of TPD52, GATA3 and KRT18 was increased in KRT19 expressing patients. 
Furthermore, KRT19 expression was associated with ER up-regulation and Luminal B 
gene signatures, as well as a constitutive RAF1 signaling pathway. Finally, KRT19
expression correlated with poor overall survival. Taken together, our results
suggest that KRT19 expression can be used as a prognostic marker.

PMID: 25156534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Nov;34(21):3993-4007. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00919-14. Epub 2014
Aug 25.

Two histone/protein acetyltransferases, CBP and p300, are indispensable for
Foxp3+ T-regulatory cell development and function.

Liu Y(1), Wang L(1), Han R(1), Beier UH(2), Akimova T(1), Bhatti T(3), Xiao H(2),
Cole PA(4), Brindle PK(5), Hancock WW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplant Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine and Biesecker Center for Study of Pediatric Liver Diseases, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Division of Nephrology,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Anatomic Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology and
Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA. (6)Division of Transplant Immunology,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Biesecker Center for Study of
Pediatric Liver Diseases, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
whancock@mail.med.upenn.edu.

T-regulatory (Treg) cells are important to immune homeostasis, and Treg cell
deficiency or dysfunction leads to autoimmune disease. A histone/protein
acetyltransferase (HAT), p300, was recently found to be important for Treg
function and stability, but further insights into the mechanisms by which p300 or
other HATs affect Treg biology are needed. Here we show that CBP, a p300 paralog,
is also important in controlling Treg function and stability. Thus, while mice
with Treg-specific deletion of CBP or p300 developed minimal autoimmune disease, 
the combined deletion of CBP and p300 led to fatal autoimmunity by 3 to 4 weeks
of age. The effects of CBP and p300 deletion on Treg development are dose
dependent and involve multiple mechanisms. CBP and p300 cooperate with several
key Treg transcription factors that act on the Foxp3 promoter to promote Foxp3
production. CBP and p300 also act on the Foxp3 conserved noncoding sequence 2
(CNS2) region to maintain Treg stability in inflammatory environments by
regulating pCREB function and GATA3 expression, respectively. Lastly, CBP and
p300 regulate the epigenetic status and function of Foxp3. Our findings provide
insights into how HATs orchestrate multiple aspects of Treg development and
function and identify overlapping but also discrete activities for p300 and CBP
in control of Treg cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4386456
PMID: 25154413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:914326. doi: 10.1155/2014/914326. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Myocardial gene expression of T-bet, GATA-3, Ror-<U+03B3>t, FoxP3, and hallmark
cytokines in chronic Chagas disease cardiomyopathy: an essentially unopposed
TH1-type response.

Nogueira LG(1), Santos RH(2), Fiorelli AI(2), Mairena EC(1), Benvenuti LA(3),
Bocchi EA(4), Stolf NA(2), Kalil J(1), Cunha-Neto E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo
School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil ; Division of Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 01246-903 São
Paulo, SP, Brazil ; Institute for Investigation in Immunology (iii), INCT,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Division of Surgery, Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo School
of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Division of Pathology, Heart
Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Transplantation and Heart Failure Unit, Heart Institute
(InCor), University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Chronic Chagas disease cardiomyopathy (CCC), a late consequence of
Trypanosoma cruzi infection, is an inflammatory cardiomyopathy with prognosis
worse than those of noninflammatory etiology (NIC). Although the T cell-rich
myocarditis is known to play a pathogenetic role, the relative contribution of
each of the functional T cell subsets has never been thoroughly investigated. We 
therefore assessed gene expression of cytokines and transcription factors
involved in differentiation and effector function of each functional T cell
subset (TH1/TH2/TH17/Treg) in CCC, NIC, and heart donor myocardial samples.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Quantitative PCR showed markedly upregulated expression of
IFN-<U+03B3> and transcription factor T-bet, and minor increases of GATA-3; FoxP3 and
CTLA-4; IL-17 and IL-18 in CCC as compared with NIC samples. Conversely,
cytokines expressed by TH2 cells (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) or associated with Treg 
(TGF-ß and IL-10) were not upregulated in CCC myocardium. Expression of
TH1-related genes such as T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-18 correlated with ventricular
dilation, FoxP3, and CTLA-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Results are consistent with a strong local TH1-mediated response in 
most samples, possibly associated with pathological myocardial remodeling, and a 
proportionally smaller FoxP3(+)CTLA4(+) Treg cell population, which is unable to 
completely curb IFN-<U+03B3> production in CCC myocardium, therefore fueling
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4134835
PMID: 25152568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Hum Pathol. 2014 Nov;45(11):2225-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.06.022. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Diagnostic utility and sensitivities of GATA3 antibodies in triple-negative
breast cancer.

Krings G(1), Nystrom M(2), Mehdi I(2), Vohra P(2), Chen YY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143. Electronic address: gregor.krings@ucsfmedctr.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143.

GATA3 is implicated in mammary epithelial development and breast cancer
progression and is an evolving immunohistochemical marker in breast cancer. Often
associated with estrogen receptor (ER) signaling, GATA3 expression has been
reported in ER-negative breast cancers, but systematic evaluation of GATA3
expression in a large set of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) is lacking.
Given low sensitivities of mammaglobin (MGB) and GCDFP15 in metastatic TNBC,
additional markers for site of origin identification would be useful in this
context. We examined immunohistochemical expression of GATA3 in a large group of 
treatment-naive TNBC (n = 111) and ER-positive (n = 39) and HER2-positive (n =
31) breast cancers with commonly used antibody clones, HG3-31 (GATA3-H) and
L50-823 (GATA3-L), and compared GATA3, MGB, and GCDFP15. Respectively, GATA3-L
and GATA3-H were positive in 66% and 44% of TNBC (P = .002), 93% and 79% of
ER-/HER2+ tumors (P = .596), and 100% of ER+/HER2- and ER+/HER2+ tumors (P = 1.00
each). GATA3-L was technically and diagnostically more sensitive than GATA3-H in 
TNBC and was technically more sensitive in other subtypes. MGB (26%) and GCDFP15 
(16%) were less sensitive for TNBC than other subtypes (P < .001). Notably, 56%
and 36% of MGB-/GCDFP15- TNBC were positive with GATA3-L and GATA3-H,
respectively (P = .027). Seventy percent of TNBC were positive for GATA3-L, MGB, 
or GCDFP15 compared with 49% using GATA3-H in the panel. GATA3 is a
diagnostically useful marker for TNBC and is more sensitive than MGB and GCDFP15 
combined. GATA3-L is more sensitive for TNBC than GATA3-H, and an immunopanel of 
GATA3-L, MGB, and GCDFP15 provides optimal diagnostic sensitivity for TNBC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Jan;51(1):59-71. doi:
10.1007/s11626-014-9807-5. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Evaluation of wild yam (Dioscorea villosa) root extract as a potential epigenetic
agent in breast cancer cells.

Aumsuwan P(1), Khan SI, Khan IA, Avula B, Walker LA, Helferich WG,
Katzenellenbogen BS, Dasmahapatra AK.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Product Research, School of Pharmacy, University
of Mississippi, University, MS, 38677, USA.

The present study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of wild yam root extract 
(WYRE) as a potential demethylating agent using two breast cancer cell lines,
MCF-7 (estrogen receptor positive; ER(+)) and MDA-MB-231 (Estrogen receptor
negative; ER(-)), and a methylated gene, GATA3, as a potential marker of breast
cancer development. The cells were treated with WYRE (0-50 µg/mL) for 72 h and
used for viability, mRNA, and methylation analyses. WYRE significantly reduced
viability of both cell lines and enhanced mRNA content of GATA3 in a
concentration-dependent manner; however, DNMT mRNAs (DNMT1, 3A, 3B) were found to
increase significantly only in MDA-MB-231 cells. Global DNA methylation, analyzed
as 5'-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine (5-mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC), showed 
a concentration-dependent enhancement of 5-mC with no alteration in 5-hmC level
in MCF-7 cells; however, in MDA-MB-231 cells, in contrast to MCF-7 cells, 5-mC
remained unaltered but 5-hmC reduced significantly in all WYRE concentrations
(10-50 µg/mL) used in this study. Since 5-hmC is generated from 5-mC by
ten-eleven-translocation (TET) enzymes, analysis of TET mRNAs (TET1, TET2, and
TET3) in MDA-MB-231 cells indicated a concentration-dependent reduction in TET1
and induction of TET3; however, TET2 remained unaltered. No alterations in any of
the TET mRNAs were found in MCF-7 cells. Methylation analysis of GATA3 promoter
at specific locus indicates probable demethylating activity of WYRE in MDA-MB-231
cells. We conclude that activation of GATA3 gene in ER(-) MDA-MB-231 cells may
occur by altering DNA methylation pattern on the promoter region which may be
different from the mechanisms operated in ER(+) MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 25148825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):191-206. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.006.

GATA-3 function in innate and adaptive immunity.

Tindemans I(1), Serafini N(2), Di Santo JP(2), Hendriks RW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Innate Immunity Unit, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France;
INSERM U668, 75724 Paris, France. (3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus
MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
r.hendriks@erasmusmc.nl.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GATA-3 has received much attention as a
master regulator of T helper 2 (Th2) cell differentiation, during which it
controls interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 expression. More recently, GATA-3 
was shown to contribute to type 2 immunity through regulation of group 2 innate
lymphoid cell (ILC2) development and function. Furthermore, during thymopoiesis, 
GATA-3 represses B cell potential in early T cell precursors, activates TCR
signaling in pre-T cells, and promotes the CD4(+) T cell lineage after positive
selection. GATA-3 also functions outside the thymus in hematopoietic stem cells, 
regulatory T cells, CD8(+) T cells, thymic natural killer cells, and ILC
precursors. Here we discuss the varied functions of GATA-3 in innate and adaptive
immune cells, with emphasis on its activity in T cells and ILCs, and examine the 
mechanistic basis for the dose-dependent, developmental-stage- and
cell-lineage-specific activity of this transcription factor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25148023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 1;74(19):5469-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3429. Epub
2014 Aug 21.

Complex formation and function of estrogen receptor a in transcription requires
RIP140.

Rosell M(1), Nevedomskaya E(2), Stelloo S(3), Nautiyal J(1), Poliandri A(1),
Steel JH(1), Wessels LF(4), Carroll JS(5), Parker MG(1), Zwart W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. (2)Division of Molecular
Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Division
of Molecular Carcinogenesis, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (3)Division of Molecular Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Cancer Research 
UK, Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Molecular Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. w.zwart@nki.nl.

RIP140 is a transcriptional coregulator involved in energy homeostasis,
ovulation, and mammary gland development. Although conclusive evidence is
lacking, reports have implicated a role for RIP140 in breast cancer. Here, we
explored the mechanistic role of RIP140 in breast cancer and its involvement in
estrogen receptor a (ERa) transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Using
ChIP-seq analysis, we demonstrate that RIP140 shares more than 80% of its binding
sites with ERa, colocalizing with its interaction partners FOXA1, GATA3, p300,
CBP, and p160 family members at H3K4me1-demarcated enhancer regions. RIP140 is
required for ERa-complex formation, ERa-mediated gene expression, and
ERa-dependent breast cancer cell proliferation. Genes affected following RIP140
silencing could be used to stratify tamoxifen-treated breast cancer cohorts,
based on clinical outcome. Importantly, this gene signature was only effective in
endocrine-treated conditions. Cumulatively, our data suggest that RIP140 plays an
important role in ERa-mediated transcriptional regulation in breast cancer and
response to tamoxifen treatment.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25145671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nat Commun. 2014 Aug 22;5:4732. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5732.

Grail controls Th2 cell development by targeting STAT6 for degradation.

Sahoo A(1), Alekseev A(1), Obertas L(1), Nurieva R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

T helper (Th)-2 cells are the major players in allergic asthma; however, the
mechanisms that control Th2-mediated inflammation are poorly understood. Here we 
find that enhanced expression of Grail, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, in Th2 cells
depends on interleukin (IL)-4-signalling components, signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6 (Stat6) and Gata3, that bind to and transactivate
the Grail promoter. Grail deficiency in T cells leads to increased expression of 
Th2 effector cytokines in vitro and in vivo and Grail-deficient mice are more
susceptible to allergic asthma. Mechanistically, the enhanced effector function
of Grail-deficient Th2 cells is mediated by increased expression of Stat6 and
IL-4 receptor a-chain. Grail interacts with Stat6 and targets it for
ubiquitination and degradation. Thus, our results indicate that Grail plays a
critical role in controlling Th2 development through a negative feedback loop.

PMID: 25145352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 21;9(8):e104453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104453.
eCollection 2014.

Infiltration of alternatively activated macrophages in cancer tissue is
associated with MDSC and Th2 polarization in patients with esophageal cancer.

Gao J(1), Wu Y(2), Su Z(2), Amoah Barnie P(2), Jiao Z(3), Bie Q(2), Lu L(4), Wang
S(2), Xu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, P. R. China; Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Suzhou Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, P. R. China. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, P. R. China. (4)Department 
of Pathology and Centre of Infection and Immunology, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, P. R. China.

Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) expand in cancer bearing hosts and
contribute to tumor immune evasion. M2 macrophages constitute a major cellular
component of cancer-related inflammation. However, the correlation between
circulating MDSCs and infiltrating M2 macrophages in tumor tissues from patients 
with esophageal cancer (ECA), and its potential relationship with the
polarization of Th2 cells remain unclear. In the present study, we showed the
level of MDSCs in PBMC and Arg1 in plasma were significantly elevated in ECA
patients, and the increased ratio of MDSC in PBMC was closely related to the
expression of CD163 in cancer tissues. In addition, the ECA patients exhibited
remarkable increases in the mRNA levels of IL-4 and GATA3, as well as the protein
levels of IL-13 and IL-6, but IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12 in peripheral blood were decreased.
Our data indicate that the increased Th2 cytokines are associated with MDSCs and 
M2 macrophages polarization, and foster the infiltration of CD163+M2 macrophages 
in cancer tissues, which promote the formation of immunosuppressive
microenvironment in ECA patients.

PMCID: PMC4140683
PMID: 25144454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Pain Relief. 2014 Jun;Suppl 3:003.

Phenotypic Identification of Spinal Cord-Infiltrating CD4(+) T Lymphocytes in a
Murine Model of Neuropathic Pain.

Draleau K(1), Maddula S(1), Slaiby A(1), Nutile-McMenemy N(2), De Leo J(3), Cao
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Osteopathic Medicine, University
of New England, Biddeford, ME, 04005, USA. (2)Department of Anesthesiology,
Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (3)Department of
Anesthesiology, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA ; Vice
President of Academic Affairs, Professor of Biology, Emmanuel College, 400 The
Fenway, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neuropathic pain is one of the most devastating kinds of chronic
pain. Neuroinflammation has been shown to contribute to the development of
neuropathic pain. We have previously demonstrated that lumbar spinal
cord-infiltrating CD4(+) T lymphocytes contribute to the maintenance of
mechanical hypersensitivity in spinal nerve L5 transection (L5Tx), a murine model
of neuropathic pain. Here, we further examined the phenotype of the CD4(+) T
lymphocytes involved in the maintenance of neuropathic pain-like behavior via
intracellular flow cytometric analysis and explored potential interactions
between infiltrating CD4(+) T lymphocytes and spinal cord glial cells.
RESULTS: We consistently observed significantly higher numbers of T-Bet(+),
IFN-<U+03B3>(+), TNF-a(+), and GM-CSF(+), but not GATA3(+) or IL-4(+), lumbar spinal
cord-infiltrating CD4(+) T lymphocytes in the L5Tx group compared to the sham
group at day 7 post-L5Tx. This suggests that the infiltrating CD4(+) T
lymphocytes expressed a pro-inflammatory type 1 phenotype (Th1). Despite the
observation of CD4(+) CD40 ligand (CD154)(+) T lymphocytes in the lumbar spinal
cord post-L5Tx, CD154 knockout (KO) mice did not display significant changes in
L5Tx-induced mechanical hypersensitivity, indicating that T lymphocyte-microglial
interaction through the CD154-CD40 pathway is not necessary for L5Tx-induced
hypersensitivity. In addition, spinal cord astrocytic activation, represented by 
glial fibillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression, was significantly lower in CD4 
KO mice compared to wild type (WT) mice at day 14 post-L5Tx, suggesting the
involvement of astrocytes in the pronociceptive effects mediated by infiltrating 
CD4(+) T lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: In all, these data indicate that the maintenance of L5Tx-induced
neuropathic pain is mostly mediated by Th1 cells in a CD154-independent manner
via a mechanism that could involve multiple Th1 cytokines and astrocytic
activation.

PMCID: PMC4136538
PMID: 25143871  [PubMed]


314. Development. 2014 Sep;141(17):3420-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.113928.

Nephric duct insertion requires EphA4/EphA7 signaling from the pericloacal
mesenchyme.

Weiss AC(1), Airik R(1), Bohnenpoll T(1), Greulich F(1), Foik A(1), Trowe MO(1), 
Rudat C(1), Costantini F(2), Adams RH(3), Kispert A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30625
Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. (3)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, Department of Tissue Morphogenesis, and University of Münster,
Faculty of Medicine, D-48149 Münster, Germany. (4)Institut für Molekularbiologie,
Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30625 Hannover, Germany
kispert.andreas@mh-hannover.de.

The vesico-ureteric junction (VUJ) forms through a complex developmental program 
that connects the primordium of the upper urinary tract [the nephric duct (ND)]
with that of the lower urinary tract (the cloaca). The signals that orchestrate
the various tissue interactions in this program are poorly understood. Here, we
show that two members of the EphA subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases, EphA4
and EphA7, are specifically expressed in the mesenchyme surrounding the caudal ND
and the cloaca, and that Epha4(-/-);Epha7(+/-) and Epha4(-/-);Epha7(-/-) (DKO)
mice display distal ureter malformations including ureterocele, blind and
ectopically ending ureters with associated hydroureter, megaureter and
hydronephrosis. We trace these defects to a late or absent fusion of the ND with 
the cloaca. In DKO embryos, the ND extends normally and approaches the cloaca but
the tip subsequently looses its integrity. Expression of Gata3 and Lhx1 and their
downstream target Ret is severely reduced in the caudal ND. Conditional deletion 
of ephrin B2 from the ND largely phenocopies these changes, suggesting that
EphA4/EphA7 from the pericloacal mesenchyme signal via ephrin B2 to mediate ND
insertion. Disturbed activity of this signaling module may entail defects of the 
VUJ, which are frequent in the spectrum of congenital anomalies of the kidney and
the urinary tract (CAKUT) in human newborns.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25139858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jan 1;211(1):156-65. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu391. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

Dietary pectin-derived acidic oligosaccharides improve the pulmonary bacterial
clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in mice by modulating
intestinal microbiota and immunity.

Bernard H(1), Desseyn JL(1), Bartke N(2), Kleinjans L(3), Stahl B(2), Belzer
C(3), Knol J(4), Gottrand F(1), Husson MO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 995, Faculté de médecine, Université Lille 2, France. (2)Nutricia
Research, Utrecht. (3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, The
Netherlands. (4)Nutricia Research, Utrecht Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen
University, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A predominantly T-helper type 2 (Th2) immune response is critical in 
the prognosis of pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. But the mucosal and 
systemic immune responses can be influenced by the intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: We assessed the effect of microbiota compositional changes induced by a 
diet enriched in 5% acidic oligosaccharides derived from pectin (pAOS) on the
immune response and outcome of chronic pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection in mice.
RESULTS: pAOS promoted Th1 polarization by increasing interferon <U+03B3> release,
upregulating t-bet gene expression, decreasing interleukin 4 secretion, and
downregulating gata3 gene expression. pAOS also sustained the release of
keratinocyte chemoattractant, recruited polynuclear leukocytes and macrophages,
stimulated M1 macrophage activation and interleukin 10 release, and decreased
tumor necrosis factor a release in the lung. These effects led to increased
bacterial clearance after the first and second P. aeruginosa infections. pAOS
modified the intestinal microbiota by stimulating the growth of species involved 
in immunity development, such as Bifidobacterium species, Sutturella wadsworthia,
and Clostridium cluster XIVa organisms, and at the same time increased the
production of butyrate and propionate.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that pAOS may have beneficial effects by
limiting the number and severity of pulmonary exacerbations in patients
chronically infected with P. aeruginosa, such as individuals with cystic
fibrosis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25139019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):E2421-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2174. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Comprehensive next-generation sequencing analyses of hypoparathyroidism:
identification of novel GCM2 mutations.

Mitsui T(1), Narumi S, Inokuchi M, Nagasaki K, Nakazawa M, Sasaki G, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (T.M., S.N., M.I., T.H.), Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Division of Pediatrics (K.N.), Department of
Homeostatic Regulation and Development, Niigata University Graduate School of
Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan; Department of Pediatrics
(M.N.), Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Tokyo 170-8476, Japan; and
Department of Pediatrics (G.S.), Tokyo Dental College Ichikawa General Hospital, 
Chiba 272-8513, Japan.

CONTEXT: In most patients with hypoparathyroidism (HP), the etiology is not
defined clinically. Eight genes (AIRE, CASR, CLDN16, GATA3, GCM2, PTH, TBCE, and 
TRPM6) are known to be responsible genes associated with HP; however, no previous
study has screened the eight responsible genes comprehensively in HP patients.
OBJECTIVES: This study was conducted to determine the genetic defect in HP
patients. We also described clinical and molecular findings of two HP patients
with novel GCM2 mutations.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We enrolled 20 nonconsanguineous Japanese patients with
child-onset permanent HP without 22q11 deletion. Mutations and genomic
rearrangements involving the eight genes were screened by targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS). We also screened genetic rearrangements by
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in the mutation-negative patients.
A putative deletion, which was suspected by NGS, was additionally analyzed by
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and junction PCR. Identified novel nucleotide-level
GCM2 mutants were characterized in vitro.
RESULTS: We identified seven patients with a single gene disorder, including a
CASR mutation, GATA3 mutations, and novel GCM2 mutations (R367Tfs*15, T370M, and 
the deletion encompassing exon 1). This submicroscopic deletion, which had been
suspected by NGS, could not be detected by aCGH and was confirmed by ddPCR and
junction PCR. Functional studies of R367Tfs*- and T370M-GCM2 demonstrated a
reduction of target gene transactivation in both.
CONCLUSIONS: Using comprehensive NGS analyses, we identified the genetic defect
in 35% of HP patients in our cohort and discovered novel GCM2 mutations including
submicroscopic deletion that was undetectable by aCGH.

PMID: 25137426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Sep;38(9):1251-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000241.

Pseudoangiosarcomatous urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder.

Paner GP(1), Cox RM, Richards K, Akki A, Gokden N, Lopez-Beltran A, Krausz T,
McKenney JK, Steinberg GD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Surgery, Section of Urology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas, Little Rock, AK
§Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Cordoba 
University, Cordoba, Spain <U+2225>Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH.

The pseudoangiosarcomatous pattern has been described mostly in cutaneous and
some visceral squamous cell carcinomas and is unique for its striking morphologic
resemblance to angiosarcoma. Herein, we describe the clinicopathologic features
of 7 pseudoangiosarcomatous urothelial carcinomas that occurred in the urinary
bladder. The patients included 6 men and 1 woman ranging in age from 47 to 87
years (median 70 y). The pseudoangiosarcomatous morphology was observed in 7
urothelial carcinomas including 3 with squamous differentiation and comprised 35%
to 85% of the invasive tumor. Histologically, the pseudoangiosarcomatous
carcinomas were characterized by tumor cell discohesion and lysis that created
pseudolumina formations surrounded by attached residual tumor cells. Detached
degenerating tumor cells variably admixed with inflammatory cells were common in 
the false lumina. Partly intact urothelial carcinoma nests contained irregular or
cleft-like spaces and disintegrating tumor cells with stretched intercellular
bridges. The tumor was commonly associated with a dense collagenous matrix, often
surrounding the lytic nests. Similar tumor cell discohesion and breakdown were
observed in 3 tumors with foci of squamous cell differentiation, distinguished by
the presence of dyskeratosis and keratin formation. All 7 tumors contained other 
nonpseudoangiosarcomatous carcinoma components such as conventional urothelial
carcinoma (5), squamous differentiation (4), sarcomatoid spindle cell carcinoma
(2), small cell carcinoma (1), micropapillary carcinoma (1), and glandular
differentiation (1). The pseudoangiosarcomatous urothelial carcinomas were all
(7/7) diffusely CK7 positive, most (6/7) were GATA3 positive, and none (0/7)
expressed vascular-associated markers. There was no evidence to suggest that
apoptosis (by TUNEL assay and cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining) or loss of the
adhesion molecules CD138 and e-cadherin were possible causes for the tumor cell
discohesion and breakdown. All 7 tumors were high stage at cystectomy and
included 1 pT3a, 2 pT3b, and 4 pT4a tumors, and 3 had pelvic lymph node
involvement. Follow-up data available in 6 cases revealed a poor outcome with an 
overall median survival of 8.5 months. In conclusion, we present an unusual
morphology of bladder carcinoma that has a striking resemblance to a malignant
vasoformative tumor. Our series showed that bladder pseudoangiosarcomatous
carcinoma morphology is associated with a higher tumor stage at cystectomy,
commonly admixed with other aggressive carcinoma variant morphologies, and
portend a poorer outcome. Knowledge of this pattern is also important to avoid
misdiagnosis, particularly in limited tissue samples.

PMID: 25133708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 18;4:5654. doi: 10.1038/srep05654.

Lactobacillus casei reduces susceptibility to type 2 diabetes via
microbiota-mediated body chloride ion influx.

Zhang Y(1), Guo X(1), Guo J(1), He Q(1), Li H(1), Song Y(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Education Ministry of
P. R. China, Department of Food Science and Engineering, Inner Mongolia
Agricultural University, Hohhot 010018, P. R. China. (2)1] Key Laboratory of
Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Education Ministry of P. R. China,
Department of Food Science and Engineering, Inner Mongolia Agricultural
University, Hohhot 010018, P. R. China [2].

Gut microbiota mediated low-grade inflammation is involved in the onset of type 2
diabetes (T2DM). In this study, we used a high fat sucrose (HFS) diet-induced
pre-insulin resistance and a low dose-STZ HFS rat models to study the effect and 
mechanism of Lactobacillus casei Zhang in protecting against T2DM onset.
Hyperglycemia was favorably suppressed by L. casei Zhang treatment. Moreover, the
hyperglycemia was connected with type 1 immune response, high plasma bile acids
and urine chloride ion loss. This chloride ion loss was significantly prevented
by L. casei via upregulating of chloride ion-dependent genes (ClC1-7, GlyRa1,
SLC26A3, SLC26A6, GABAAa1, Bestrophin-3 and CFTR). A shift in the caecal
microflora, particularly the reduction of bile acid 7a-dehydroxylating bacteria, 
and fecal bile acid profiles also occurred. These change coincided with organ
chloride influx. Thus, we postulate that the prevention of T2DM onset by L. casei
Zhang may be via a microbiota-based bile acid-chloride exchange mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4135721
PMID: 25133590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;22(4):1038-42. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.04.028.

[Expressive changes of CD4(+)T cell subset transcription factors in patients with
aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia and their
clinical significances].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng XM(1), Xu HZ(2), Zhang JY(1), Yin DM(1), Liu MM(1), Sui XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan 250021, Shandong Province, China. (2)Department of Hematology, 
Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan 250021,
Shandong Province, China. E-mail: Xuhongzhi1965@sina.com.

This study was aimed to compare the expressions of specific transcription factors
of CD4(+) T cell subset ( T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FoxP3 mRNA) in peripheral
blood of patients with aplastic anemia(AA), myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS), and
acute myeloid leukemia(AML), and investigate their immune status and
pathogenesis, so as to provide experimental basis for the choice of clinical
treatment. The expression of T-box (T-bet), GATA-3, ROR-<U+03B3>t and Foxp3 mRNA in
PBMNC were examined by RT-PCR in 42 cases of MDS, including 22 refractory
anemia(MDS-RA) and 20 refractory anemia with excess blasts (MDS-RAEB), in 23
cases of AA, 17 cases of AML patients and 16 healthy volunteers respectively. The
results indicated that, compared with normal control group, expressions of T-bet 
and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in AA patient group were significantly higher (P < 0.01),
expression levels of GATA3 Foxp3 mRNA were lower (both P < 0.01). There was no
significant difference in expression of T-bet and GATA3 mRNA between MDS group
and normal control group, but the expression levels of Foxp3 and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA were 
higher than those in normal controls (P < 0.05); T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t in MDS-RA group 
were higher than those in the normal controls(P < 0.01), and GATA3 expression
significantly reduced (P < 0.05), however, there was no significant difference in
expression of Foxp3 between MDS-RA and the controls. Expression levels of T-bet
and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in patients with MDS-RAEB and AML were lower than those in normal 
controls (P < 0.05), but the expression levels of GATA3 and Foxp3 mRNA were
significantly higher than those in normal controls (P < 0.01). It is concluded
that the transcription factor expressions are different in PBMNC of patients
among these three diseases. Immune-mediated excessive apoptosis may play an
important role in pathogenesis, bone marrow failure in patients with AA and
MDS-RA, and abnormal clones of immature cells may be one of main reasons for bone
marrow failure in AML and late stage of MDS.

PMID: 25130824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biores Open Access. 2014 Aug 1;3(4):162-75. doi: 10.1089/biores.2014.0019.

Directing human induced pluripotent stem cells into a neurosensory lineage for
auditory neuron replacement.

Gunewardene N(1), Bergen NV(2), Crombie D(2), Needham K(1), Dottori M(3), Nayagam
BA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Melbourne , East Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia . (2)Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of
Melbourne , East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia . (3)Centre for Neural
Engineering, University of Melbourne , Parkville, Victoria, Australia . (4)Centre
for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne , East Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia . ; Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of
Melbourne , Parkville, Victoria, Australia . ; Bionics Institute, University of
Melbourne , East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia .

Emerging therapies for sensorineural hearing loss include replacing damaged
auditory neurons (ANs) using stem cells. Ultimately, it is important that these
replacement cells can be patient-matched to avoid immunorejection. As human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can be obtained directly from the
patient, they offer an opportunity to generate patient-matched neurons for
transplantation. Here, we used an established neural induction protocol to
differentiate two hiPSC lines (iPS1 and iPS2) and one human embryonic stem cell
line (hESC; H9) toward a neurosensory lineage in vitro. Immunocytochemistry and
qRT-PCR were used to analyze the expression of key markers involved in AN
development at defined time points of differentiation. The hiPSC- and
hESC-derived neurosensory progenitors expressed the dorsal hindbrain marker
(PAX7), otic placodal marker (PAX2), proneurosensory marker (SOX2), ganglion
neuronal markers (NEUROD1, BRN3A, ISLET1, ßIII-tubulin, Neurofilament kDa 160),
and sensory AN markers (GATA3 and VGLUT1) over the time course examined. The
hiPSC- and hESC-derived neurosensory progenitors had the highest expression
levels of the sensory neural markers at 35 days in vitro. Furthermore, the
neurons generated from this assay were found to be electrically active. While all
cell lines analyzed produced functional neurosensory-like progenitors,
variabilities in the levels of marker expression were observed between hiPSC
lines and within samples of the same cell line, when compared with the hESC
controls. Overall, these findings indicate that this neural assay was capable of 
differentiating hiPSCs toward a neurosensory lineage but emphasize the need for
improving the consistency in the differentiation of hiPSCs into the required
lineages.

PMCID: PMC4120935
PMID: 25126480  [PubMed]


321. World J Pediatr. 2014 Aug;10(3):278-80. doi: 10.1007/s12519-014-0505-x. Epub 2014
Aug 15.

GATA3 mutation in a family with hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal dysplasia 
syndrome.

Zhu ZY(1), Zhou QL, Ni SN, Gu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Nanjing Children's Hospital Affiliated 
to Nanjing Medical University, 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210008, China.

BACKGROUND: The hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome
is an autosomal dominant disorder primarily caused by GATA3 gene mutation. We
report here a case that both of a Chinese boy and his father had HDR syndrome
which caused by a novel mutation of GATA3.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing was performed to detect the
exons of the GATA3 gene for mutation analysis.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of GATA3 revealed a heterozygous nonsense mutation in 
this family: a mutation of GATA3 at exon 2 (c.515C >A) that resulted in a
premature stop at codon 172 (p.S172X) with a loss of two zinc finger domains.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel nonsense mutation which will expand the
spectrum of HDR-associated GATA3 mutations.

PMID: 25124981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-63. doi: 10.1002/wdev.142. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Early embryonic specification of vertebrate cranial placodes.

Schlosser G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences & Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cranial placodes contribute to many sensory organs and ganglia of the vertebrate 
head. The olfactory, otic, and lateral line placodes form the sensory receptor
cells and neurons of the nose, ear, and lateral line system; the lens placode
develops into the lens of the eye; epibranchial, profundal, and trigeminal
placodes contribute sensory neurons to cranial nerve ganglia; and the
adenohypophyseal placode gives rise to the anterior pituitary, a major endocrine 
control organ. Despite these differences in fate, all placodes are now known to
originate from a common precursor, the preplacodal ectoderm (PPE). The latter is 
a horseshoe-shaped domain of ectoderm surrounding the anterior neural plate and
neural crest and is defined by expression of transcription factor Six1, its
cofactor Eya1, and other members of the Six and Eya families. Studies in
zebrafish, Xenopus, and chick reveal that the PPE is specified together with
other ectodermal territories (epidermis, neural crest, and neural plate) during
early embryogenesis. During gastrulation, domains of ventrally (e.g., Dlx3/Dlx5, 
GATA2/GATA3, AP2, Msx1, FoxI1, and Vent1/Vent2) and dorsally (e.g., Zic1, Sox3,
and Geminin) restricted transcription factors are established in response to a
gradient of BMP and help to define non-neural and neural competence territories, 
respectively. At neural plate stages, the PPE is then induced in the non-neural
competence territory by signals from the adjacent neural plate and mesoderm
including FGF, BMP inhibitors, and Wnt inhibitors. Subsequently, signals from
more localized signaling centers induce restricted expression domains of various 
transcription factors within the PPE, which specify multiplacodal areas and
ultimately individual placodes. For further resources related to this article,
please visit the WIREs website.CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has declared no
conflicts of interest for this article.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25124756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb;50(2):180-90. doi: 10.1007/s00535-014-0982-7. Epub 2014
Aug 12.

IL-33 promotes GATA-3 polarization of gut-derived T cells in experimental and
ulcerative colitis.

Seidelin JB(1), Coskun M, Kvist PH, Holm TL, Holgersen K, Nielsen OH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Section 54 O3, Department of Gastroenterology, Herlev Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Herlev Ringvej 75, 2730, Herlev, Denmark,
jseidelin@dadlnet.dk.

BACKGROUND: In the respiratory mucosa, interleukin (IL)-33, has been shown to
enhance T helper 2 (TH2)-type responses through the master regulatory gene
GATA-3. IL-33 is upregulated in ulcerative colitis (UC), and the aim was to
assess if IL-33 holds a similar key position in the shaping of the immune
response in experimental colitis (piroxicam-accelerated colitis (PAC) in IL-10
(-/-) mice, dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) model) and UC.
METHODS: Colonic IL-33 expression was determined in UC (8 active UC, 8 quiescent 
UC, and 7 controls) and experimental colitis. Mesenteric lymph node (MesLN) T
cells were isolated from PAC IL-10 (-/-) mice and stimulated with IL-33.
RESULTS: The colonic IL-33 expression was significantly upregulated all forms of 
colitis (P < 0.01) and correlated with disease severity score and inflammation (P
< 0.001), and with GATA-3 expression levels (P < 0.01); no correlation with the
TH1-specific T-bet expression was observed. MesLN T cells stimulated with IL-33
had increased GATA-3 expression, and showed an IL-33 dose-dependent increase in
secreted TH2-type cytokines, whereas this effect was abolished by blocking IL-33 
signaling. The non-TH2-type cytokine IL-17 was upregulated by IL-33 but in a T
cell receptor dependent manner, as opposed to TH2-type cytokines, which required 
only IL-33 stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that intestinal IL-33 is capable of inducing 
GATA-3 in mucosal T cells, and suggests that IL-33 is a key mediator of
pathological TH2 and non-TH2-type responses in intestinal inflammation. Blocking 
IL-33 signaling could be a feasible option in the treatment of UC.

PMID: 25112700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Nov;44(11):3252-62. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444646. Epub 2014 Sep
5.

Antigen presenting cell-derived IL-6 restricts Th2-cell differentiation.

Mayer A(1), Debuisson D, Denanglaire S, Eddahri F, Fievez L, Hercor M, Triffaux
E, Moser M, Bureau F, Leo O, Andris F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunobiologie, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaire,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Gosselies, Belgium.

The identification of DC-derived signals orchestrating activation of Th1 and Th17
immune responses has advanced our understanding on how these inflammatory
responses develop. However, whether specific signals delivered by DCs also
participate in the regulation of Th2 immune responses remains largely unknown. In
this study, we show that administration of antigen-loaded, IL-6-deficient DCs to 
naïve mice induced an exacerbated Th2 response, characterized by the
differentiation of GATA-3-expressing T lymphocytes secreting high levels of IL-4,
IL-5, and IL-13. Coinjection of wild type and IL-6-deficient bone marrow-derived 
dendritic cells (BMDCs) confirmed that IL-6 exerted a dominant, negative
influence on Th2-cell development. This finding was confirmed in vitro, where
exogenously added IL-6 was found to limit IL-4-induced Th2-cell differentiation. 
iNKT cells were required for optimal Th2-cell differentiation in vivo although
their activation occurred independently of IL-6 secretion by the BMDCs.
Collectively, these observations identify IL-6 secretion as a major, unsuspected,
mechanism whereby DCs control the magnitude of Th2 immunity.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25092208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Apr;43(4):271-7. doi: 10.1002/dc.23206. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Utility of GATA3 immunohistochemistry for diagnosis of metastatic breast
carcinoma in cytology specimens.

Braxton DR(1), Cohen C, Siddiqui MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University Hospital,
Atlanta, Georgia.

BACKGROUND: GATA3 as a diagnostic marker of metastatic breast carcinoma in
cytology specimens has not been fully established.
METHODS: Metastatic breast carcinoma was assessed for GATA3, mammaglobin, and
GCDFP-15 immunohistochemistry on cell blocks. GATA3 was scored by intensity (0,
negative; 1, weakly positive; 2, moderately positive; 3, strongly positive), and 
area (0-100%). Mammaglobin (MMG) and GCDFP-15 staining was scored qualitatively
(positive vs. negative). Results were correlated with specimen type (fine-needle 
aspiration vs. body fluid), breast prognostic markers estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), Her-2/Neu (Her2), and Ki67, and with each other.
Statistical significance was determined by chi-squared test and ANOVA for
numerical variables. Alpha was set as 0.05. A total of 40 CB specimens containing
metastatic breast carcinoma were studied.
RESULTS: GATA3 was positive in 32 (80%) cases. All ER-positive cases (n = 25)
were positive for GATA3. Conversely, all GATA3-negative cases (n = 8) were
triple-negative breast cancers. On qualitative univariate analysis, GATA3 was
statistically associated with ER (P = 0.0001), and PR (P = 0.0468). GATA3
intensity was statistically associated with ER (P = 0.0001), PR (P = 0.0157),
Her2 (P = 0.0256), and cancer category (P = 0.0127). GATA3 staining was
statistically associated with ER (P = 0.0001), PR (P = 0.0160), Her2 (P =
0.0451), and cancer category (P = 0.0002). MMG and GCDFP-15 were directly
compared to GATA3 in 35 samples. The sensitivity was 86% for GATA3, 26% for MMG, 
and 14% for GCDFP-15.
CONCLUSION: GATA3 is a more sensitive diagnostic marker of metastatic breast
carcinoma in CB samples than MMG and GCDFP-15.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25088841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2014 Jun;39(3):180-4.

[Effects of needle pricking therapy of Zhuang minority medicine on expression of 
pulmonary T-bet, GATA-binding protein 3 genes and thymic stromal lymphopoietin
protein in the lung of asthma mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang HQ, Dou XB, Li KM, Zheng JY, Li XH, Zhu XY.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of needle pricking therapy on the expression of 
thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) protein, T-box expressed in T
cells(T-bet)mRNA and GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA 3) mRNA in the lung tissue of
mice with asthma, so as to explore its mechanism underlying improvement of
asthma.
METHODS: Thirty female BALB/c mice were randomly divided into control, model and 
needle pricking groups (10 mice/group). The asthma model was established by i. p.
of Ovalbumin (OVA) suspension fluid (containing Aluminium Hydroxide 400 microg
and OVA 100 microg, 50 microg/L) and forced inhalation of atomized OVA. A sharp
needle was held to prick "Dazhui" (GV 14),"Feishu" (BL 13), "Dingchuan" (EX-B
1),"Fengmen" (BL 12),"Shenshu" (BL 23) and "Pishu" (BL 20) acupoint regions to
let a little bit of white fibrous tissue out, then to insert into the acupoints
to about 1 mm in depth, once a day for seven times. The lung tissue was taken for
detecting the expression of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA by RT-PCR and for
determining the immunoactivity of TSLP by immunofluorescence method. In addition,
HE staining was used to examine the pathologic changes of the lung tissue.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the expression levels of GATA-3 mRNA
and TSLP protein of the lung tissue in the model group were significantly
increased (P < 0.01), whereas that of T-bet mRNA was remarkably decreased (P <
0.05). Following needle prick stimulation treatment, the expression levels of
GATA-3 mRNA and TSLP protein were markedly down-regulated (P < 0.01) and that of 
T-bet mRNA was obviously upregulated (P < 0.05). After the treatment,
pathological changes including hyperemia of the pulmonary alveoli, epithelial
thickening, narrowing of the lumina, and infiltration of many inflammatory cells 
around the tracheal blood vessels were improved.
CONCLUSION: Needle pricking therapy can regulate the expression of pulmonary TSLP
protein and GATA 3 and T-bet genes in mice with asthma, which may contribute to
its effect in improving pulmonary pathological changes of asthma mice.

PMID: 25069192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e102764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102764.
eCollection 2014.

Differential peripheral blood gene expression profile based on Her2 expression on
primary tumors of breast cancer patients.

Tudoran O(1), Virtic O(2), Balacescu L(1), Pop L(2), Dragla F(1), Eniu A(1),
Fetica B(3), Balacescu O(1), Berindan-Neagoe I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology
Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (2)Research Center for Functional
Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Department of Pathology, The
Oncology Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (4)Department of
Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology Institute I.
Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Research Center for Functional Genomics,
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Department of Immunology, Iuliu Hatieganu
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e110962.

Breast cancer prognosis and treatment is highly dependent on the molecular
features of the primary tumors. These tumors release specific molecules into the 
environment that trigger characteristic responses into the circulatory cells. In 
this study we investigated the expression pattern of 84 genes known to be
involved in breast cancer signaling in the peripheral blood of breast cancer
patients with ER-, PR- primary tumors. The patients were grouped according to
Her2 expression on the primary tumors in Her2+ and Her2- cohorts. Transcriptional
analysis revealed 15 genes to be differentially expressed between the two groups 
highlighting that Her2 signaling in primary tumors could be associated with
specific blood gene expression. We found CCNA1 to be up-regulated, while ERBB2,
RASSF1, CDH1, MKI67, GATA3, GLI1, SFN, PTGS2, JUN, NOTCH1, CTNNB1, KRT8, SRC, and
HIC1 genes were down-regulated in the blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients compared to Her2+ cohort. IPA network analysis predicts that the
identified genes are interconnected and regulate each other. These genes code for
cell cycle regulators, cell adhesion molecules, transcription factors or signal
transducers that modulate immune signaling, several genes being also associated
with cancer progression and treatment response. These results indicate an altered
immune signaling in the peripheral blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients. The involvement of the immune system is necessary in favorable
treatment response, therefore these results could explain the low response rates 
observed for triple negative breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4113305
PMID: 25068292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Inflammation. 2015 Apr;38(2):697-704. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-9979-x.

The effect of synthetic salidroside on cytokines and airway inflammation of
asthma induced by diisocyanate (TDI) in mice by regulating GATA3/T-bet.

Wang J(1), Xiao L, Zhu L, Hu M, Wang Q, Yan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Tongjiaxiang 24, Nanjing, China.

This study was conducted to explore the anti-asthma effects of synthetic
salidroside on cytokines and airway inflammation of asthma induced by
diisocyanate (TDI) in mice. The experiment was carried out 60 female BALB/C mice 
which were randomly assigned to six experimental groups: control, vehicle, model,
dexamethasone (2 mg/kg), and salidroside (24 and 48 mg/kg). After the experiment,
histological studies were evaluated by the hematoxylin and eosin staining, the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and blood were collected from the animals,
and the composition of the induced inflammatory cells, and the concentrations of 
certain cytokines (IL-4, INF-<U+03B3>) were evaluated. GATA3 and T-bet mRNAs were
evaluated by QPCR. Our study demonstrated that salidroside inhibited TDI-induced 
increases in eosinophil count; IL-4 and INF-<U+03B3> were recovered. Histological
studies demonstrated that salidroside substantially inhibited TDI-induced
eosinophilia in lung tissue. Salidroside can improve T-bet mRNA and reduce GATA3 
mRNA in lung. These findings suggest that salidroside may effectively ameliorate 
the progression of asthma and could be used as a therapy for patients with
allergic asthma by regulating GATA3/T-bet balance.

PMID: 25052478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Nov-Dec;22(10):756-61. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000007.

Value of GATA3 immunostaining in the diagnosis of parathyroid tumors.

Ordóñez NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX.

GATA3 is a transcription factor that is involved in the embryonic development of 
the parathyroid glands and in adult parathyroid cell proliferation. The aim of
this study is to investigate the expression of GATA3 in parathyroid tumors and to
determine whether it could be used as an immunohistochemical marker for
parathyroid differentiation in tumors. Immunoreactivity for GATA3 was nuclear and
was demonstrated in all 10 hyperplastic parathyroid glands, 22 parathyroid
adenomas, and 6 parathyroid carcinomas; whereas, all thyroid tumors, renal cell
carcinomas, thymic epithelial tumors, and carcinoid tumors investigated for
comparison purposes were negative for this marker. It is concluded that GATA3 is 
a very sensitive and relatively specific immunohistochemical marker for
parathyroid differentiation that can assist in the differential diagnosis of
parathyroid tumors.

PMID: 25046229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Dev Dyn. 2014 Oct;243(10):1338-51. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24160. Epub 2014 Jul 19.

Dissecting the differentiation process of the preplacodal ectoderm in zebrafish.

Yao D(1), Zhao F, Wu Y, Wang J, Dong W, Zhao J, Zhu Z, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)The Education Ministry Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation and the State Key Laboratory of Bio-membrane and Membrane
Bio-engineering, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The preplacodal region (PPR) is a region of specialized ectoderm at
the border of neural and nonneural ectoderm (NNE). Coordinated Bmp, Fgf, and Wnt 
signals are known to drive PPR development; however, the underlying mechanism is 
unknown.
RESULTS: We identified key components involved in PPR differentiation. The
mesoderm/marginal Wnts at the early gastrula stage trigger differentiation by
allowing the adjacent NNE border cells to start adopting caudal PPR fates;
otherwise, the development of caudal PPR identity is hindered due to the
persistent presence of gata3 mRNA. The caudal PPR fate dominates when foxi1
expression is enhanced at the late gastrula stage, and depleting Foxi1 after 6
hours postfertilization (hpf) reduces the otic-epibranchial placodal domain. When
the Gata3 level is manipulated at the fertilized egg stage or near 6 hpf, the
lens is always affected. In establishing PPR polarity, both Gata3 and Foxi1
inhibit Bmp signaling, whereas Foxi1 inhibits, but Gata3 enhances, Fgf
sensitivity of the PPR cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that in zebrafish, (1) the PPR at the shield stage
may enter a developmental state when the PPR cells preferentially adopt a
particular placodal fate and (2) a network of genetically linked factors,
including Wnt/beta-catenin, Fgfr, Bmp, Gata3, and Foxi1, direct the process of
PPR differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25044691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Nov;134(5):1175-1186.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.05.038. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Increased frequency of dual-positive TH2/TH17 cells in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid characterizes a population of patients with severe asthma.

Irvin C(1), Zafar I(1), Good J(2), Rollins D(2), Christianson C(1), Gorska MM(2),
Martin RJ(2), Alam R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy & Immunology, and Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy & Immunology, and Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo;
School of Medicine, University of Colorado at Denver, Denver, Colo. (3)Department
of Medicine, Division of Allergy & Immunology, and Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo; School of Medicine,
University of Colorado at Denver, Denver, Colo. Electronic address:
alamr@njhealth.org.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jan;135(1):291.
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jan;135(1):290-1.

BACKGROUND: TH2 cells can further differentiate into dual-positive TH2/TH17
cells. The presence of dual-positive TH2/TH17 cells in the airways and their
effect on asthma severity are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to study dual-positive TH2/TH17 cells in bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) fluid from asthmatic patients, examine their response to
glucocorticoids, and define their relevance for disease severity.
METHODS: Bronchoscopy and lavage were performed in 52 asthmatic patients and 25
disease control subjects. TH2 and TH2/TH17 cells were analyzed by using
multicolor flow cytometry and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Cytokines
were assayed by means of ELISA.
RESULTS: Dual-positive TH2/TH17 cells were present at a higher frequency in BAL
fluid from asthmatic patients compared with numbers seen in disease control
subjects. High-level IL-4 production was typically accompanied by high-level
IL-17 production and coexpression of GATA3 and retinoic acid receptor-related
orphan receptor <U+03B3>t. Increased presence of TH2/TH17 cells was associated with
increased IL-17 production in lavage fluid. TH2/TH17 cell counts and IL-17
production correlated with PC20 for methacholine, eosinophil counts, and FEV1.
TH2/TH17 cells, unlike TH2 cells, were resistant to dexamethasone-induced cell
death. They expressed higher levels of mitogen-activated protein-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase kinase 1, a molecule that induces glucocorticoid
resistance. On the basis of the dominance of BAL fluid TH2 or TH2/TH17 cells, we 
identified 3 subgroups of asthma: TH2(predominant), TH2/TH17(predominant), and
TH2/TH17(low). The TH2/TH17(predominant) subgroup manifested the most severe form
of asthma, whereas the TH2/TH17(low) subgroup had the mildest asthma.
CONCLUSION: Asthma is associated with a higher frequency of dual-positive
TH2/TH17 cells in BAL fluid. The TH2/TH17(predominant) subgroup of asthmatic
patients manifested glucocorticoid resistance in vitro. They also had the
greatest airway obstruction and hyperreactivity compared with the
TH2(predominant) and TH2/TH17(low) subgroups.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254017
PMID: 25042748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):26752-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.587865. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Nuclear factor of activated T cells regulates the expression of interleukin-4 in 
Th2 cells in an all-or-none fashion.

Köck J(1), Kreher S(1), Lehmann K(1), Riedel R(1), Bardua M(1), Lischke T(1),
Jargosch M(1), Haftmann C(1), Bendfeldt H(1), Hatam F(1), Mashreghi MF(1),
Baumgrass R(1), Radbruch A(1), Chang HD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, a Leibniz Institute,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (2)From the German Rheumatism Research
Center Berlin, a Leibniz Institute, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
chang@drfz.de.

Th2 memory lymphocytes have imprinted their Il4 genes epigenetically for
expression in dependence of T cell receptor restimulation. However, in a given
restimulation, not all Th cells with a memory for IL-4 expression express IL-4.
Here, we show that in reactivated Th2 cells, the transcription factors NFATc2,
NF-kB p65, c-Maf, p300, Brg1, STAT6, and GATA-3 assemble at the Il4 promoter in
Th2 cells expressing IL-4 but not in Th2 cells not expressing it. NFATc2 is
critical for assembly of this transcription factor complex. Because NFATc2
translocation into the nucleus occurs in an all-or-none fashion, dependent on
complete dephosphorylation by calcineurin, NFATc2 controls the frequencies of
cells reexpressing Il4, translates analog differences in T cell receptor
stimulation into a digital decision for Il4 reexpression, and instructs all
reexpressing cells to express the same amount of IL-4. This analog-to-digital
conversion may be critical for the immune system to respond to low concentrations
of antigens.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175318
PMID: 25037220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2014;78(6):1037-43. doi: 10.1080/09168451.2014.912115.
Epub 2014 May 28.

Cyanidin-3-glucoside suppresses Th2 cytokines and GATA-3 transcription factor in 
EL-4 T cells.

Pyo MY(1), Yoon SJ, Yu Y, Park S, Jin M.

Author information: 
(1)a College of Pharmacy, Sookmyung Women's University , Seoul , Korea.

Allergic disease is dominated by Th2 immune responses. Interleukin (IL)-4 and
IL-13, representative Th2 cytokines, play pivotal roles in the pathogenic
activation of the Th2 immune response. In this study, we found that
cyanidin-3-glucoside chloride (C3G), an anthocyanin suppressed IL-4 and IL-13
produced in activated EL-4 T cells but not Th1 cytokines including IL-2,
interferon-<U+03B3>, or IL-12. IL-4 and IL-13 mRNA levels and luciferase activation in
cells transiently transfected with IL-4 and IL-13 promoter reporter plasmids were
significantly inhibited by C3G, suggesting that suppression might be, at least in
part, regulated at the transcriptional level. Data from western blot and reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses of transcription factors
involved in cytokine expression suggested that expression of GATA-3, but not
T-bet, was downregulated in the nucleus by C3G. Taken together, our data indicate
that C3G may has potential as an anti-allergic agent suppressing Th2 activation
by downregulating Th2 cytokines and the GATA3 transcription factor in allergies.

PMID: 25036132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Aug;38(8):e6-e19. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000238.

Best practices recommendations in the application of immunohistochemistry in the 
prostate: report from the International Society of Urologic Pathology consensus
conference.

Epstein JI(1), Egevad L, Humphrey PA, Montironi R; Members of the ISUP
Immunohistochemistry in Diagnostic Urologic Pathology Group.

Collaborators: Amin MB, Ulbright TM, Grignon D, Trpkov K, Lopez-Beltran A, Zhou
M, Argani P, Delahunt B, Berney DM, Srigley JR, Tickoo SK, Reuter VE.

Author information: 
(1)*Departments of Pathology, Urology, and Oncology, The John Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD Department of Pathology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden §Section of Pathological
Anatomy, Polytechnic University of the Marche Region, School of Medicine, United 
Hospitals, Ancona, Italy.

The following are the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP)
recommendations for the use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) in prostate specimens. 
Either high-molecular weight cytokeratin (34ßE12 or CK5/6 or others) or p63 or a 
combination of the 2 with AMACR either in a double or triple cocktail is
recommended for the workup of small foci of atypical glands suspicious for
adenocarcinoma of the prostate (PCa). ERG is optional as it is present in only
40% to 50% of prostate cancers and also positive in high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia. In the setting of obvious carcinoma or benign glands, 
there is no justification to do basal cell stains and AMACR. If there is a
Gleason score of 3+4=7 or a higher-grade cancer on at least 1 part, the workup of
other parts with an atypical focus suspicious for Gleason score 3+3=6 cancer is
not recommended. In the setting of Gleason score 4+3 or 4+4=8 cancer on at least 
1 part, the extent of high-grade cancer could affect clinical treatment such that
workup of other atypical possible high-grade cancer foci is justified. In the
setting of Gleason score 4+3 or higher-grade cancer on at least 1 part, given
that intraductal carcinoma in the vast majority of cases is considered extension 
of high-grade cancer into prostatic ducts and acini, it is not recommended in the
setting of definitive invasive high-grade cancer that workup of additional
cribriform lesions be pursued. In the setting of Gleason score 3+3 on at least 1 
part, the number of positive cores and/or their location could possibly affect
subsequent therapy in terms of suitability for active surveillance or focal
therapy, such that unless one knows with certainty that it would not affect
therapy, it is justified to perform an IHC workup of additional atypical foci. In
the differential diagnosis of high-grade PCa versus urothelial carcinoma (UC),
the primary option is to use prostate-specific antigen (PSA) as a first test to
identify PCa and GATA3 to identify UC. If GATA3 is not available, then HMWCK and 
p63 can be used. If the tumor is PSA positive with intense staining and HMWCK and
p63 negative, the findings are diagnostic of PCa. If the tumor is
equivocal/weak/negative for PSA and negative/focal for p63 and HMWCK, then one
needs to perform staining for P501S, NKX3.1, and GATA3. Some experts also include
PAP in this second round of staining. If the tumor is negative for PSA and
diffusely strongly positive for p63 and HMWCK, the findings are diagnostic of UC.
If the tumor is negative for PSA and moderately to strongly positive for GATA3,
it is diagnostic of UC. Laboratories should be encouraged to use GATA3 for UC and
add P501S and NKX3.1 as prostate markers in addition to PSA, p63, and HMWCK. If
GATA3, p501S, and NKX3.1 are not available in equivocal cases, the case should be
sent out for consultation to laboratories with these antibodies. The article also
covers the use of IHC in: (1) high-grade PCa versus bladder adenocarcinoma; (2)
prostatic small cell carcinoma versus high-grade PCa; (3) metastatic carcinoma of
unknown primary: rule out PCa; (4) nonspecific granulomatous prostatitis/xanthoma
versus high-grade PCa; (5) adult prostate sarcoma versus sarcomatoid PCa; (6)
colorectal adenocarcinoma versus high-grade PCa; and (7) prognostic IHC markers.

PMID: 25029122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Aug;38(8):e20-34. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000240.

Best practices recommendations in the application of immunohistochemistry in the 
bladder lesions: report from the International Society of Urologic Pathology
consensus conference.

Amin MB(1), Trpkov K, Lopez-Beltran A, Grignon D; Members of the ISUP
Immunohistochemistry in Diagnostic Urologic Pathology Group.

Collaborators: Epstein JI, Ulbright TM, Humphrey PA, Egevad L, Montironi R, Zhou 
M, Argani P, Delahunt B, Berney DM, Srigley JR, Tickoo S, Reuter VE.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA §Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Calgary and Calgary Laboratory Services, Calgary, AB, Canada Unit of Anatomic
Pathology, Department of Surgery Universidad de Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.

The bladder working group of the 2013 International Society of Urologic Pathology
(ISUP) Conference on Best Practices Recommendation in the Application of
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) in Urologic Pathology discussed 5 settings in which
IHC is commonly used in clinical practice. With regard to markers for urothelial 
differentiation, the committee found that there is no ideal marker or established
panel to confirm urothelial differentiation. On the basis of the differential
diagnostic consideration, positivity for GATA3, CK20, p63, and either
high-molecular weight cytokeratin (HMWCK) or cytokeratin (CK)5/6 is of value in
proving urothelial differentiation in the appropriate morphologic and clinical
context. With regard to the role of IHC in the distinction of reactive atypia
from urothelial carcinoma in situ, the committee recommended that morphology
remains the gold standard in this differential diagnosis and that, at best, the
IHC panel of CK20/p53/CD44(s) has potential utility but is variably used and has 
limitations. The immunostaining pattern must be interpreted with strict
morphologic correlation, because overreliance on IHC may be misleading,
particularly in the posttreatment setting. IHC has no role in the distinction of 
dysplasia versus carcinoma in situ and in the grading of papillary urothelial
carcinoma. IHC may have a limited but distinct role in staging of bladder cancer.
In a subset of cases, depending on the clinical and histologic context,
broad-spectrum cytokeratins (to identify early or obscured invasion) and desmin
(distinction of muscle from desmoplasia and to highlight muscle contours for
subclassification) may be helpful. Limited experience and conflicting data
preclude smoothelin or vimentin to be recommended routinely for subclassifying
muscle type at this time. In the workup of a spindled cell proliferation of the
bladder and in limited specimens, we recommend an immunohistochemical panel of 6 
markers including ALK1, SMA, desmin, cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), and p63 with either
of HMWCK or CK5/6. Currently, there are no prognostic immunohistochemical or
molecular studies that are recommended to be routinely performed on biopsy or
resection specimens.

PMID: 25029121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 14;9(7):e102022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102022.
eCollection 2014.

The regulation and role of c-FLIP in human Th cell differentiation.

Kyläniemi MK(1), Kaukonen R(2), Myllyviita J(2), Rasool O(2), Lahesmaa R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland; National Doctoral Programme in Informational and
Structural Biology, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. (2)Turku Centre for
Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.

The early differentiation of T helper (Th) cells is a tightly controlled and
finely balanced process, which involves several factors including cytokines,
transcription factors and co-stimulatory molecules. Recent studies have shown
that in addition to the regulation of apoptosis, caspase activity is also needed 
for Th cell proliferation and activation and it might play a role in Th cell
differentiation. The isoforms of the cellular FLICE inhibitory protein (c-FLIP)
are regulators of CASPASE-8 activity and the short isoform, c-FLIPS, has been
shown to be up-regulated by IL-4, the Th2 driving cytokine. In this work, we have
studied the expression and functional role of three c-FLIP isoforms during the
early Th cell differentiation. Only two of the isoforms, c-FLIPS and c-FLIPL,
were detected at the protein level although c-FLIPR was expressed at the mRNA
level. The knockdown of c-FLIPL led to enhanced Th1 differentiation and elevated 
IL-4 production by Th2 cells, whereas the knockdown of c-FLIPS diminished GATA3
expression and IL-4 production by Th2 cells. In summary, our results provide new 
insight into the role of c-FLIP proteins in the early differentiation of human Th
cells.

PMCID: PMC4096760
PMID: 25019384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Clin Pathol. 2014 Aug;142(2):173-83. doi: 10.1309/AJCPK1OV6IMNPFGL.

Evaluation of contemporary prostate and urothelial lineage biomarkers in a
consecutive cohort of poorly differentiated bladder neck carcinomas.

Mohanty SK(1), Smith SC(1), Chang E(1), Luthringer DJ(1), Gown AM(2), Aron M(1), 
Amin MB(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, and. (2)PhenoPath Laboratories, Seattle, WA. (3)From the
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, and aminm@cshs.org.

OBJECTIVES: New immunohistochemical (IHC) markers of urothelial carcinoma (UCa)
and prostatic adenocarcinoma (PCa) have emerged in recent years, yet comparative 
studies to establish markers remain lacking. We aimed to identify an effective
but parsimonious approach for poorly differentiated bladder neck lesions, to
establish a best practice panel approach in a setting simulating prospective use.
METHODS: We tested the performance of a panel of IHC markers on whole sections of
a consecutive cohort of transurethral resection specimens of poorly
differentiated, challenging bladder neck resections (n=36).
RESULTS: In the setting of poorly differentiated bladder neck carcinomas,
biomarker sensitivities for UCa were as follows: GATA3, 100%; S100P, 88%; p63,
75%; and cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, 56%; specificities of each were 100%. CK7 and CK20
showed sensitivities of 75% and 63%, though these were only 85% and 80% specific.
For PCa markers, NKX3.1, p501S, prostate-specific membrane antigen, and androgen 
receptor (AR) each showed 100% sensitivity, outperforming ERG (35%) and
prostate-specific antigen (PSA; 25%). All the prostate histogenesis markers were 
100% specific, except for AR, which was positive in 13% of the UCa cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel IHC markers show improved diagnostic performance that enables 
positive and negative support for identifying histogenesis with the use of as few
as two markers for this critical therapeutic distinction. PSA underperforms newer
markers.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25015857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. PLoS Biol. 2014 Jul 8;12(7):e1001901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001901.
eCollection 2014.

An immunological marker of tolerance to infection in wild rodents.

Jackson JA(1), Hall AJ(2), Friberg IM(3), Ralli C(2), Lowe A(2), Zawadzka M(4),
Turner AK(4), Stewart A(1), Birtles RJ(5), Paterson S(4), Bradley JE(2), Begon
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)IBERS, Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom. (2)School of Life 
Sciences, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. (3)School of 
Life Sciences, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom;
Institute of Integrative Biology, The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United 
Kingdom. (4)Institute of Integrative Biology, The University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, United Kingdom. (5)School of Environment and Life Sciences, University
of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom.

Hosts are likely to respond to parasitic infections by a combination of
resistance (expulsion of pathogens) and tolerance (active mitigation of
pathology). Of these strategies, the basis of tolerance in animal hosts is
relatively poorly understood, with especially little known about how tolerance is
manifested in natural populations. We monitored a natural population of field
voles using longitudinal and cross-sectional sampling modes and taking
measurements on body condition, infection, immune gene expression, and survival. 
Using analyses stratified by life history stage, we demonstrate a pattern of
tolerance to macroparasites in mature compared to immature males. In comparison
to immature males, mature males resisted infection less and instead increased
investment in body condition in response to accumulating burdens, but at the
expense of reduced reproductive effort. We identified expression of the
transcription factor Gata3 (a mediator of Th2 immunity) as an immunological
biomarker of this tolerance response. Time series data for individual animals
suggested that macroparasite infections gave rise to increased expression of
Gata3, which gave rise to improved body condition and enhanced survival as hosts 
aged. These findings provide a clear and unexpected insight into tolerance
responses (and their life history sequelae) in a natural vertebrate population.
The demonstration that such responses (potentially promoting parasite
transmission) can move from resistance to tolerance through the course of an
individual's lifetime emphasises the need to incorporate them into our
understanding of the dynamics and risk of infection in the natural environment.
Moreover, the identification of Gata3 as a marker of tolerance to macroparasites 
raises important new questions regarding the role of Th2 immunity and the
mechanistic nature of the tolerance response itself. A more manipulative,
experimental approach is likely to be valuable in elaborating this further.

PMCID: PMC4086718
PMID: 25004450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;30(7):704-7, 712.

[Imbalance in the expression of Foxp3, T-bet and GATA-3 is correlated with
inflammation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang C(1), Liu X(2), Peng Q(2), Li D(2), Ji Q(2), Wang C(3), Li Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Hubei University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan
430065; Clinical College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Anhui
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230038, China. (2)Clinical
College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Anhui University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230038, China. (3)Department of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei
230601, China. (4)Department of Respiration, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the change of regulatory T cells(Tregs), fork head-like
transcription factor 3 (Foxp3), T box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3) in rat models of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD).
METHODS: Thirty rats were randomly divided into control group and model group
(n=15 each). The rats of model group were developed by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and smoking. Interleukin-4 (IL-4) and <U+03B3>-interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) in serum and
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were detected 28 days after modeling by
ELISA. Peripheral Tregs were detected by flow cytometry. The expressions of
Foxp3, T-bet, GATA gene and protein in lung tissue were observed by reverse
transcription PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the model group had more serious
inflammation in lung tissues, expressed the higher levels of IFN-<U+03B3> in serum and
BALF (P<0.01), T-bet mRNA and protein in lung tissue, and the lower levels of
IL-4, CD4<U+207A> CD25<U+207A> Treg, CD4<U+207A> CD25<U+207A> Foxp3<U+207A> Treg (P<0.05), Foxp3, GATA-3 mRNA and
protein (P<0.01). Correlation analysis showed that there were correlations
between T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 expressions and IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3> levels (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: There is a relationship between inflammation and imbalance of in the 
expression of T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 in COPD.

PMID: 25001933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Nat Immunol. 2014 Aug;15(8):777-88. doi: 10.1038/ni.2937. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

Epigenomic analysis of primary human T cells reveals enhancers associated with
TH2 memory cell differentiation and asthma susceptibility.

Seumois G(1), Chavez L(2), Gerasimova A(2), Lienhard M(3), Omran N(4), Kalinke
L(4), Vedanayagam M(4), Ganesan AP(4), Chawla A(3), Djukanovic R(4), Ansel KM(5),
Peters B(3), Rao A(6), Vijayanand P(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]
Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Southampton National Institute for Health
Research Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, University of Southampton, Faculty
of Medicine, Southampton, UK. [3] University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA. [4]. (2)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy &
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]. (3)La Jolla Institute for Allergy &
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. (4)Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Southampton National Institute for Health Research Respiratory Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, UK.
(5)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (6)1] 
La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]
Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA. [3]
Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA. [4] University of California San Diego Moores Cancer Center, San
Diego, California, USA. (7)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La
Jolla, California, USA. [2] Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Southampton
National Institute for Health Research Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit,
University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, UK. [3] University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Aug;15(8):701-3.

A characteristic feature of asthma is the aberrant accumulation, differentiation 
or function of memory CD4(+) T cells that produce type 2 cytokines (TH2 cells).
By mapping genome-wide histone modification profiles for subsets of T cells
isolated from peripheral blood of healthy and asthmatic individuals, we
identified enhancers with known and potential roles in the normal differentiation
of human TH1 cells and TH2 cells. We discovered disease-specific enhancers in T
cells that differ between healthy and asthmatic individuals. Enhancers that
gained the histone H3 Lys4 dimethyl (H3K4me2) mark during TH2 cell development
showed the highest enrichment for asthma-associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), which supported a pathogenic role for TH2 cells in asthma. 
In silico analysis of cell-specific enhancers revealed transcription factors,
microRNAs and genes potentially linked to human TH2 cell differentiation. Our
results establish the feasibility and utility of enhancer profiling in
well-defined populations of specialized cell types involved in disease
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4140783
PMID: 24997565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Neurochem. 2014 Oct;131(2):206-18. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12814. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

The immunomodulatory effects of human mesenchymal stem cells on peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells in ALS patients.

Kwon MS(1), Noh MY(2), Oh KW(2), Cho KA(2), Kang BY(2), Kim KS(3), Kim YS(2), Kim
SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CHA University, Bundang-gu,
Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Korea. (2)Cell Therapy Center and Department of
Neurology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Haengdang-dong, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Bioengineering Institute, CoreStem Inc., Seoul, Korea.

In a previous study, we reported that intrathecal injection of mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) slowed disease progression in G93A mutant superoxide dismutase1
transgenic mice. In this study, we found that intrathecal MSC administration
vastly increased the infiltration of peripheral immune cells into the spinal cord
of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice (G93A mutant superoxide dismutase1
transgenic). Thus, we investigated the immunomodulatory effect of MSCs on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in ALS patients, focusing on
regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg ; CD4(+) /CD25(high) /FoxP3(+) ) and the mRNA
expression of several cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-17, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13, and
TGF-ß). Peripheral blood samples were obtained from nine healthy controls (HC)
and sixteen patients who were diagnosed with definite or probable ALS. Isolated
PBMCs from the blood samples of all subjects were co-cultured with MSCs for 24 or
72 h. Based on a fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis, we found that
co-culture with MSCs increased the Treg /total T-lymphocyte ratio in the PBMCs
from both groups according to the co-culture duration. Co-culture of PBMCs with
MSCs for 24 h led to elevated mRNA levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-10 in the PBMCs from
both groups. However, after co-culturing for 72 h, although the IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA level 
had returned to the basal level in co-cultured HC PBMCs, the IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA level in 
co-cultured ALS PBMCs remained elevated. Additionally, the levels of IL-4 and
TGF-ß were markedly elevated, along with Gata3 mRNA, a Th2 transcription factor
mRNA, in both HC and ALS PBMCs co-cultured for 72 h. The elevated expression of
these cytokines in the co-culture supernatant was confirmed via ELISA.
Furthermore, we found that the increased mRNA level of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) in the co-cultured MSCs was correlated with the increase in
Treg induction. These findings of Treg induction and increased anti-inflammatory 
cytokine expression in co-cultured ALS PBMCs provide indirect evidence that MSCs 
may play a role in the immunomodulation of inflammatory responses when MSC
therapy is targeted to ALS patients. We propose the following mechanism for the
effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) administered intrathecally in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS): MSCs increase infiltration of peripheral immune cells
into CNS and skew the infiltrated immune cells toward regulatory T lymphocytes
(Treg ) and Th2 lymphocytes. Treg and Th2 secret anti-inflammatory cytokines such
as IL-4, IL-10, and TGF-ß. A series of immunomodulatory mechanism provides a new 
strategy for ALS treatment.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24995608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1824-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.04.015. Epub 2014 
May 8.

The utility of p63, p40, and GATA-binding protein 3 immunohistochemistry in
diagnosing micropapillary urothelial carcinoma.

Lin X(1), Zhu B(1), Villa C(1), Zhong M(2), Kundu S(3), Rohan SM(1), Yang XJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. (2)Department of
Pathology, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, NY 10595. (3)Department of
Urology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. (4)Department of Pathology, Northwestern Memorial
Hospital, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611.
Electronic address: xyang@northwestern.edu.

Micropapillary urothelial carcinoma (MPUC) is an uncommon variant of urothelial
carcinoma (UC) with an aggressive clinical course. There have been limited
studies on the UC markers GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3), p63, and p40 in MPUC.
Our study investigated the immunoreactivity of these 3 markers in MPUC compared
with conventional UC of different grades and stages. Immunohistochemistry was
performed on 62 cases of high-grade urothelial carcinoma (HGUC), 16 low-grade
urothelial carcinoma (LGUC), and 20 MPUC. p63 expression was strong and diffuse
in all LGUC, significantly decreased in high stage and HGUC, and virtually absent
in MPUC. p40 expression was decreased in HGUC and markedly decreased in MPUC
relative to LGUC. These results suggest that loss of p63 expression in a UC
appears to be associated with adverse features--including cases with
micropapillary differentiation. Decreased GATA3 expression was seen frequently in
high-grade and high-pathologic stage (=pT2) tumors but was retained in MPUC
cases. The findings of retained GATA3 expression in MPUC, which often shows a
loss of expression of other urothelial markers such as p63, may be helpful for
determining the origin of micropapillary carcinoma of unknown primary. Compared
with the traditional markers p63 and p40, GATA3 is the most sensitive marker of
conventional UC and MPUC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24993315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Brain. 2014 Jun 28;7:48. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-7-48.

Postnatal maintenance of the 5-Ht1a-Pet1 autoregulatory loop by serotonin in the 
raphe nuclei of the brainstem.

Kim JY, Kim A, Zhao ZQ, Liu XY, Chen ZF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Itch, Washington University School of Medicine, St,
Louis 63110, USA. chenz@wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Despite the importance of 5-HT1A as a major target for the action of 
several anxiolytics/antidepressant drugs, little is known about its regulation in
central serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) neurons.
RESULTS: We report that expression of 5-HT1A and the transcription factor Pet1
was impaired in the rostral raphe nuclei of mice lacking tryptophan hydroxylase 2
(Tph2) after birth. The downregulation of Pet1 was recapitulated in 5-Ht1a-/-
mice. Using an explant culture system, we show that reduction of Pet1 and 5-HT1A 
was rescued in Tph2-/- brainstem by exogenous 5-HT. In contrast, 5-HT failed to
rescue reduced expression of Pet1 in 5-Ht1a-/- brainstem explant culture.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest a causal relationship between 5-HT1A and Pet1,
and reveal a potential mechanism by which 5-HT1A-Pet1 autoregulatory loop is
maintained by 5-HT in a spatiotemporal-specific manner during postnatal
development. Our results are relevant to understanding the pathophysiology of
certain psychiatric and developmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC4086287
PMID: 24972638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Jul 16;62(28):6871-8. doi: 10.1021/jf501428w. Epub 2014
Jul 8.

Th2 factors may be involved in TiO2 NP-induced hepatic inflammation.

Hong J(1), Wang L, Zhao X, Yu X, Sheng L, Xu B, Liu D, Zhu Y, Long Y, Hong F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Soochow University , Suzhou 215123, China.

TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) are used in the food industry but have potential toxic
effects in humans and animals. The resulting immune response is driven by the
production of Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5, which contribute to the development of
hepatic inflammation. However, TiO2 NPs have been demonstrated to impair liver
function and cause liver inflammation in animal models, which may be associated
with activation of Th2 factor-mediated pathways. Mice were administered a gavage 
instillation of 2.5, 5, or 10 mg/kg body weight TiO2 NPs for six consecutive
months. We investigated whether TiO2 NPs activate the Th2 factor-mediated
signaling pathway under TiO2 NP-induced hepatic toxicity. The results showed that
mice exhibited an accumulation of titanium in the liver, which in turn led to
reductions in body weight, increases in liver indices, liver dysfunction,
infiltration of inflammatory cells, and hepatocyte apoptosis or necrosis.
Furthermore, hepatic inflammation was accompanied by increased (0.67 ± 0.09- to
2.14 ± 0.19-fold) IL-4 expression and up-regulation of its target genes including
IL-5 (0.1 ± 0.06- to 0.69 ± 0.12-fold), IL-12 (0.08 ± 0.03- to 0.83 ± 0.21-fold),
IFN-<U+03B3> (0.17 ± 0.09- to 0.87 ± 0.15-fold), GATA3 (0.05 ± 0.02- to 1.29 ±
0.18-fold), GATA4 (0.04 ± 0.01- to 0.87 ± 0.13-fold), T-bet (0.3 ± 0.06- to 0.93 
± 0.15-fold), ROR<U+03B3>t (0.32 ± 0.11- to 1.67 ± 0.17-fold), STAt3 (0.16 ± 0.06- to
2.14 ± 0.23-fold), STAT6 (0.2 ± 0.05- to 0.63 ± 0.12-fold), eotaxin (0.53 ± 0.13-
to 1.49 ± 0.21-fold), MCP-1 (0.5 ± 0.11- to 0.74 ± 0.18-fold), and MIP-2 (0.27 ± 
0.07- to 0.71 ± 0.18-fold) and significant down-regulation of its target gene
STAT1 (-0.15 ± 0.05 to -0.81 ± 0.11-fold). Taken together, the alteration of Th2 
factor expression may be involved in the control of hepatic inflammation induced 
by chronic TiO2 NP toxicity.

PMID: 24971501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Aug 15;307(4):G430-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00360.2013. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Roles for Nkx2-5 and Gata3 in the ontogeny of the murine smooth muscle gastric
ligaments.

Prakash A(1), Udager AM(1), Saenz DA(1), Gumucio DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan dgumucio@umich.edu.

The gastric ligaments are superficial cord-like structures, located on the lesser
curvature of the stomach, that extend from the pylorus to the esophagus. These
ligaments have been documented in a wide variety of mammalian species, including 
humans, but their composition and ontogeny is unexplored. Here, we demonstrate
that, during ontogeny, the gastric ligaments are first visible as extensions from
a C-shaped domain of Gata3-expressing cells that surround the future pylorus;
this domain will later give rise to the pyloric outer longitudinal muscle (OLM). 
The open ends of the C are located ventrally, and, beginning at embryonic day (E)
13.5, the ligaments grow anteriorly from these points. Whereas most other
ligaments of the stomach are neurovascular in nature, the gastric ligaments are
composed of smooth muscle cells that mature between E14.5 and E16.5. The gastric 
ligaments coexpress the transcription factors Gata3, Nkx2-5, and Sox9, and
germline loss of Gata3 or conditional deletion of Nkx2-5 abrogates Sox9
expression and impairs gastric ligament smooth muscle development; similar
phenotypes were previously seen in the OLM. In accord with this molecular
contiguity between the OLM and gastric ligaments, three-dimensional image
reconstruction highlights physical contiguity between these smooth muscle
structures, suggesting that they may work together as a unit to control flexure
of the pyloric region, a function similar to the ligament of Treitz at the
duodenojejunal junction. These findings may have implications for our
understanding of normal pyloric sphincter function, as well as the common human
congenital pathology idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4137113
PMID: 24970776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 26;10(6):e1004190. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004190.
eCollection 2014.

Adequate Th2-type response associates with restricted bacterial growth in latent 
mycobacterial infection of zebrafish.

Hammarén MM(1), Oksanen KE(1), Nisula HM(1), Luukinen BV(1), Pesu M(2), Rämet
M(3), Parikka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. (2)BioMediTech,
University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa Hospital 
District, Tampere, Finland. (3)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland; Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Tuberculosis is still a major health problem worldwide. Currently it is not known
what kind of immune responses lead to successful control and clearance of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This gap in knowledge is reflected by the inability
to develop sufficient diagnostic and therapeutic tools to fight tuberculosis. We 
have used the Mycobacterium marinum infection model in the adult zebrafish and
taken advantage of heterogeneity of zebrafish population to dissect the
characteristics of adaptive immune responses, some of which are associated with
well-controlled latency or bacterial clearance while others with progressive
infection. Differences in T cell responses between subpopulations were measured
at the transcriptional level. It was discovered that a high total T cell level
was usually associated with lower bacterial loads alongside with a T helper 2
(Th2)-type gene expression signature. At late time points, spontaneous
reactivation with apparent symptoms was characterized by a low Th2/Th1 marker
ratio and a substantial induction of foxp3 reflecting the level of regulatory T
cells. Characteristic gata3/tbx21 has potential as a biomarker for the status of 
mycobacterial disease.

PMCID: PMC4072801
PMID: 24968056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520.

Global analysis of ZNF217 chromatin occupancy in the breast cancer cell genome
reveals an association with ERalpha.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Littlepage LE, Simion C, Sweeney CA, Farnham PJ, Krig SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO
80639, USA. seth.frietze@unco.edu.

BACKGROUND: The ZNF217 gene, encoding a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is located at
20q13 and found amplified and overexpressed in greater than 20% of breast tumors.
Current studies indicate ZNF217 drives tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory
mechanisms of ZNF217 are largely unknown. Because ZNF217 associates with
chromatin modifying enzymes, we postulate that ZNF217 functions to regulate
specific gene signaling networks. Here, we present a large-scale functional
genomic analysis of ZNF217, which provides insights into the regulatory role of
ZNF217 in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: ChIP-seq analysis reveals that the majority of ZNF217 binding sites are 
located at distal regulatory regions associated with the chromatin marks H3K27ac 
and H3K4me1. Analysis of ChIP-seq transcription factor binding sites shows
clustering of ZNF217 with FOXA1, GATA3 and ERalpha binding sites, supported by
the enrichment of corresponding motifs for the ERalpha-associated cis-regulatory 
sequences. ERalpha expression highly correlates with ZNF217 in lysates from
breast tumors (n = 15), and ERalpha co-precipitates ZNF217 and its binding
partner CtBP2 from nuclear extracts. Transcriptome profiling following ZNF217
depletion identifies differentially expressed genes co-bound by ZNF217 and
ERalpha; gene ontology suggests a role for ZNF217-ERalpha in expression programs 
associated with ER+ breast cancer studies found in the Molecular Signature
Database. Data-mining of expression data from breast cancer patients correlates
ZNF217 with reduced overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our genome-wide ZNF217 data suggests a functional role for ZNF217 at
ERalpha target genes. Future studies will investigate whether ZNF217 expression
contributes to aberrant ERalpha regulatory events in ER+ breast cancer and
hormone resistance.

PMCID: PMC4082627
PMID: 24962896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2014 Jul 31;124(5):737-49. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-544106. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 governs life and death of peripheral T cells.

Zhang Y(1), Kinkel S(1), Maksimovic J(2), Bandala-Sanchez E(1), Tanzer MC(1),
Naselli G(3), Zhang JG(1), Zhan Y(1), Lew AM(1), Silke J(1), Oshlack A(2),
Blewitt ME(1), Harrison LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia; and. (2)Bioinformatics, Quantitative Sciences Core, Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC,
Australia. (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
VIC, Australia;

Differentiation of naïve CD4(+) T cells into effector (Th1, Th2, and Th17) and
induced regulatory (iTreg) T cells requires lineage-specifying transcription
factors and epigenetic modifications that allow appropriate repression or
activation of gene transcription. The epigenetic silencing of cytokine genes is
associated with the repressive H3K27 trimethylation mark, mediated by the Ezh2 or
Ezh1 methyltransferase components of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
Here we show that silencing of the Ifng, Gata3, and Il10 loci in naïve CD4(+) T
cells is dependent on Ezh2. Naïve CD4(+) T cells lacking Ezh2 were epigenetically
primed for overproduction of IFN-<U+03B3> in Th2 and iTreg and IL-10 in Th2 cells. In
addition, deficiency of Ezh2 accelerated effector Th cell death via death
receptor-mediated extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways, confirmed in vivo
for Ezh2-null IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells responding to Listeria
monocytogenes infection. These findings demonstrate the key role of PRC2/Ezh2 in 
differentiation and survival of peripheral T cells and reveal potential
immunotherapeutic targets.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24951427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Am J Clin Pathol. 2014 Jul;142(1):64-71. doi: 10.1309/AJCP8H2VBDSCIOBF.

Semiquantitative GATA-3 immunoreactivity in breast, bladder, gynecologic tract,
and other cytokeratin 7-positive carcinomas.

Clark BZ(1), Beriwal S(2), Dabbs DJ(2), Bhargava R(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Magee-Womens Hospital of University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA. clarkbz@upmc.edu. (2)From Magee-Womens Hospital of University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate GATA-3 immunohistochemical expression semiquantitatively 
in breast, gynecologic, gastric, pancreatic-biliary tract, urothelial, and
vulvar/cervical squamous cell carcinomas.
METHODS: GATA-3 expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 198 invasive 
breast carcinomas on tissue microarrays. Tissue microarrays of other tissues
included 144 gynecologic tumors, 28 bladder carcinomas, 63 cholangiocarcinomas,
20 pancreatic carcinomas, and 62 gastric carcinomas. Full tissue sections of 10
invasive squamous cell carcinomas were also stained. GATA-3 expression was
semiquantitatively scored using an H-score method. H-score greater than 10 was
considered a positive result.
RESULTS: Of 186 breast carcinomas, 95% were positive (mean H-score of 217).
GATA-3 expression was uncommon in 139 nonsquamous gynecologic tumors, with often 
weak reactivity (mean H-score <50) seen in 18% of endocervical, 7% of
endometrial, and 10% of ovarian tumors. Six (60%) of 10 squamous cell carcinomas 
expressed GATA-3 (mean H-score of 102). Of 22 urothelial carcinomas, 95%
expressed GATA-3 (mean H-score of 170). A few cholangiocarcinomas (3%),
pancreatic adenocarcinomas (10%), and gastric carcinomas (2%) weakly expressed
GATA-3 (mean H-score <50).
CONCLUSIONS: Strong GATA-3 expression is a reliable marker of primary breast
carcinoma in the appropriate clinical context. GATA-3 reactivity in around 70% of
triple-negative breast carcinomas is also clinically useful. Significant
reactivity in gynecologic squamous cell carcinomas suggests that GATA-3 alone
cannot reliably distinguish these tumors from urothelial carcinoma.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 24926087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Hum Pathol. 2014 Aug;45(8):1682-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.04.011. Epub 2014 
Apr 24.

GATA3 expression in small cell carcinoma of bladder and prostate and its
potential role in determining primary tumor origin.

Bezerra SM(1), Lotan TL(2), Faraj SF(1), Karram S(1), Sharma R(1), Schoenberg
M(3), Bivalacqua TJ(3), Netto GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231. (2)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,
Baltimore, MD 21231; Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231. (3)Department of Urology, The Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231; Department of Oncology, The Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231. (4)Department of Pathology,
The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231; Department of
Urology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231; Department 
of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231.
Electronic address: gnetto1@jhmi.edu.

GATA3 is a sensitive marker for urothelial carcinoma. We here evaluate, for the
first time, GATA3 expression in small cell carcinoma of bladder and prostate and 
assess its utility in the differential diagnosis with small cell carcinoma of
lung primary. Archival tissues from 60 small cell carcinomas (12 bladder, 15
lung, and 33 prostate primary cases) were used to build 2 tissue microarrays. We 
also assessed whole slide sections from 10 additional primary small cell
carcinomas of bladder. GATA3 nuclear expression was evaluated using standard
immunohistochemistry. Intensity (weak, moderate, and strong) and extent of
expression were assessed in each tissue microarray spot. Extent positivity was
categorized as focal (1%-25%), multifocal (>25%), and diffuse (>75%). Nuclear
GATA3 expression was encountered in 7 bladder (7/22, 32%) and 2 lung (2/15, 13%) 
small cell carcinomas. All 33 primary prostate small cell carcinomas were
negative. Among bladder tumors, strong and diffuse (>75%) GATA3 labeling was seen
in 3 cases (3/22, 14%); focal positivity was observed in the 4 remaining cases
(4/22, 18%). Both positive lung cases had only focal positivity. Our study is the
first to reveal GATA3 expression in the small subset of lung small cell carcinoma
that should be taken into consideration in assigning site of origin in advanced
small cell carcinoma cases. Our novel finding of GATA3 positivity in one-third of
bladder small cell carcinoma is of potential value in differentiating small cell 
carcinomas of prostate origin from those of bladder origin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24925221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Allergy. 2014 Sep;69(9):1154-61. doi: 10.1111/all.12440. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Association between group 2 innate lymphoid cells enrichment, nasal polyps and
allergy in chronic rhinosinusitis.

Miljkovic D(1), Bassiouni A, Cooksley C, Ou J, Hauben E, Wormald PJ, Vreugde S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Queen
Elizabeth Hospital, and the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) were shown to be involved in
the initiation and coordination of Th2-type immune responses in allergic disease 
animal models. Recently, ILC2s enrichment was noted in chronic rhinosinusitis
(CRS) patients; however, the role of ILC2s in coordinating the Th2 response in
CRS remains to be elucidated. Here, we characterize the ILC2 compartment in CRS
by investigating the correlations between ILC2s, Th2 cells and Th2 cytokines
expression in CRS patients.
METHODS: We used flow cytometric analysis of sinonasal mucosal tissues of 29 CRS 
patients and 5 controls to quantify ILC2s and Th2 cells. Messenger RNA expression
levels of IL-5, IL-13, IL-25, IL-33, TSLP and GATA3 were determined using
qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: ILC2s were significantly enriched in nasal polyps (CRSwNP) patients.
Multivariate linear regression showed a significant positive association of ILC2 
numbers with CRSwNP and allergic CRS and a negative association with the number
of previous endoscopic sinus surgeries. Group 2 innate lymphoid cell numbers
significantly correlated with Th2 cell frequencies. Messenger RNA expression
levels of IL-5 and IL-13 were increased in CRSwNP compared with controls, while
mRNA levels of IL-25 and GATA3 were significantly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results characterize the complex interactions between ILC2s and 
other Th2 response elements in the context of CRS and suggest that ILC2
enrichment occurs in CRSwNP and in allergic CRS patients.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24924975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Dec;38(12):1664-71. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000267.

Immunohistochemical staining characteristics of nephrogenic adenoma using the
PIN-4 cocktail (p63, AMACR, and CK903) and GATA-3.

McDaniel AS(1), Chinnaiyan AM, Siddiqui J, McKenney JK, Mehra R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Internal Medicine §Urology Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology <U+2225>Comprehensive Cancer Center ¶Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI #Department of
Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.

Nephrogenic adenoma (NA) is a benign lesion of the urinary tract associated with 
injury to the urothelium. The varied morphologic patterns of NA make it a
potential diagnostic pitfall, because it can mimic closely prostatic
adenocarcinoma and urothelial carcinoma. In current practice, an antibody
cocktail comprising p63, CK903, and AMACR (PIN-4 cocktail) is frequently utilized
to evaluate foci suspicious for prostatic adenocarcinoma. Although the staining
characteristics of the individual components of the PIN-4 cocktail have been
reported for NA, no study has described the expression patterns for NA when the
stains are applied as a cocktail. GATA-3 is an emerging marker of urothelial
carcinoma; however, the GATA-3 staining characteristics of NA have yet to be
described. Sixty-three NA specimens (M:F=36:27, average age=51.4 y) from various 
locations in the urinary tract including urinary bladder (n=40), ureter (n=3),
and urethra (n=20) were collected from the archives of 2 institutions.
Immunohistochemical analysis with the PIN-4 cocktail and GATA-3 antibodies was
performed, and the distribution and intensity of staining was recorded for each
antibody in each case. PIN-4 cocktail staining revealed AMACR expression in 56%
of cases, CK903 expression in 97%, and rare p63 positivity (in only 2 cases).
Only 2 NA cases displayed an overall PIN-4 staining pattern compatible with
prostate cancer. GATA-3 expression was noted in 40% of NAs. No correlation
between AMACR, CK903, or GATA-3 positivity and histologic pattern or anatomic
location was identified. Although heterogenous staining patterns were seen within
individual cases, use of the PIN-4 cocktail effectively discriminates NA from
prostate cancer because of the high frequency of coexpression of AMACR and CK903 
within NA. In addition, GATA-3 is not a useful marker in differentiating between 
NA and urothelial carcinoma.

PMID: 24921643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):3316-32.

The silencing of the SWI/SNF subunit and anticancer gene BRM in Rhabdoid tumors.

Kahali B(1), Yu J, Marquez SB, Thompson KW, Liang SY, Lu L, Reisman D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Florida, Florida, USA.

Rhabdoid sarcomas are highly malignant tumors that usually occur in young
children. A key to the genesis of this tumor is the mutational loss of the BAF47 
gene as well as the widespread epigenetic suppression of other key anticancer
genes. The BRM gene is one such epigenetically silenced gene in Rhabdoid tumors. 
This gene codes for an ATPase catalytic subunit that shifts histones and opens
the chromatin. We show that BRM is an epigenetically silenced gene in 10/11
Rhabdoid cell lines and in 70% of Rhabdoid tumors. Moreover, BRM can be induced
by BAF47 re-expression and by Flavopiridol. By selective shRNAi knockdown of BRM,
we show that BRM re-expression is necessary for growth inhibition by BAF47
re-expression or Flavopiridol application. Similar to lung cancer cell lines, we 
found that HDAC3, HDAC9, MEF2D and GATA3 controlled BRM silencing and that HDAC9 
was overexpressed in Rhabdoid cancer cell lines. In primary BRM-deficient
Rhabdoid tumors, HDAC9 was also found to be highly overexpressed. Two insertional
BRM promoter polymorphisms contribute to BRM silencing, but only the -1321
polymorphism correlated with BRM silencing in Rhabdoid cell lines. To determine
how these polymorphisms were tied to BRM silencing, we conducted ChIP assays and 
found that both HDAC9 and MEF2D bound to the BRM promoter at or near these
polymorphic sites. Using BRM promoter swap experiments, we indirectly showed that
both HDAC9 and MEF2D bound to these polymorphic sites. Together, these data show 
that the mechanism of BRM silencing contributes to the pathogenesis of Rhabdoid
tumors and appears to be conserved among tumor types.

PMCID: PMC4102812
PMID: 24913006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Oct;80(4):276-82. doi: 10.1111/sji.12197.

Increased interleukin-27 promotes Th1 differentiation in patients with chronic
immune thrombocytopenia.

Li Q(1), Zhang L, Yang M, Xia R, Xia L, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The first affiliated hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui Province, China.

Chronic immune thrombocytopenia (cITP) is an autoimmune disease with disturbed
cytokine profile. Although plasma levels of IL-27 are shown to be associated with
cITP, its association with T cell subsets has not been studied. The objective of 
this study was to study the association between IL-27 and different T cell
subsets in patients with cITP. Heparinized blood was collected from 31 patients
with cITP and 36 healthy controls (platelet count <100 × 10(9)/l and 103-280 ×
10(9)/l, respectively). The percentage of Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were enumerated by flow cytometry, and the mRNA
levels of IL-27, T-bet, GATA-3 and retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma (ROR<U+03B3>t)
by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain (RT-PCR). Plasma cytokine
levels of IL-27, interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), IL-4 and IL-17A were estimated by flow
cytometrix. The effect of exogenous recombinant IL-27(rhIL-27) on the
differentiation of T cells into Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells was investigated by cell 
culture. The percentage of Th1 and Th17 cells and the plasma concentration and
mRNA levels of IL-27 were significantly higher in cITP patients compared with
healthy controls. Plasma levels of IL-27 correlated positively with percentage of
Th1 cells in patients with cITP. Exogenous (rhIL-27) could significantly
up-regulate the percentage of Th1 cells and down-regulate Th2 cells in vitro.
Th17 cells were reduced in the presence of (rhIL-27) in controls but had no
effect in patients with cITP. The up-regulation of IL-27 might cause Th1
differentiation and might be involved in the pathophysiology of cITP.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24909905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2779-80. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28786. Epub 2014 Jun 4.

Reply to: Comparative analysis of GATA3 mutation profiles between Asian and
Western patients with breast cancer. Is there really a difference?

Zuo W(1), Yu KD, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Cancer Center and Cancer Institute, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Comment on
    Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2778-9.
    Cancer. 2014 May 1;120(9):1329-37.

PMID: 24898401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2778-9. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28782. Epub 2014 Jun 4.

Comparative analysis of GATA3 mutation profiles between Asian and Western
patients with breast cancer. Is there really a difference?

Chandiramani N(1), Kenny PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York.

Comment in
    Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2779-80.

Comment on
    Cancer. 2014 May 1;120(9):1329-37.

PMID: 24898288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Environ Health Prev Med. 2014 Jul;19(4):307-13. doi: 10.1007/s12199-014-0393-7.
Epub 2014 Jun 4.

Regulation of serine protease inhibitor Kazal type-5 (SPINK5) gene expression in 
the keratinocytes.

Le NA(1), Katsuyama M, Demura M, Tanii H, Katsuyama H, Saijoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Kanazawa,
9208640, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Serine protease inhibitor Kazal type-5 (SPINK5) plays a crucial role 
in deciding the timing of desquamation of the skin. Its gene expression is
limited at the very surface of the stratum granulosum (SG), whereas expression of
kallikreins (KLKs) encoding proteases is usually found throughout the stratum
spinosum and SG.
METHODS: To explore the difference in expression regulation of these
proteases/inhibitors, the function of SPINK5 promoter was examined using
luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Luciferase assay targeting the SPINK5 promoters (nucleotide -676/-532
and -318/-146 from the major transcription start site) showed high intensity in
NHEK human keratinocyte. These two sites had neither common cis-elements nor
GATA3 element but electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed similar retardation
bands. Moreover, DNA footprinting did not display specific protected bands. Thus,
we could not identify cis-element(s) that controlled these elements.
Differentiation induced by high Ca(2+) medium failed to alter their luciferase
activities. Transfection of GATA3 expressing vector significantly but slightly
increased them and that of vector expressing its dominant negative form
decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Although GATA3 is reportedly important for inhibition of
proliferation and induction of differentiation of keratinocytes, its effect on
SPINK5 expression was indirect and GATA3 alone was insufficient for final
differentiation of keratinocytes where full SPINK5 expression was observed.

PMCID: PMC4085257
PMID: 24894987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):587-99. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0485. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

VGLL1 expression is associated with a triple-negative basal-like phenotype in
breast cancer.

Castilla MÁ(1), López-García MÁ(2), Atienza MR(3), Rosa-Rosa JM(3), Díaz-Martín
J(2), Pecero ML(3), Vieites B(2), Romero-Pérez L(2), Benítez J(3), Calcabrini
A(3), Palacios J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, ItalyInstituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy jose.palacios@salud.madrid.org
macastillamoro@gmail.com. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad
de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda.
Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa 
en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital
Universitario Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación
Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del
Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid,
SpainDepartment of Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
ItalyInstituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (3)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1) is a poorly characterized gene encoding a
transcriptional co-activator structurally homologous to TAZ and YAP that
modulates the Hippo pathway in Drosophila. In this study, we examined the
expression of VGLL1 and its intronic miRNA, miR-934, in breast cancer. VGLL1 and 
miR-934 expression miRNA profiling was carried out on frozen samples of grade 3
invasive ductal carcinomas. VGLL1 protein was also examined in 433 sporadic and
BRCA1-associated breast carcinomas on tissue microarrays. RNA-seq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was used to confirm differences in VGLL1 and miR-934
expression in different breast cancer subtypes, and to correlate their expression
with that of other genes and miRNAs. Of 28 miRNAs differentially expressed in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative grade 3 breast carcinomas,
miR-934 was most strongly upregulated in ER-negative carcinomas, and its
expression was correlated with that of VGLL1. Nuclear VGLL1 expression was
observed in 13% of sporadic breast carcinomas, and while VGLL1 was only
occasionally found in luminal A (0.70%) and B (5.60%) carcinomas, it was often
expressed in HER2-positive (17%), triple-negative (TN) breast carcinomas (>40%)
and BRCA1-associated TN carcinomas (>50%). These findings were confirmed in the
TCGA dataset, which revealed positive associations with luminal progenitor genes 
(GABRP, SLC6A14, FOXC1, PROM1, and BBOX1) and strong negative correlations with
ER-associated genes (ESR1, C6ORF211, GATA3, and FOXA1). Moreover, VGLL1
expression was associated with reduced overall survival. In conclusion, VGLL1 and
miR-934 are mainly expressed in sporadic and BRCA1-associated TN basal-like
breast carcinomas, and their coordinated expression, at least partially mediated 
by the direct modulation of ESR1, might be involved in the maintenance of a
luminal progenitor phenotype.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Allergy. 2014 Aug;69(8):1068-76. doi: 10.1111/all.12435. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

Myeloid dendritic cells are primed in allergic asthma for thymic stromal
lymphopoietin-mediated induction of Th2 and Th9 responses.

Froidure A(1), Shen C, Gras D, Van Snick J, Chanez P, Pilette C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, Université Catholique de
Louvain and Walloon Institute for Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology
(WELBIO), Brussels, Belgium; Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, service de
Pneumologie, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Type 1 myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) contribute to inception of
allergic asthma (AA) and are regulated by epithelial-derived cytokines.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether mDCs from AA patients are primed for thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP)-driven responses.
METHODS: mDCs from 18 AA patients and 15 controls were purified using
immunomagnetic sorting. Cells were pulsed with TSLP or Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus (Der p) allergen, before FACS phenotyping and co-culture with
allogeneic CD4+ T cells. Bronchial biopsies from 15 AA patients and four controls
were immunostained for CD1c and TSLP receptor (TSLPR).
RESULTS: Allergic asthma patients had a higher proportion of TSLPR+ mDCs, in
blood and bronchial mucosa. When compared to mDCs from controls, both TSLP- and
Der p-pulsed blood mDCs from AA patients induced increased polarization of CD4+ T
cells into Th2 cells (IL-5, IL-13, and GATA3+), while only TSLP-mDCs promoted Th9
cells (IL-9 and PU.1+ /IRF4+). In addition, OX40L was induced upon TSLP
stimulation and was required for the induction of Th2, but not Th9, cells. In
contrast, development of Th9 cells in this model depended on TGF-ß1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate overlapping but partially distinct effects of TSLP
and Der p allergen pathways, showing that DCs are primed in human asthma for
TSLP-driven induction of both Th2 and Th9 cells. This novel TSLP/mDC/Th9 axis
operates through a distinct, OX40L-independent pathway. These data further
highlight the TSLP pathway as a relevant target in human asthma.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24888572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Genome Biol. 2014 May 23;15(5):R71. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-5-r71.

A shared transcriptional program in early breast neoplasias despite genetic and
clinical distinctions.

Brunner AL, Li J, Guo X, Sweeney RT, Varma S, Zhu SX, Li R, Tibshirani R, West
RB.

BACKGROUND: The earliest recognizable stages of breast neoplasia are lesions that
represent a heterogeneous collection of epithelial proliferations currently
classified based on morphology. Their role in the development of breast cancer is
not well understood but insight into the critical events at this early stage will
improve efforts in breast cancer detection and prevention. These microscopic
lesions are technically difficult to study so very little is known about their
molecular alterations.
RESULTS: To characterize the transcriptional changes of early breast neoplasia,
we sequenced 3'- end enriched RNAseq libraries from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue of early neoplasia samples and matched normal breast and
carcinoma samples from 25 patients. We find that gene expression patterns within 
early neoplasias are distinct from both normal and breast cancer patterns and
identify a pattern of pro-oncogenic changes, including elevated transcription of 
ERBB2, FOXA1, and GATA3 at this early stage. We validate these findings on a
second independent gene expression profile data set generated by whole
transcriptome sequencing. Measurements of protein expression by
immunohistochemistry on an independent set of early neoplasias confirms that ER
pathway regulators FOXA1 and GATA3, as well as ER itself, are consistently
upregulated at this early stage. The early neoplasia samples also demonstrate
coordinated changes in long non-coding RNA expression and microenvironment
stromal gene expression patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first examination of global gene expression in
early breast neoplasia, and the genes identified here represent candidate
participants in the earliest molecular events in the development of breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4072957
PMID: 24887547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Virchows Arch. 2014 Aug;465(2):199-205. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1601-y. Epub 2014
May 31.

Clinicopathological characteristics and outcome of nested carcinoma of the
urinary bladder.

Beltran AL(1), Cheng L, Montironi R, Blanca A, Leva M, Rouprêt M, Fonseca J,
Vidal A, Menendez CL, Pallares J, Bollito E, Reymundo C, Luque RJ, Comperat E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, 14004,
Cordoba, Spain, em1lobea@uco.es.

We present the clinicopathological features of 56 cases of the nested variant of 
urothelial bladder carcinoma. This is an uncommon variant of bladder cancer,
recognized by the current WHO classification of urologic tumors. The nested
component represented 100 % of the tumor in 24 cases. The architectural pattern
of the tumor varied from solid expansile to infiltrative nests characterized by
deceptively bland histologic features resembling von Brunn nests. Typical
features of high-grade conventional urothelial carcinoma were present in 32
cases. Most neoplastic cells had nuclei of low to intermediate nuclear grade with
occasional nuclear enlargement, most frequently seen in deep areas of tumor. The 
nested component expressed cytokeratins 7, 20, CAM5.2, and high molecular weight 
(34ßE12), p63, Ki67, p53, p27, and GATA3. Tumor extension was T1 (n = 9),
minimally T2 (n = 10), T2a (n = 1), T2b (n = 4), T3a (n = 8), T3b (n = 13), and
T4a (n = 11). On follow-up, 36 of patients died of or were alive with disease
from 2 to 80 months (mean 21 months). Four patients died of other causes. Eleven 
other patients remained disease free. Univariate survival analysis showed no
differences for nested carcinoma compared with conventional urothelial carcinoma.
As in conventional urothelial carcinoma, in nested carcinoma of the bladder pT
category defined different survival groups. In summary, nested variant of
urothelial bladder carcinoma is typically associated with advanced stage. In
samples of limited volume, it may be misdiagnosed as proliferation of von Brunn
nests or other nested-like bladder lesions, delaying definitive therapy.

PMID: 24878757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Immunol. 2014 Jul 1;193(1):150-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302923. Epub 2014 May
28.

Nuclear role of WASp in gene transcription is uncoupled from its ARP2/3-dependent
cytoplasmic role in actin polymerization.

Sadhukhan S(1), Sarkar K(2), Taylor M(1), Candotti F(3), Vyas YM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; (2)Division of
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA 52242;
and. (3)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (4)Division of
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA 52242;
and yatin-vyas@uiowa.edu.

Defects in Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein (WASp) underlie development of WAS,
an X-linked immunodeficiency and autoimmunity disorder of childhood.
Nucleation-promoting factors (NPFs) of the WASp family generate F-actin in the
cytosol via the VCA (verprolin-homology, cofilin-homology, and acidic) domain and
support RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription in the nucleus. Whether
nuclear-WASp requires the integration of its actin-related protein
(ARP)2/3-dependent cytoplasmic function to reprogram gene transcription, however,
remains unresolved. Using the model of human TH cell differentiation, we find
that WASp has a functional nuclear localizing and nuclear exit sequences, and
accordingly, its effects on transcription are controlled mainly at the level of
its nuclear entry and exit via the nuclear pore. Human WASp does not use its
VCA-dependent, ARP2/3-driven, cytoplasmic effector mechanisms to support histone 
H3K4 methyltransferase activity in the nucleus of TH1-skewed cells. Accordingly, 
an isolated deficiency of nuclear-WASp is sufficient to impair the
transcriptional reprogramming of TBX21 and IFNG promoters in TH1-skewed cells,
whereas an isolated deficiency of cytosolic-WASp does not impair this process. In
contrast, nuclear presence of WASp in TH2-skewed cells is small, and its loss
does not impair transcriptional reprogramming of GATA3 and IL4 promoters. Our
study unveils an ARP2/3:VCA-independent function of nuclear-WASp in TH1 gene
activation that is uncoupled from its cytoplasmic role in actin polymerization.

PMCID: PMC4137324
PMID: 24872192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;27(9-10):961-5. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0004.

Neonatal diagnosis of a patient with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness
and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome associated with cerebral infarction.

Mejia JD, Cervantes L, Puerta H, Bauer M, Diaz A.

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia syndrome (HDRS) is
comprised of a triad of conditions. It is an autosomal dominant condition caused 
by mutations in the GATA3 gene, located at 10p15, a critical region in the
development of the embryonic parathyroid glands, inner ear, and kidneys. Here we 
describe the case of a patient with all three components of HDR syndrome
diagnosed in the neonatal period who presented with cerebral infarction,
hypocalcemia, and renal anomalies. Upon chromosomal microarray he was found to
have an interstitial deletion at 10p, which produced a partial deletion in the
GATA3 gene.

PMID: 24859509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Oct;46(2):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.05.005. Epub
2014 May 21.

A novel lineage transcription factor based analysis reveals differences in T
helper cell subpopulation development in infected and intrauterine growth
restricted (IUGR) piglets.

Ebner F(1), Rausch S(1), Scharek-Tedin L(2), Pieper R(2), Burwinkel M(3), Zentek 
J(2), Hartmann S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität 
Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. (2)Institute of
Animal Nutrition, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Königin-Luise-Straße 49, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (3)Institute of Virology,
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. (4)Institute of
Immunology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
Susanne.Hartmann@fu-berlin.de.

Research in mouse and human clearly identified subsets of T helper (Th) cells
based on nuclear expression of specific lineage transcription factors. In swine, 
however, transcription factor based detection of functional subpopulations of
porcine Th cells by flow cytometry is so far limited to regulatory T cells via
Foxp3. T-bet and GATA-3 are the transcription factors that regulate commitment to
Th1 or Th2 cells, respectively. In this study we prove GATA-3 and T-bet
expression in porcine CD4(+) cells polarized in vitro. Importantly, GATA-3 and
T-bet expressing cells were detectable in pigs infected with pathogens associated
with Th2 and Th1 immune responses. Increased frequencies of GATA-3 positive
CD4(+) cells are found in vivo in pigs experimentally infected with the nematode 
Trichuris suis, whereas porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV) infection elicited T-bet positive CD4(+) T cells. Analysing the immune
status of pre-weaning piglets with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) we
found an increased expression of Foxp3, T-bet and GATA-3 in CD4(+) and
CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive T cells in systemic and intestinal compartments of
IUGR piglets. Hence, we established the detection of porcine Th1 and Th2 cells
via T-bet and GATA-3 and show that the porcine lineage transcription factors are 
differentially regulated very early in life depending on the developmental
status.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Immunol. 2014 Aug;60(2):129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.03.004. Epub 2014 
May 20.

Effects of strenuous exercise on Th1/Th2 gene expression from human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of marathon participants.

Xiang L(1), Rehm KE(2), Marshall GD Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology 
and Allergy, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA. Electronic address: lxiang@umc.edu. (2)Laboratory of Behavioral
Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Department of
Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.

Physical stressors, such as strenuous exercise, can have numerous effects on the 
human body including the immune system. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
gene expression profile of Th1/Th2 cytokines and related transcription factor
genes in order to investigate possible immune imbalances before and after a
marathon. Blood samples were collected from 16 normal volunteers 24-48 h before
and one week after completing a marathon race. Gene expression of Th1 and Th2
related cytokines from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was
analyzed using Human Th1-Th2-Th3 RT(2) Profiler PCR Array and qRT-PCR that
measured the transcript levels of 84 genes related to T cell activation. We found
that PBMC express a characteristic Th2-like gene profile one week post-marathon
compared to pre-marathon. The majority of genes up-regulated one week
post-marathon such as IL-4, GATA3, and CCR4 were Th2 associated. For Th1-related 
genes, CXCR3 and IRF1 were up-regulated one week post-marathon. There was a trend
of down-regulation of two Th1 related genes, T-bet and STAT1. Th3-related gene
expression patterns did not change in the study. The ratios of both IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4
and T-bet/GATA3 gene expressions were significantly lower one week after
marathon. These findings suggest that a Th1/Th2 immune imbalance persisted at
least 1 week after completion of a marathon which offers a mechanistic rationale 
for the increased risk of upper respiratory tract infections often reported after
strenuous exercise.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Br J Dermatol. 2014 Oct;171(4):732-41. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13128. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Regulated genes in psoriatic skin during treatment with fumaric acid esters.

Onderdijk AJ(1), Balak DM, Baerveldt EM, Florencia EF, Kant M, Laman JD, van
IJcken WF, Racz E, de Ridder D, Thio HB, Prens EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, P.O. Box 2040,
3000 CA, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Immunology, Erasmus University
Medical Centre, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2014 Oct;171(4):687.

BACKGROUND: Fumaric acid esters (FAEs) are widely used in Europe for the
treatment of psoriasis because of their clinical efficacy and favourable safety
profile. However, the mechanisms of action by which FAEs improve psoriasis remain
largely unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To identify pathways and mechanisms affected by FAE treatment and to 
compare these with pathways affected by treatment with the antitumour necrosis
factor (anti-TNF)-a biologic etanercept.
METHODS: In a prospective cohort study, 50 patients with plaque psoriasis were
treated with FAEs for 20 weeks. Nine patients were randomly selected for gene
expression profiling of plaque biopsies from week 0 and week 12. The groups
consisted of FAE responders [> Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)-75
improvement] and nonresponders (< PASI-50 improvement). Changes in gene
expression profiles were analysed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and the 
outcome was compared with gene expression affected by etanercept.
RESULTS: Response to FAE treatment was associated with a = 2-fold change (P <
0.05) in the expression of 458 genes. In FAE responders the role of
interleukin-17A in the psoriasis pathway was most significantly activated.
Glutathione and Nrf2 pathway molecules were specifically induced by FAE treatment
and not by etanercept treatment, representing an FAE-specific effect in psoriatic
skin. In addition, FAE treatment specifically induced the transcription factors
PTTG1, NR3C1, GATA3 and NF<U+03BA>BIZ in responding patients.
CONCLUSIONS: FAE treatment induces glutathione and Nrf2 pathway genes in lesional
skin of patients with psoriasis. In responders, FAEs specifically regulate the
transcription factors PTTG1, NR3C1, GATA3 and NF<U+03BA>BIZ, which are important in
normal cutaneous development, and the T-helper (Th)2 and Th17 pathways,
respectively.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24852654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e98139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098139. eCollection
2014.

Identification of microRNAs regulating the developmental pathways of bone marrow 
derived mast cells.

Xiang Y(1), Eyers F(2), Young IG(3), Rosenberg HF(4), Foster PS(2), Yang M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of Biomedical Sciences and
Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia; Department of Physiology,
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China. (2)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of
Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and 
Hunter Medical Research Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia. (4)Inflammation Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Allergic
Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in leukocyte differentiation,
although those utilised for specific programs and key functions remain
incompletely characterised. As a global approach to gain insights into the
potential regulatory role of miRNA in mast cell differentiation we characterised 
expression in BM cultures from the initiation of differentiation. In cultures
enriched in differentiating mast cells we characterised miRNA expression and
identified miRNA targeting the mRNA of putative factors involved in
differentiation pathways and cellular identity. Detailed pathway analysis
identified a unique miRNA network that is intimately linked to the mast cell
differentiation program.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified 86 unique miRNAs with expression
patterns that were up- or down- regulated at 5-fold or more during bone marrow
derived mast cells (BMMC) development. By employing TargetScan and MeSH
databases, we identified 524 transcripts involved in 30 canonical pathways as
potentially regulated by these specific 86 miRNAs. Furthermore, by applying
miRanda and IPA analyses, we predict that 7 specific miRNAs of this group are
directly associated with the expression of c-Kit and FceRIa and likewise, that 18
miRNAs promote expression of Mitf, GATA1 and c/EBPa three core transcription
factors that direct mast cell differentiation. Furthermore, we have identified 11
miRNAs that may regulate the expression of STATs-3, -5a/b, GATA2 and GATA3 during
differentiation, along with 13 miRNAs that target transcripts encoding Ndst2,
mMCP4 and mMCP6 and thus may regulate biosynthesis of mast cell secretory
mediators.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This investigation characterises changes in miRNA
expression in whole BM cultures during the differentiation of mast cells and
predicts functional links between miRNAs and their target mRNAs for the
regulation of development. This information provides an important resource for
further investigations of the contributions of miRNAs to mast cell
differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC4029961
PMID: 24848502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cytokine. 2014 Aug;68(2):76-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 May 4.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 inhibitor modulates T regulatory and IL-17 cells in
the prevention of adjuvant induced arthritis in mice model.

Ahmad SF(1), Zoheir KM(2), Bakheet SA(3), Ashour AE(3), Attia SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud
University, PO Box 11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
s_fayazahmad@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of 
Pharmacy, King Saud University, PO Box 11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of
Cell Biology, National Research Centre, Cario, Egypt. (3)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, PO Box
11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, PO Box 11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia;
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar
University, Cairo, Egypt.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is one of the major autoimmune diseases of global
prevalence. Irrespective of much research in RA disease, no drugs with capable
safety profiles are yet available. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1)
synthesizes and transfers ADP ribose polymers to target proteins, and regulates
DNA repair and genomic integrity maintenance. PARP-1 also plays a crucial role in
the progression of the inflammatory response, and its inhibition confers
protection in several models of inflammatory disorders. We investigated the
possible anti-arthritic effects of the PARP-1 inhibitor 5-aminoisoquinolinone
(5-AIQ) in a mouse model of adjuvant induced arthritis (AIA). In this study, we
examined the effects of 5-AIQ on the key mediators of arthritic inflammation,
namely, edema and arthritic score, T cell subsets, regulatory T (Treg) cells,
IL-17A, GITR expressing cells, NF-kB p65, IkB-a and pro and anti-inflammatory
mediators mRNA expression levels. PARP-1 inhibition 5-AIQ treatment significantly
attenuated the severity of AIA, reduced the arthritis scores, a substantial
reduction in the levels of T cell subsets, IL-17A, NF-kB p65, GITR expressing
cells, and as well as the pro-inflammatory mediators. However, 5-AIQ
significantly up-regulated the number of Tregs cells, IkB-a levels and mRNA
expression of anti-inflammatory mediators. Our results suggest that treatment
with 5-AIQ attenuated AIA in mice might offer a promising alternative/adjunct
treatment for RA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24845796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Aug;80(2):95-100. doi: 10.1111/sji.12189.

Carbon monoxide-releasing molecule-A1 inhibits Th1/Th17 and stimulates Th2
differentiation in vitro.

Nikolic I(1), Vujicic M, Stojanovic I, Stosic-Grujicic S, Saksida T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Research 'Sinisa Stankovic', University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia.

Carbon monoxide (CO) is endogenously produced by haeme oxygenase-1 and has
profound effects on intracellular signalling processes, generating
anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative and antiapoptotic effects. A
boron-containing compound CORM-A1 is capable of releasing CO in such a way to
mimic physiological functions of haeme oxygenase-1. Considering the importance of
Th1/Th17 versus Th2 balance in the final outcome of immune and inflammatory
responses in this study we focused on immune-modulatory effects of CORM-A1 on
murine lymph node-derived T cells in vitro and its influence on T-cell
proliferation, activation and differentiation. Anti-CD3/CD28 antibody-triggered
lymph node cells proliferation remained unaffected after 24-hour CORM-A1
treatment, as well as the expression of the early activation marker CD25.
However, CORM-A1 successfully reduced the secretion of the two representative
pro-inflammatory cytokines, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, while the secretion of
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 remained unchanged. Furthermore, CORM-A1
efficiently reduced the percentage of CD4(+) IFN-<U+03B3>(+) and CD4(+) IL-17(+) cells, 
whereas CD4(+) IL-4(+) cell population increased after treatment. Also, CORM-A1
significantly reduced expression of transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>T, necessary for
Th17 development, but the expression of Th1-related and Th2-related transcription
factors (T-bet and GATA-3, respectively) remained unchanged. In conclusion, our
findings indicate that CO has anti-inflammatory role through the regulation of
balance between pro-inflammatory Th1/Th17 and anti-inflammatory Th2 cells.
Observed immunomodulatory effects of CORM-A1 could be useful for developing novel
therapeutic approaches in managing Th1/Th17-mediated immune disorders.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24845722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Feb;56(2):480-91. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.924119. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Repressed BMP signaling reactivates NKL homeobox gene MSX1 in a T-ALL subset.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), several members of the NK-like
(NKL) homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed. Here, we have analyzed the
activity of NKL homeobox gene MSX1 using pediatric T-ALL in silico data,
detecting overexpression in 11% of patients. Quantification of MSX1 transcripts
in a panel of 24 T-ALL cell lines demonstrated overexpression in two examples.
Comparative expression profiling indicated inhibition of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling pathway, which was shown to inhibit MSX1 transcription.
In the LOUCY cell line we identified conspicuous expression of CHRDL1 encoding a 
BMP inhibitor which mediated activation of MSX1. Promoter analyses demonstrated
activation of CHRDL1 by oncogenic PITX1. Furthermore, knockdown and
overexpression studies of hematopoietic transcription factors demonstrated that
GATA2 and FOXC1 mediate activation and GATA3, LEF1, TAL1 and TOX repression of
MSX1 transcription. Collectively, our findings suggest that MSX1 is
physiologically restricted to lymphoid progenitors. The identification of
deregulated BMP signaling may provide novel therapeutic options for the treatment
of T-ALL.

PMID: 24844359  [PubMed - in process]


371. Endocrinology. 2014 Aug;155(8):2909-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1045. Epub 2014 May 
19.

Serine protease inhibition attenuates rIL-12-induced GZMA activity and
proinflammatory events by modulating the Th2 profile from estrogen-treated mice.

Karpuzoglu E(1), Schmiedt CW, Pardo J, Hansen M, Guo TL, Holladay SD, Gogal RM
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Diagnostic Imaging (E.K., T.L.G.,
S.D.H., R.M.G.), and Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery (C.W.S.,
M.H.), College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
30602; and Immune Effector Cells Group (J.P.), Aragon Health Research Institute
(IIS Aragon), Biomedical Research Centre of Aragon (CIBA), Nanoscience Institute 
of Aragon (INA), Aragon I+D Foundation (ARAID), University of Zaragoza, 50009
Zaragoza, Spain.

Estrogen has potent immunomodulatory effects on proinflammatory responses, which 
can be mediated by serine proteases. We now demonstrate that estrogen increased
the extracellular expression and IL-12-induced activity of a critical member of
serine protease family Granzyme A, which has been shown to possess a novel
inflammatory persona. The inhibition of serine protease activity with inhibitor
4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride significantly diminished 
enhanced production of proinflammatory interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-1ß, IL-1a, and Granzyme A
activity even in the presence of a Th1-inducing cytokine, IL-12 from splenocytes 
from in vivo estrogen-treated mice. Inhibition of serine protease activity
selectively promoted secretion of Th2-specific IL-4, nuclear phosphorylated
STAT6A, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)6A translocation, 
and STAT6A DNA binding in IL-12-stimulated splenocytes from estrogen-treated
mice. Inhibition with 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride
reversed the down-regulation of Th2 transcription factors, GATA3 and c-Maf in
splenocytes from estrogen-exposed mice. Although serine protease inactivation
enhanced the expression of Th2-polarizing factors, it did not reverse
estrogen-modulated decrease of phosphorylated STAT5, a key factor in Th2
development. Collectively, data suggest that serine protease inactivity augments 
the skew toward a Th2-like profile while down-regulating IL-12-induced
proinflammatory Th1 biomolecules upon in vivo estrogen exposure, which implies
serine proteases as potential regulators of inflammation. Thus, these studies may
provide a potential mechanism underlying the immunomodulatory effect of estrogen 
and insight into new therapeutic strategies for proinflammatory and
female-predominant autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4097994
PMID: 24840346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. PLoS One. 2014 May 15;9(5):e96535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096535. eCollection
2014.

Itm2a, a target gene of GATA-3, plays a minimal role in regulating the
development and function of T cells.

Tai TS(1), Pai SY(2), Ho IC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Medical Research, E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology,
and Allergy, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The integral membrane protein 2a (Itm2a) is one of the BRICHOS domain-containing 
proteins and is structurally related to Itm2b and Itm2c. It is expressed
preferentially in the T lineage among hematopoietic cells and is induced by
MHC-mediated positive selection. However, its transcriptional regulation and
function are poorly understood. Here we showed Itm2a to be a target gene of
GATA-3, a T cell-specific transcription factor. Deficiency of Itm2a had little
impact on the development and function of polyclonal T cells but resulted in a
partial defect in the development of thymocytes bearing a MHC class I-restricted 
TCR, OT-I. In addition, Itm2a-deficient mice displayed an attenuated T helper
cell-dependent immune response in vivo. We further demonstrated that Itm2b but
not Itm2c was also expressed in T cells, and was induced upon activation, albeit 
following a kinetic different from that of Itm2a. Thus, functional redundancy
between Itm2a and Itm2b may explain the minimal phenotype of Itm2a deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4022677
PMID: 24831988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Hum Pathol. 2014 Aug;45(8):1625-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.03.015. Epub 2014 
Apr 13.

GATA3 expression in sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.

Fatima N(1), Osunkoya AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322. (2)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA 30322; Department of Urology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322; Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322. Electronic address:
adeboye.osunkoya@emory.edu.

The current available data on GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) expression in
sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma are limited, especially in the non-tissue
microarray-based setting. In this study, we analyzed the expression of GATA3 in
sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma of the bladder in cystectomy/cystoprostatectomy 
specimens. A search was made through our surgical pathology and consultation
files for cystectomy/cystoprostatectomy specimens with a diagnosis of sarcomatoid
urothelial carcinoma. Only cases with available tissue blocks were selected.
Immunohistochemical staining for GATA3 was performed, and staining in
adjacent/overlying conventional urothelial carcinoma and/or benign urothelium was
also documented. Twenty-two cases were obtained. Of 22 cases, 16 (73%) of
sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma were positive for GATA3. In the 7 (27%) of 22
cases that were negative for GATA3, it was observed that these cases were
predominantly composed either of pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcomatoid areas
or foci composed of extensive heterologous elements (chondroid, osteoid, or
rhabdoid). GATA3 staining was positive in the adjacent/overlying conventional
urothelial carcinoma and/or benign urothelium in all cases. This is one of the
largest studies to date analyzing the expression of GATA3 in sarcomatoid
urothelial carcinoma in cystectomy/cystoprostatectomy specimens. GATA3 is
expressed in most cases of sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma. Negative expression 
may, however, be observed in cases composed predominantly of pleomorphic
undifferentiated sarcomatoid areas or extensive heterologous elements. We
recommend including GATA3 in the panel of immunohistochemical stains for
sarcomatoid carcinomas of unknown origin, especially if a bladder primary is
being considered in the differential diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24824028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5703-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302830. Epub 2014
May 12.

KLF13 cooperates with c-Maf to regulate IL-4 expression in CD4+ T cells.

Kwon SJ(1), Crespo-Barreto J(1), Zhang W(1), Wang T(1), Kim DS(1), Krensky A(2), 
Clayberger C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; (2)Laboratory of Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611; and Department of
Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
60611. (3)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611; and Clayberger@northwestern.edu.

Kruppel-like factor (KLF) 13 is a transcription factor that positively regulates 
expression of the chemokine RANTES 3-5 d after activation of T cells. In this
study, we document a key role for KLF13 in the expression of IL-4 in CD4(+) T
cells. Gene expression analysis in activated T cells from Klf13(-/-) mice showed 
that IL-4, along with other Th2 cytokine genes, was downregulated when compared
with cells from wild-type mice. The decreased levels of IL-4 were not associated 
with changes in expression of the Th2-inducing transcription factors GATA3 or
c-Maf. Additional analysis revealed that KLF13 directly binds to IL-4 promoter
regions and synergizes with c-Maf to positively regulate IL-4 expression. These
results indicate that KLF13 is a positive regulator for differentiation of Th2
cells, as part of the transcriptional machinery that regulates IL-4 production in
Th2 cells.

PMID: 24821970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(14):2732-44.

Fbw7 targets GATA3 through cyclin-dependent kinase 2-dependent proteolysis and
contributes to regulation of T-cell development.

Kitagawa K, Shibata K, Matsumoto A, Matsumoto M, Ohhata T, Nakayama KI, Niida H, 
Kitagawa M.

Proper development of T cells depends on lineage-specific regulators controlled
transcriptionally and posttranslationally to ensure precise levels at appropriate
times. Conditional inactivation of F-box protein Fbw7 in mouse T-cell development
resulted in reduced thymic CD4 single-positive (SP) and splenic CD4(+) and CD8(+)
cell proportions. Fbw7 deficiency skewed CD8 SP lineage differentiation, which
exhibited a higher incidence of apoptosis. Similar perturbations during
development of CD8-positive cells were reported with transgenic mice, which
enforced GATA3 (T-cell differentiation regulator) expression throughout T-cell
development. We observed augmented GATA3 in CD4/CD8 double negative (DN) stage 4,
CD4 SP, and CD8 SP lineages in Fbw7-deficient thymocytes. Using overexpressed
proteins in cultured cells, we demonstrated that Fbw7 bound to, ubiquitylated,
and destabilized GATA3. Two Cdc4 phosphodegron (CPD) candidate sequences,
consensus Fbw7 recognition domains, were identified in GATA3, and phosphorylation
of Thr-156 in CPD was required for Fbw7-mediated ubiquitylation and degradation. 
Phosphorylation of GATA3 Thr-156 was detected in mouse thymocytes, and
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) was identified as a respondent for
phosphorylation at Thr-156. These observations suggest that Fbw7-mediated GATA3
regulation with CDK2-mediated phosphorylation of CPD contributes to the precise
differentiation of T-cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC4097664
PMID: 24820417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014 Oct;53(10):1896-900. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/keu171. Epub 2014 May 9.

CD70-expressing CD4 T cells produce IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 in rheumatoid arthritis.

Park JK(1), Han BK(1), Park JA(1), Woo YJ(1), Kim SY(1), Lee EY(1), Lee EB(1),
Chalan P(1), Boots AM(1), Song YW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea,
Division of Rheumatology, Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ,
USA, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands and World Class University
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Division 
of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Division
of Rheumatology, Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ, USA,
Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands and World Class University Department of
Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Medical Research Center, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Division of Rheumatology, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Division of Rheumatology, 
Cooper Medical School, Rowan University, Camden, NJ, USA, Department of
Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands and World Class University Department of Molecular
Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Medical Research Center, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ysong@snu.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: CD70-expressing CD4 T cells are enriched in RA and promote
autoimmunity via co-stimulatory CD70-CD27 interaction. This study aimed to
explore the phenotype and cytokine production of CD70(+) CD4 T cells in RA.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 32 RA patients were isolated and
frequencies of CD70(+) cells within different CD4 T subsets were analysed using
flow cytometry. IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 production were compared between the CD70(+) and 
CD70(-) cells. Expression of master transcription factors T-bet, GATA3 and
retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gamma t (ROR<U+03B3>t) were examined by real-time 
PCR. Results are presented as mean (s.e.m.).
RESULTS: CD4 T cells of healthy controls rarely expressed CD70 as compared with
CD4 T cells of RA patients [mean 0.9% (s.e.m. 0.3%) vs 7.6 (0.6), P < 0.001]. In 
RA, CD70(+) cells were present within all CD4 T cell subsets, i.e.
CD45RA(+)CCR7(+) naive, CD45RA(-)CCR7(+) central memory, CD45RA(-)CCR7(-)
effector memory and CD45RA(+)CCR7(-) terminally differentiated effector memory T 
cells with a mean frequency of 3.9% (s.e.m. 1.1%), 4.0 (0.5), 4.2 (0.7) and 9.4
(4.3), respectively. As compared to CD70(-) CD4 T cells, CD70(+) CD4 T cells
produced significantly more IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 after short activation. CD70(+) CD4 T
cells preferentially expressed transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>t.
CONCLUSION: CD70(+) CD4 T cells are enriched in RA and may directly contribute to
RA pathogenesis by producing IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17. Targeting CD70(+) CD4 T cells might
offer new therapeutic opportunities in RA.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24817699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Hum Pathol. 2014 Jul;45(7):1529-40. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.03.006. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

Diagnostic utility of immunohistochemistry in distinguishing between epithelioid 
pleural mesotheliomas and breast carcinomas: a comparative study.

Ordóñez NG(1), Sahin AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: nordonez@mdanderson.org. (2)The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Epithelioid mesotheliomas and breast carcinomas can present a variety of
morphologic patterns. Because of this, breast carcinomas that metastasize to the 
pleura and lung may be confused with mesotheliomas. The aim of the present study 
is to compare the immunohistochemical markers currently available for the
diagnosis of these 2 malignancies and to determine the best panel of markers that
can be used to assist in discriminating between them. Sixty epithelioid
mesotheliomas and 80 breast carcinomas (40 triple negative and 40 estrogen
receptor positive) were investigated for expression of the positive mesothelioma 
markers calretinin, keratin 5/6, mesothelin, podoplanin, thrombomodulin, and WT1;
the positive carcinoma marker claudin 4; and the breast-associated markers gross 
cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), mammaglobin, and GATA3. All of the
epithelioid mesotheliomas reacted for calretinin and keratin 5/6, 93% for WT1;
88% for podoplanin; 77% for thrombomodulin; 23% for GATA3; and 0% for claudin 4, 
GCDFP-15, and mammaglobin, respectively. Of the triple-negative breast
carcinomas, 100% expressed claudin 4; 5%, keratin 5/6; 30%, GATA3; 18%,
mammaglobin; 15%, GCDFP-15; 56%, mesothelin; 38%, calretinin; 18%,
thrombomodulin; 5%, WT1; and 3%, podoplanin. Among the estrogen receptor-positive
breast carcinomas, 100% were claudin 4 and GATA3 positive; 70% expressed
GCDFP-15; 63%, mammaglobin; 13%, calretinin; 13%, thrombomodulin; 8%, WT1; 5%,
keratin 5/6; 3%, mesothelin; and 0%, podoplanin. It is concluded that podoplanin 
and WT1 are the best positive mesothelioma markers for differentiating
epithelioid mesotheliomas from breast carcinomas. An accurate differential
diagnosis can be reached with the use of these two markers in combination with
the breast-associated markers GCDFP-15, mammaglobin, and GATA3.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24816068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5687-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301908. Epub 2014 
May 9.

IFN-a suppresses GATA3 transcription from a distal exon and promotes H3K27
trimethylation of the CNS-1 enhancer in human Th2 cells.

Huber JP(1), Gonzales-van Horn SR(1), Roybal KT(1), Gill MA(2), Farrar JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390; and. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390. (3)Department of Immunology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; and
David.Farrar@UTSouthwestern.edu.

CD4(+) Th2 development is regulated by the zinc finger transcription factor
GATA3. Once induced by acute priming signals, such as IL-4, GATA3 poises the Th2 
cytokine locus for rapid activation and establishes a positive-feedback loop that
maintains elevated GATA3 expression. Type I IFN (IFN-a/ß) inhibits Th2 cells by
blocking the expression of GATA3 during Th2 development and in fully committed
Th2 cells. In this study, we uncovered a unique mechanism by which IFN-a/ß
signaling represses the GATA3 gene in human Th2 cells. IFN-a/ß suppressed
expression of GATA3 mRNA that was transcribed from an alternative distal upstream
exon (1A). This suppression was not mediated through DNA methylation, but rather 
by histone modifications localized to a conserved noncoding sequence (CNS-1)
upstream of exon 1A. IFN-a/ß treatment led to a closed conformation of CNS-1, as 
assessed by DNase I hypersensitivity, along with enhanced accumulation of
H3K27me3 mark at this CNS region, which correlated with increased density of
total nucleosomes at this putative enhancer. Consequently, accessibility of CNS-1
to GATA3 DNA binding activity was reduced in response to IFN-a/ß signaling, even 
in the presence of IL-4. Thus, IFN-a/ß disrupts the GATA3-autoactivation loop and
promotes epigenetic silencing of a Th2-specific regulatory region within the
GATA3 gene.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4104489
PMID: 24813204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Oncotarget. 2014 May 15;5(9):2349-54.

Unique molecular signatures as a hallmark of patients with metastatic breast
cancer: implications for current treatment paradigms.

Wheler JJ(1), Parker BA, Lee JJ, Atkins JT, Janku F, Tsimberidou AM, Zinner R,
Subbiah V, Fu S, Schwab R, Moulder S, Valero V, Schwaederle M, Yelensky R, Miller
VA, Stephens MP, Meric-Bernstam F, Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Program), The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Our analysis of the tumors of 57 women with metastatic breast cancer with next
generation sequencing (NGS) demonstrates that each patient's tumor is unique in
its molecular fingerprint. We observed 216 somatic aberrations in 70 different
genes, including 131 distinct aberrations. The most common gene alterations (in
order of decreasing frequency) included: TP53, PIK3CA, CCND1, MYC, HER2 (ERBB2), 
MCL1, PTEN, FGFR1, GATA3, NF1, PIK3R1, BRCA2, EGFR, IRS2, CDH1, CDKN2A, FGF19,
FGF3 and FGF4. Aberrations included mutations (46%), amplifications (45%),
deletions (5%), splices (2%), truncations (1%), fusions (0.5%) and rearrangements
(0.5%), with multiple distinct variants within the same gene. Many of these
aberrations represent druggable targets, either through direct pathway inhibition
or through an associated pathway (via 'crosstalk'). The 'molecular individuality'
of these tumors suggests that a customized strategy, using an "N-of-One" model of
precision medicine, may represent an optimal approach for the treatment of
patients with advanced tumors.

PMCID: PMC4058010
PMID: 24811890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2909-10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-555763.

Cellular origin of T-cell lymphomas.

de Leval L(1), Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL OF LAUSANNE;

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2915-23.
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):3007-15.

PMID: 24810625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;51(4):575-85. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0329OC.

Growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated binder 2, a scaffolding adaptor
protein, negatively regulates host immunity against tuberculosis.

Hu S(1), Zhang Y, Yu Y, Jin D, Zhang X, Gu S, Jia H, Chen X, Zhang Z, Jin Q, Ke
Y, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)1 Ministry of Health (MOH) Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens,
Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Cell-mediated immunity is indispensable for host protection against tuberculosis 
(TB). Growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated binder (Gab) 2, a
scaffolding adaptor protein, negatively regulates signaling pathways critical for
T cell-mediated immunity. We sought to investigate the clinical significance and 
immunological role of Gab2 in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. We evaluated 
Gab2 protein and messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in human patients with pulmonary
TB and determined the correlation of the mRNA expression pattern with
antigen-specific IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. Subsequently, we carried out M. tuberculosis
infection in Gab2-deficient and wild-type control mice to explore the
immunological role of Gab2 by examining bacterial load, histological changes,
cytokine secretion, and gene expression of immune-associated transcription
factors. mRNA levels of Gab2 and its correlated family member, Gab1, were
markedly decreased in untreated patients with pulmonary TB compared with healthy 
control subjects. Importantly, this decreased Gab2 expression to normal levels
after bacterial load in the patient's sputum became undetectable under the
standard anti-TB treatment, which negatively correlated with the level of M.
tuberculosis antigen-specific IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. In the M. tuberculosis infection
mouse model, infected Gab2-deficient mice exhibited decreased bacterial load and 
milder lung pathological damage compared with infected wild-type mice,
accompanied by decreased production of IL-2, IL-6, and granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor proinflammatory cytokines, and an increased
T-cell-specific T-box transcription factor/GATA binding protein 3 expression
ratio. Overall, our study indicates that down-regulation of Gab2 relates to a
protective function during M. tuberculosis infection, revealing a potential
negative regulatory role for Gab2 in immunity to TB.

PMID: 24805943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jul;34(1):269-75. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1771. Epub 2014 May 
6.

Apyrase protects against allergic airway inflammation by decreasing the
chemotactic migration of dendritic cells in mice.

Li P(1), Cao J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang W(1), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430071, P.R. China.

Recent studies have demonstrated that extracellular adenosine
5'-triphosphate (eATP) is involved in allergic airway inflammation by activating 
purinergic receptors. eATP can be hydrolyzed by ectonucleotidases, such as CD39. 
In this study, we investigated the expression and distribution of CD39 in the
lungs of mice, as well as the effects of apyrase on airway inflammation and the
chemotactic migration of dendritic cells (DCs). A mouse model of asthma was
developed with chicken ovalbumin (OVA)/aluminum hydroxide using female C57BL/6
mice. Apyrase was administered to OVA-sensitized mice prior to each challenge by 
intraperitoneal injection. The distribution of CD39 was detected by
immunofluorescence. The mRNA and protein expression of CD39 was determined by
quantitative PCR and western blot analysis, respectively. The levels of Th2
cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The effect of apyrase on the
chemotactic migration of DCs towards ATP was explored by migration assay
in vitro. In the lungs, CD39 was primarily located in the cytoplasm and
cytomembrane of bronchial epithelial cells and CD39 expression was reduced in
mice with allergic asthma. Treatment with apyrase markedly attenuated OVA-induced
airway inflammation, including peribronchial eosinophilic inflammation and
reduced the number of inflammatory cells, as well as the levels of cytokines in
BALF. Furthermore, apyrase also markedly reduced the expression of GATA binding
protein 3 (GATA3) and decreased the chemotactic migration of DCs towards ATP.Our 
data demonstrate that a reduction in CD39 expression may be associated with the
development of allergic airway inflammation and that apyrase alleviates airway
inflammation by decreasing the chemotactic migration of DCs towards eATP.
Therefore, targeting at eATP or ectonucleotidases may provide a novel therapeutic
approach for allergic asthma.

PMID: 24804736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Transcription. 2014 Feb 21;5. [Epub ahead of print]

mTOR signaling and transcriptional regulation in T lymphocytes.

Zeng H(1), Chi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology; St. Jude Children's Research Hospital; Memphis, TN
USA.

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling integrates diverse
environmental cues, including growth factors, nutrients and immunological
signals. Activation of mTOR signaling stimulates protein synthesis and anabolic
metabolism and coordinates cell growth, proliferation and fate decisions. In
recent years, mTOR signaling has been linked to the entire spectrum of T cell
biology, ranging from T cell development and activation to lineage specification 
and memory formation. Mechanistically, mTOR activation profoundly affects the
expression and activity of many immunologically relevant transcription factors to
propagate immune signaling and mediate effector functions. These transcription
factors orchestrate cell metabolism (MYC, SREBPs and HIF1), lineage
differentiation (T-bet, GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, FOXP3 and Eomesodermin) and immune
activation and functions (NF-<U+03BA>B, FOXOs, IRF4, STATs and GFI-1). This review
discusses how mTOR signaling, through impinging upon transcriptional factors,
regulates T cell development, activation, and effector and memory
differentiation.

PMID: 24802901  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


384. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 20;289(25):17620-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570853. Epub
2014 May 6.

Histone demethylase jumonji AT-rich interactive domain 1B (JARID1B) controls
mammary gland development by regulating key developmental and lineage
specification genes.

Zou MR(1), Cao J(1), Liu Z(1), Huh SJ(2), Polyak K(3), Yan Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, and. (3)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, and
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138. (4)From the
Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
qin.yan@yale.edu.

The JmjC domain-containing H3K4 histone demethylase jumonji AT-rich interactive
domain 1B (JARID1B) (also known as KDM5B and PLU1) is overexpressed in breast
cancer and is a potential target for breast cancer treatment. To investigate the 
in vivo function of JARID1B, we developed Jarid1b(-/-) mice and characterized
their phenotypes in detail. Unlike previously reported Jarid1b(-/-) strains, the 
majority of these Jarid1b(-/-) mice were viable beyond embryonic and neonatal
stages. This allowed us to further examine phenotypes associated with the loss of
JARID1B in pubertal development and pregnancy. These Jarid1b(-/-) mice exhibited 
decreased body weight, premature mortality, decreased female fertility, and
delayed mammary gland development. Related to these phenotypes, JARID1B loss
decreased serum estrogen level and reduced mammary epithelial cell proliferation 
in early puberty. In mammary epithelial cells, JARID1B loss diminished the
expression of key regulators for mammary morphogenesis and luminal lineage
specification, including FOXA1 and estrogen receptor a. Mechanistically, JARID1B 
was required for GATA3 recruitment to the Foxa1 promoter to activate Foxa1
expression. These results indicate that JARID1B positively regulates mammary
ductal development through both extrinsic and cell-autonomous mechanisms.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4067197
PMID: 24802759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2015;22(3):138-51. doi: 10.1159/000360579. Epub 2014 Apr
30.

Regulation of differentiation and function of helper T cells by
lymphocyte-derived catecholamines via a1- and ß2-adrenoceptors.

Huang HW(1), Fang XX, Wang XQ, Peng YP, Qiu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong,
China.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, we have reported that lymphocyte-derived endogenous
catecholamines (CAs) facilitate a shift in the T helper (Th)1/Th2 balance towards
Th2. The purpose of this study was to explore the involvement of adrenoreceptors 
(ARs) in Th differentiation and function modulation by lymphocyte-derived CAs.
METHODS: Lymphocytes were separated from the mesenteric lymph nodes of mice,
stimulated with concanavalin A (Con A) and treated with pargyline, an inhibitor
of CA degradation.
RESULTS: Pargyline downregulated the expression of Th1-relative factors, T-bet,
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-2, but upregulated the expression of
Th2-relative factors, GATA-3, IL-4 and IL-10. Pargyline reduced the percentage of
IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4+ cells and the CD4+IFN-<U+03B3>+/CD4+IL-4+ cell ratio, although it
did not alter the proportion of IL-4-producing CD4+ cells. In addition, the
percentage of CD4+CD26+ T cells and the CD4+CD26+/CD4+CD30+ cell ratio were also 
reduced in the pargyline-treated group. Furthermore, Con A-activated T cells
treated with pargyline produced a lower level of IFN-<U+03B3> and a higher level of IL-4
than the control group. All these effects were blocked by the a1-AR antagonist
corynanthine or the ß2-AR antagonist ICI 118551, but not by the a2-AR antagonist 
yohimbine or ß1-AR antagonist atenolol.
CONCLUSIONS: These results imply that lymphocyte-derived CAs promote polarization
of differentiation and function towards Th2 cells and that this effect is
mediated by a1-AR and ß2-AR.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24800755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:781649. doi: 10.1155/2014/781649. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Th9/IL-9 profile in human echinococcosis: their involvement in immune response
during infection by Echinococcus granulosus.

Pang N(1), Zhang F(2), Ma X(2), Zhang Z(2), Zhao H(2), Xin Y(3), Wang S(4), Zhu
Y(2), Wen H(3), Ding J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hematologic Disease Center and Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Research
Institute of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory,
First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang
830054, China. (3)State Key Laboratory Incubation Base of Major Diseases in
Xinjiang and Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Echinococcosis, First Affiliated Hospital
of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China. (4)Basic Medical 
College of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China. (5)State 
Key Laboratory Incubation Base of Major Diseases in Xinjiang and Xinjiang Key
Laboratory of Echinococcosis, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China ; Basic Medical College of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China.

Th9 cells have been reported to contribute to immune responses; however, the role
of Th9 cells in Echinococcus granulosus infection is unknown. This study is to
determine whether Th9 cells and IL-9 are involved in human Echinococcus
granulosus infection. Compared with healthy controls (HC group), the mRNA levels 
of PU.1, IL-9, and GATA-3 were significantly increased in patients before therapy
(CE group), as revealed by qRT-PCR. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the
percentages of Th9 and Th2 cells in CE group were significantly higher. The
levels of IL-9, IL-4, IL-10, and TGF- ß in CE group were also significantly
increased, as detected by CBA assay. The percentages of Th9 and Th2 cells in CE
group were positively correlated. After treatments of surgery in combination with
albendazole, the PU.1 and GATA-3 mRNA levels were significantly decreased in
patients after therapy (PCE group) compared with CE group. The numbers of Th9 and
Th2 cells and levels of IL-9, IL-4, IL-10, and TGF- ß were also significantly
decreased in PCE group. In conclusion, the ratios of Th9 cells and IL-9 levels
were significantly decreased after treatment, suggesting that Th9/IL-9 may be
involved in immune response induced by Echinococcus granulosus infection.

PMCID: PMC3985320
PMID: 24799769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(11):6839-49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku360. Epub 2014
May 3.

Unraveling the regulatory connections between two controllers of breast cancer
cell fate.

Lee J(1), Tiwari A(2), Shum V(3), Mills GB(4), Mancini MA(5), Igoshin OA(6),
Balázsi G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology - Unit 950, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA Department of Bioengineering, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005, USA. (2)Department of Bioengineering, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005, USA. (3)Department of Systems Biology - Unit 950, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA
Department of Physics, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004, USA.
(4)Department of Systems Biology - Unit 950, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of
Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA igoshin@rice.edu.
(7)Department of Systems Biology - Unit 950, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA gbalazsi@mdanderson.org
gabor@laufercenter.org.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) expression is critical for breast cancer
classification, high ERa expression being associated with better prognosis. ERa
levels strongly correlate with that of GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), a major
regulator of ERa expression. However, the mechanistic details of ERa-GATA3
regulation remain incompletely understood. Here we combine mathematical modeling 
with perturbation experiments to unravel the nature of regulatory connections in 
the ERa-GATA3 network. Through cell population-average, single-cell and
single-nucleus measurements, we show that the cross-regulation between ERa and
GATA3 amounts to overall negative feedback. Further, mathematical modeling
reveals that GATA3 positively regulates its own expression and that ERa
autoregulation is most likely absent. Lastly, we show that the two
cross-regulatory connections in the ERa-GATA3 negative feedback network decrease 
the noise in ERa or GATA3 expression. This may ensure robust cell fate
maintenance in the face of intracellular and environmental fluctuations,
contributing to tissue homeostasis in normal conditions, but also to the
maintenance of pathogenic states during cancer progression.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4066784
PMID: 24792166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;38(23):4084-7.

[Difference in effect between asthma-based mouse model and Stemona tuberosa
extracts].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XX, Zhang XD, Li HY, Jia TZ, Yang JX.

In this study, OVA-induced asthma mice was taken as the model, and orally
administered with different concentration of ethanol extracts of crude and
processed Stemona tuberosa, in order to determine the cytokine level released
from Th1 and Th2 in splenocytes. RT-PCR was carried out to determine the genetic 
expression of T-bet/GATA-3 in lung, and compare the differentiation between
ethanol extracts of crude and processed S. tuberosa in therapeutic effect on
asthma in mice. According to the results, compared with the crude samples,
processed samples significantly increased the levels of inflammatory factor
INF-gamma (P < 0.05) and decreased IL-5 (P < 0.05) in splenocytes. According to
the RT-PCR results, the administration of processed samples could increase the
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 (P < 0.05). The experiment showed that ethanol extracts of 
both crude and processed S. tuberosa could treat asthma by regulating Th1/Th2
ratio, but processed samples showed more notable effect. This indicated that
crude and processed S. tuberosa had significant pharmacological difference.
Therefore, it was more rational to apply processed S. tuberosa in clinical
treatment of asthma and chronic cough, which layed a foundation for further
revealing the processing mechanism of S. tuberosa.

PMID: 24791494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Trends Immunol. 2014 Jun;35(6):233-42. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2014.04.002. Epub 2014
Apr 28.

GATA3: a master of many trades in immune regulation.

Wan YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 450 West Drive, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: wany@email.unc.edu.

GATA3 has conventionally been regarded as a transcription factor that drives the 
differentiation of T helper (Th) 2 cells. Increasing evidence points to a
function for GATA3 beyond controlling Th2 differentiation. GATA3 regulates T cell
development, proliferation, and maintenance. Furthermore, recent studies have
demonstrated important roles for GATA3 in innate lymphoid cells. Thus, GATA3
emerges as a factor with diverse functions in immune regulation, which are in
some cases cell-type specific and in others shared by multiple cell types. Here, 
I discuss recent discoveries and the current understanding of the functions of
GATA3 in immune regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4045638
PMID: 24786134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Hum Pathol. 2014 Jul;45(7):1473-82. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.02.024. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of novel and traditional markers associated with
urothelial differentiation in a spectrum of variants of urothelial carcinoma of
the urinary bladder.

Paner GP(1), Annaiah C(2), Gulmann C(3), Rao P(4), Ro JY(5), Hansel DE(6), Shen
SS(5), Lopez-Beltran A(7), Aron M(2), Luthringer DJ(2), De Peralta-Venturina
M(2), Cho Y(8), Amin MB(9).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Surgery, Section of Urology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (3)Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA;
Department of Pathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (4)Department of
Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Department of
Pathology and Genomic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. (7)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Cordoba
University, Cordoba, Spain. (8)University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (9)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Electronic address: aminm@cshs.org.

Data on immunohistochemical expression of novel and traditional urothelial
markers in the wide range of urothelial carcinoma variants have so far been very 
limited. In this study, whole tissue sections from 130 bladder urothelial
carcinoma and variants were stained with a panel of novel and traditional
immunomarkers supportive of urothelial lineage. The positivity rates were as
follows: (a) urothelial carcinomas with or without divergent differentiation:
GATA3 (50%), S-100P (86%), uroplakin III (20%), thrombomodulin (40%), cytokeratin
7 (CK7) (80%), CK20 (55%), p63 (87%), and high molecular weight cytokeratin
(HMCK) (89%); (b) urothelial carcinoma variants (micropapillary, plasmacytoid,
nested, clear cell, and microcystic): GATA3 (88%), S-100P (96%), uroplakin III
(33%), thrombomodulin (49%), CK7 (95%), CK20 (61%), p63 (69%), and HMCK (96%);
and (c) undifferentiated carcinomas (lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma, small cell
carcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma and carcinoma with rhabdoid and giant cells):
GATA3 (28%), S-100P (31%), uroplakin III (0%), thrombomodulin (22%), CK7 (50%),
CK20 (3%), p63 (50%), and HMCK (49%). In urothelial carcinoma with squamous
differentiation, GATA3 expression was lower (20%) in contrast to p63 and S-100P. 
In urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation, GATA3 (50%) and p63 (60%)
expression was lower than S-100P (100%). p63 expression was relatively lower in
micropapillary (54%) and plasmacytoid (50%) variants compared with the other
urothelial carcinoma variants. This study provides comprehensive data for novel
and traditionally used markers to support urothelial lineage in urothelial
carcinoma variants. Our findings show that GATA3, S-100P, CK7, CK20, HMCK, and
p63, in the appropriate differential diagnostic setting, are useful to support
urothelial lineage of variant morphologies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 1;192(11):5160-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302539. Epub 2014
Apr 28.

CD4+ T cells from human neonates and infants are poised spontaneously to run a
nonclassical IL-4 program.

Hebel K(1), Weinert S(2), Kuropka B(3), Knolle J(1), Kosak B(1), Jorch G(1),
Arens C(4), Krause E(3), Braun-Dullaeus RC(2), Brunner-Weinzierl MC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University Hospital, Otto-von-Guericke 
University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; (2)Division of Cardiology, Department of
Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120
Magdeburg, Germany; (3)Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, 13125
Berlin, Germany; and. (4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, University Hospital, Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg,
Germany. (5)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University Hospital,
Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany;
Monika.Brunner-Weinzierl@med.ovgu.de.

Senescence or biological aging impacts a vast variety of molecular and cellular
processes. To date, it is unknown whether CD4(+) Th cells display an
age-dependent bias for development into specific subpopulations. In this study,
we show the appearance of a distinct CD4(+) T cell subset expressing IL-4 at an
early stage of development in infant adenoids and cord blood that is lost during 
aging. We identified by flow cytometric, fluorescent microscopic, immunoblot, and
mass spectrometric analysis a population of CD4(+) T cells that expressed an
unglycosylated isoform of IL-4. This T cell subpopulation was found in neonatal
but not in adult CD4(+) T cells. Furthermore, we show that the mRNA of the Th2
master transcription factor GATA3 is preferentially expressed in neonatal CD4(+) 
T cells. The Th2 phenotype of the IL-4(+)CD4(+) T cells could be reinforced in
the presence of TGF-ß. Although the IL-4(+)CD4(+) T cells most likely originate
from CD31(+)CD4(+) T recent thymic emigrants, CD31 was downregulated prior to
secretion of IL-4. Notably, the secretion of IL-4 requires a so far unidentified 
trigger in neonatal T cells. This emphasizes that cytokine expression and
secretion are differentially regulated processes. Our data support the hypothesis
of an endogenously poised cytokine profile in neonates and suggest a link between
cytokine production and the developmental stage of an organism. The determination
of the IL-4 isoform-expressing cells in humans might allow the identification of 
Th2 precursor cells, which could provide novel intervention strategies directed
against Th2-driven immunopathologies such as allergies.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 24778440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Blood. 2014 Jul 31;124(5):700-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-427781. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

Human innate lymphoid cells.

Hazenberg MD(1), Spits H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Histology,
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Jul 31;124(5):673-5.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are lymphoid cells that do not express rearranged
receptors and have important effector and regulatory functions in innate immunity
and tissue remodeling. ILCs are categorized into 3 groups based on their distinct
patterns of cytokine production and the requirement of particular transcription
factors for their development and function. Group 1 ILCs (ILC1s) produce
interferon <U+03B3> and depend on Tbet, group 2 ILCs (ILC2s) produce type 2 cytokines
like interleukin-5 (IL-5) and IL-13 and require GATA3, and group 3 ILCs (ILC3s)
include lymphoid tissue inducer cells, produce IL-17 and/or IL-22, and are
dependent on ROR<U+03B3>t. Whereas ILCs play essential roles in the innate immune
system, uncontrolled activation and proliferation of ILCs can contribute to
inflammatory autoimmune diseases. In this review, we provide an overview of the
characteristics of ILCs in the context of health and disease. We will focus on
human ILCs but refer to mouse studies if needed to clarify aspects of ILC
biology.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24778151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Exp Anim. 2014;63(2):133-40.

Overexpression of GATA-3 in T cells accelerates dextran sulfate sodium-induced
colitis.

Okamura M(1), Yoh K, Ojima M, Morito N, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy and Embryology, Division of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an inflammatory bowel disease, and its pathogenesis
includes genetic, environmental, and immunological factors, such as T helper
cells and their secreted cytokines. T helper cells are classified as Th1, Th2,
and Th17 cells. However, it is unclear which T helper cells are important in UC. 
Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis is a commonly used model of UC. In
this study, we induced DSS colitis in Th1 dominant (T-bet transgenic (Tg)) mice, 
Th2 dominant (GATA-3 Tg) mice, and Th17 dominant (ROR<U+03B3>t Tg) mice to elucidate the
roles of T helper cell in DSS colitis. The results showed that GATA-3 Tg mice
developed the most severe DSS colitis compared with the other groups. GATA-3 Tg
mice showed a significant decreased in weight from day 1 to day 7, and an
increased high score for the disease activity index compared with the other
groups. Furthermore, GATA-3 Tg mice developed many ulcers in the colon, and many 
neutrophils and macrophages were detected on day 4 after DSS treatment.
Measurement of GATA-3-induced cytokines demonstrated that IL-13 was highly
expressed in the colon from DSS-induced GATA-3 Tg mice. In conclusion, GATA-3
overexpression in T-cells and IL-13 might play important roles in the development
of DSS colitis.

PMCID: PMC4160978
PMID: 24770638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Immunology. 2014 Oct;143(2):202-18. doi: 10.1111/imm.12304.

Insufficient interleukin-12 signalling favours differentiation of human CD4(+)
and CD8(+) T cells into GATA-3(+) and GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) subsets in humanized
mice.

Billerbeck E(1), Labitt RN, Vega K, Frias-Staheli N, Dorner M, Xiao JW, Rice CM, 
Ploss A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, Center for the Study of
Hepatitis C, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into type 1 or type 2 subsets is mediated by
the expression of the opposing lineage defining transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3. However, the existence of GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) CD4(+) T cells in mice
suggests functional plasticity of these subsets. Little is known about type 1 and
type 2 plasticity of human T-cell subsets in vivo. Here, we show that in the
xenogeneic environment of humanized mice, which lacks a functional
immune-regulatory network, human CD4(+) and, notably, CD8(+) T cells
preferentially differentiate into interleukin (IL)-4(+) GATA-3(+) and IL-4(+)
interferon-<U+03B3>(+) GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) subsets. Treatment with recombinant human
IL-12 or expansion of IL-12-producing human dendritic cells in vivo reverted this
phenotype and led to the down-regulation of GATA-3 expression. These changes also
correlated with improved antiviral immune responses in humanized mice. In
conclusion, our study shows the capacity of human CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells for
stable co-expression of GATA-3 and T-bet in humanized mice and reveals a critical
role for IL-12 in regulating this phenotype.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4172137
PMID: 24766459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2696-708. doi: 10.1172/JCI72171. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

ZEB1 sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma to metastasis suppression by PI3K antagonism.

Yang Y, Ahn YH, Chen Y, Tan X, Guo L, Gibbons DL, Ungewiss C, Peng DH, Liu X, Lin
SH, Thilaganathan N, Wistuba II, Rodriguez-Canales J, McLendon G, Creighton CJ,
Kurie JM.

Epithelial tumor cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) are typically prone to metastasis and drug resistance and contribute to a
poor clinical outcome. The transcription factor ZEB1 is a known driver of EMT,
and mediators of ZEB1 represent potential therapeutic targets for metastasis
suppression. Here, we have shown that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-targeted
(PI3K-targeted) therapy suppresses metastasis in a mouse model of
Kras/Tp53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma that develops metastatic disease due to high
expression of ZEB1. In lung adenocarcinoma cells from Kras/Tp53-mutant animals
and human lung cancer cell lines, ZEB1 activated PI3K by derepressing miR-200
targets, including amphiregulin (AREG), betacellulin (BTC), and the transcription
factor GATA6, which stimulated an EGFR/ERBB2 autocrine loop. Additionally,
ZEB1-dependent derepression of the miR-200 and miR-183 target friend of GATA 2
(FOG2) enhanced GATA3-induced expression of the p110a catalytic subunit of PI3K. 
Knockdown of FOG2, p110a, and RHEB ameliorated invasive and metastatic
propensities of tumor cells. Surprisingly, FOG2 was not required for mesenchymal 
differentiation, suggesting that mesenchymal differentiation and invasion are
distinct and separable processes. Together, these results indicate that ZEB1
sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma cells to metastasis suppression by PI3K-targeted
therapy and suggest that treatments to selectively modify the metastatic behavior
of mesenchymal tumor cells are feasible and may be of clinical value.

PMCID: PMC4038569
PMID: 24762440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 22;14:278. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-278.

Breast tumor specific mutation in GATA3 affects physiological mechanisms
regulating transcription factor turnover.

Adomas AB, Grimm SA, Malone C, Takaku M, Sims JK, Wade PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, 111 T,W, Alexander Dr, 27709 Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
wadep2@niehs.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA3 is a favorable prognostic indicator in
estrogen receptor-a (ERa)-positive breast tumors in which it participates with
ERa and FOXA1 in a complex transcriptional regulatory program driving tumor
growth. GATA3 mutations are frequent in breast cancer and have been classified as
driver mutations. To elucidate the contribution(s) of GATA3 alterations to
cancer, we studied two breast cancer cell lines, MCF7, which carries a
heterozygous frameshift mutation in the second zinc finger of GATA3, and T47D,
wild-type at this locus.
METHODS: Immunofluorescence staining and subcellular fractionation were employed 
to verify cellular localization of GATA3 in T47D and MCF7 cells. To test protein 
stability, cells were treated with translation inhibitor, cycloheximide or
proteasome inhibitor, MG132, and GATA3 abundance was measured over time using
immunoblot. GATA3 turn-over in response to hormone was determined by treating the
cells with estradiol or ERa agonist, ICI 182,780. DNA binding ability of
recombinant GATA3 was evaluated using electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
heparin chromatography. Genomic location of GATA3 in MCF7 and T47D cells was
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with next-generation sequencing
(ChIP-seq).
RESULTS: GATA3 localized in the nucleus in T47D and MCF7 cells, regardless of the
mutation status. The truncated protein in MCF7 had impaired interaction with
chromatin and was easily released from the nucleus. Recombinant mutant GATA3 was 
able to bind DNA to a lesser degree than the wild-type protein. Heterozygosity
for the truncating mutation conferred protection from regulated turnover of
GATA3, ERa and FOXA1 following estrogen stimulation in MCF7 cells. Thus, mutant
GATA3 uncoupled protein-level regulation of master regulatory transcription
factors from hormone action. Consistent with increased protein stability,
ChIP-seq profiling identified greater genome-wide accumulation of GATA3 in MCF7
cells bearing the mutation, albeit with a similar distribution across the genome,
comparing to T47D cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that this specific, cancer-derived mutation in GATA3
deregulates physiologic protein turnover, stabilizes GATA3 binding across the
genome and modulates the response of breast cancer cells to estrogen signaling.

PMCID: PMC4021073
PMID: 24758297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 15;735:97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.019. Epub 
2014 Apr 19.

Attenuation of collagen induced arthritis via suppression on Th17 response by
activating cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway with nicotine.

Wu S(1), Luo H(1), Xiao X(2), Zhang H(2), Li T(3), Zuo X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. (2)Department
of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. (3)Department of Rheumatology,
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan
410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. Electronic address: litonglltt@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. Electronic
address: susanzuo@hotmail.com.

The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway can inhibit the inflammation of
collagen induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
However, the immunologic mechanisms that provide a therapeutic effect against the
auto-inflammatory disease are not yet elucidated. The present study explores the 
effect of cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway on CD4+ T cell responses in CIA. 
Forty DBA/1 mice were divided into 4 groups: a control group, a CIA group, a
vagotomy group, and a nicotine group. The degree of arthritis was measured by
arthritis score and hematoxylin and eosin. ELISA was used to detect the serum
concentration of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and IL-17A. Flow cytometry was used to detect the
cytokines and transcription factors (TFs) (the TFs of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells
are T-bet, ROR<U+03B3>t and GATA3 respectively) in the spleen. Immunohistochemistry was 
used to analyze ROR<U+03B3>t expression in the joint synovium. Arthritis in the nicotine
group was significantly lightened compared with that in the CIA group and in the 
vagotomy group. Nicotine attenuated Th17 lineage by reducing IL-17A production
and ROR<U+03B3>t expression. The expressions of IL-4 and GATA3 were increased in the
same setting. However, the expressions of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet had no difference
between the nicotine and the CIA group. Nicotine may induce a shift to the Th2
lineage and improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance. Activating the cholinergic
anti-inflammatory pathway with nicotine can inhibit Th17 cell responses and may
improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance in CIA, providing a new justification for its
application in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24755145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2014 Aug;4(8):609-16. doi: 10.1002/alr.21336. Epub 2014
Apr 21.

Effect of prednisone on nasal symptoms and peripheral blood T-cell function in
chronic rhinosinusitis.

Watanabe S(1), Pinto JM, Bashir ME, De Tineo M, Suzaki H, Baroody FM, Naclerio
RM, Sharma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Showa
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Systemic corticosteroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory
drugs used for controlling chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) symptoms. The potential
mechanisms for their beneficial effects include increasing the number and
function of T regulatory cells (Tregs), as reported in the local tissue
post-intranasal steroid treatment. We investigated the effect of systemic
corticosteroids on peripheral blood (PB) Tregs in subjects with CRS.
METHODS: Twenty CRS subjects and 19 controls were recruited. PB mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were isolated from CRS subjects before and after systemic corticosteroid 
administration in the course of clinical treatment. Control subjects received no 
treatment and were studied at one visit. Nasal symptoms were recorded. CD4(+)
CD25(+) Foxp3(+) cells (Tregs) were analyzed by flow cytometry. Messenger RNA
(mRNA) levels for interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-10, IL-13,
IL-17A, transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1), forkhead box P3 (FoxP3), and
GATA-binding factor 3 (GATA-3) were measured in PBMCs using real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: CRS subjects reported improved nasal symptoms (p = 0.005) and
significantly reduced PB Tregs after treatment with corticosteroids (p = 0.042). 
The transcript levels of IL-4 and GATA-3 were significantly higher in the CRS
subjects at their first visit when compared to controls (p = 0.019 and p = 0.05, 
respectively). Corticosteroid treatment lowered the transcript levels of
immunoregulatory transcription factors [FoxP3 (p = 0.048) and GATA-3 (p = 0.012)]
and IFN-<U+03B3> (p = 0.036) in PB.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to prior work in local nasal tissue, our study reports
reduced PB Tregs and decreased T helper 1 (T(H)1) and T(H)2 function after
treatment with systemic corticosteroids. These data indicate that corticosteroid 
effects on Tregs in CRS are complex involving local signals in the tissue that
are distinct from those in circulating cells.

© 2014 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

PMID: 24753507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Am J Hematol. 2014 Jul;89(7):721-5. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23727. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Genomic ancestry and somatic alterations correlate with age at diagnosis in
Hispanic children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Walsh KM(1), de Smith AJ, Welch TC, Smirnov I, Cunningham MJ, Ma X, Chokkalingam 
AP, Dahl GV, Roberts W, Barcellos LF, Buffler PA, Metayer C, Wiemels JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 94143; Program in Cancer
Genetics, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 94143.

Hispanic children have a higher incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
than non-Hispanic whites but tend to be diagnosed at older ages. In genome-wide
association studies, Native American ancestry and polymorphisms in six genes have
been associated with ALL risk. In multivariable regression models, we
investigated whether genomic ancestry, inherited risk SNPs, or acquired somatic
alterations were associated with differences in age at diagnosis in Hispanic
children with B-cell ALL. Genome-wide array data were used to estimate each
participant's percent membership in the three Hispanic ancestral populations:
Native American, African, and European. Each 20% increase in European ancestry
was associated with a six month younger age at diagnosis (95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.36-11.6
months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037). Correspondingly, each 20% increase in Native American
ancestry was associated with a six-month older age at diagnosis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037). Both
the TEL-AML1 translocation and high-hyperdiploidy were associated with younger
age at diagnosis (24.4 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.0 x 10(-4) and 12.4 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011,
respectively), while CDKN2A and IKZF1 deletions were associated with older age at
diagnosis (19.7 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.0 x 10(-4) and 18.1 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012,
respectively). No associations with age at diagnosis were observed for RAS
mutation, PAX5 deletion or for known heritable risk alleles in IKZF1, CDKN2A,
PIP4K2A, GATA3, ARID5B, or CEBPE. Because younger age at diagnosis is associated 
with improved treatment outcomes for children with ALL, the effect of European
ancestry on ALL survival may be mediated by its effect on age at diagnosis, or by
proxy, its association with more treatable molecular subtypes of ALL.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4069235
PMID: 24753091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biomed Rep. 2014 May;2(3):404-407. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Genetic variant rs1058240 at the microRNA-binding site in the GATA3 gene may
regulate its mRNA expression.

Yang F(1), Chen F(1), Gu J(2), Zhang W(1), Luo J(1), Guan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210002, P.R. China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Jinling
Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210002, P.R. China.

The GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a member of a family of 6 GATA dual zinc
finger transcription factors (GATA1-6), which are required for the development
and morphogenesis of the mammary gland. GATA3 is considered to play a dual role
in oncogenesis and cancer development, whereas somatic GATA3 mutations have been 
reported in breast cancer. Variants of the GATA3 genetic 3' untranslated region
(3'UTR) microRNA (miRNA) binding sites have been associated with breast cancer
risk. However, the roles of genetic variants in the GATA3 gene 3'UTR and its
post-transcriptional regulation have not been fully elucidated. We discovered
that rs1058240 in the GATA3 3'UTR displayed potential miRNA binding sites and
this variant was found to be significantly associated with GATA3 mRNA expression 
(P=2.36E-07), suggesting that rs1058240 may be a putative variant mediating the
post-transcriptional regulation of the GATA3 target gene. Further studies
investigating the regulatory mechanism of GATA3 transcriptional activity are
required to design novel strategies against breast cancer cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3990192
PMID: 24748983  [PubMed]


401. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1078-83. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.006. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

p40 exhibits better specificity than p63 in distinguishing primary skin adnexal
carcinomas from cutaneous metastases.

Lee JJ(1), Mochel MC(2), Piris A(3), Boussahmain C(2), Mahalingam M(4), Hoang
MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Department of Dermatology, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA. Electronic address: mhoang@mgh.harvard.edu.

The histopathologic distinction between primary adnexal carcinomas and metastatic
adenocarcinoma to the skin from sites such as the breast, lung, and others often 
presents a diagnostic dilemma. Current markers of diagnostic utility include p63 
and cytokeratin 5/6; however, their expression has been demonstrated in 11% to
22% and 27% of cutaneous metastases, respectively. Furthermore, the
immunoreactivity of p40 and GATA3 in various cutaneous adnexal carcinomas has not
been previously reported. In the present study, we compared the expression of
p40, p63, cytokeratin 5/6, and GATA3 in a total of 143 cases, including 67
primary adnexal carcinomas and 76 cutaneous metastases. p40, p63, cytokeratin
5/6, and GATA3 expression was observed in 80%, 84%, 86%, and 47% of primary
adnexal carcinoma, respectively, and in 8%, 17%, 26%, and 40% of cutaneous
metastases, respectively. <U+03C7>(2) Analysis revealed statistically significant P
values (<.0001) for p40, p63, and cytokeratin 5/6 in distinguishing primary
adnexal carcinoma from cutaneous metastases. In summary, while p63 and
cytokeratin 5/6 have similar sensitivity (84% and 86%, respectively) in detecting
primary adnexal carcinomas, p40 appeared to be the most specific marker (92%)
with the best positive predictive value (90%). Since breast and lung are the most
common sites of origin for cutaneous metastases, p40 is the best distinguishing
marker in these settings. None of the four studied markers (p40, p63, cytokeratin
5/6, and GATA3) are helpful in distinguishing between primary adnexal carcinomas 
from cutaneous metastases of salivary gland or bladder malignancies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Hum Pathol. 2014 Jul;45(7):1466-72. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.02.023. Epub 2014
Mar 15.

Differential expression of GATA-3 in urothelial carcinoma variants.

Liang Y(1), Heitzman J(1), Kamat AM(2), Dinney CP(2), Czerniak B(1), Guo CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Urology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: ccguo@mdanderson.org.

GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) is a novel immunohistochemical marker for
urothelial carcinoma (UC); however, few studies have investigated GATA-3's role
as a marker for UC variants. We used immunohistochemistry to assess GATA-3
expression in different UC variants, including micropapillary (n = 46),
sarcomatoid (n = 43), small cell carcinoma (n = 22), and plasmacytoid (n = 16)
variants, and we also compared GATA-3 expression in conventional bladder UC (n = 
103) to that in squamous cell carcinoma (n = 14). GATA-3 expression was present
in 70% (72/103) of conventional bladder UCs and highly concordant between matched
primary and metastatic UCs. The GATA-3 expression levels of the micropapillary
variants (57%; 26/46) and plasmacytoid variants (44%; 7/16) were not
significantly different from that of conventional UC. However, the GATA-3
expression levels of the sarcomatoid variants (16%; 7/43) and small cell
carcinoma variants (5%; 1/22), which only weakly expressed the protein, were
significantly lower than that of conventional UC (P < .001). Only 7% of squamous 
cell carcinomas (1/14) expressed GATA-3, and it was also significantly lower than
that of conventional UC (P < .001). GATA-3 expression was not significantly
associated with tumor stage or patients' clinical outcomes. In conclusion, GATA-3
expression differed among UC variants. GATA-3 is a useful marker for confirming
the urothelial origin of micropapillary and plasmacytoid UC variants but not that
of sarcomatoid or small cell carcinoma variants. GATA-3 can also be used in
differentiating UC from squamous cell carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24745616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 17;10(4):e1004228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004228.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide diet-gene interaction analyses for risk of colorectal cancer.

Figueiredo JC(1), Hsu L(2), Hutter CM(3), Lin Y(2), Campbell PT(4), Baron JA(5), 
Berndt SI(6), Jiao S(2), Casey G(1), Fortini B(1), Chan AT(7), Cotterchio M(8),
Lemire M(9), Gallinger S(10), Harrison TA(2), Le Marchand L(11), Newcomb PA(2),
Slattery ML(12), Caan BJ(13), Carlson CS(2), Zanke BW(14), Rosse SA(2), Brenner
H(15), Giovannucci EL(16), Wu K(17), Chang-Claude J(18), Chanock SJ(6), Curtis
KR(2), Duggan D(19), Gong J(2), Haile RW(20), Hayes RB(21), Hoffmeister M(15),
Hopper JL(22), Jenkins MA(22), Kolonel LN(11), Qu C(2), Rudolph A(18), Schoen
RE(23), Schumacher FR(1), Seminara D(3), Stelling DL(2), Thibodeau SN(24),
Thornquist M(2), Warnick GS(2), Henderson BE(1), Ulrich CM(25), Gauderman WJ(1), 
Potter JD(26), White E(2), Peters U(2); CCFR; GECCO.

Author information: 
(1)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (2)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (4)Epidemiology Research Program,
American Cancer Society, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (6)Division of Cancer
Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United 
States of America. (7)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Channing Division of 
Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (8)Cancer Care Ontario, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (9)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (10)Department of Surgery, University Health Network Toronto General
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (11)Epidemiology Program, University of
Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, United States of America. (12)Department 
of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, United States of America. (13)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Medical Care Program, Oakland, California, United States of America. (14)Division
of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada. (15)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (16)Channing Division of Network Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(17)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (18)Division of Cancer Epidemiology,
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (19)Translational Genomics
Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America. (20)Stanford
Cancer Institute, Palo Alto, California, United States of America. (21)Division
of Epidemiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York,
United States of America. (22)Melbourne School of Population Health, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (23)Department of Medicine and
Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
United States of America. (24)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
and Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of
America. (25)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Division of Preventive
Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany. (26)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Centre for Public
Health Research, Massey University, Wellington, New Zealand.

Dietary factors, including meat, fruits, vegetables and fiber, are associated
with colorectal cancer; however, there is limited information as to whether these
dietary factors interact with genetic variants to modify risk of colorectal
cancer. We tested interactions between these dietary factors and approximately
2.7 million genetic variants for colorectal cancer risk among 9,287 cases and
9,117 controls from ten studies. We used logistic regression to investigate
multiplicative gene-diet interactions, as well as our recently developed Cocktail
method that involves a screening step based on marginal associations and
gene-diet correlations and a testing step for multiplicative interactions, while 
correcting for multiple testing using weighted hypothesis testing. Per quartile
increment in the intake of red and processed meat were associated with
statistically significant increased risks of colorectal cancer and vegetable,
fruit and fiber intake with lower risks. From the case-control analysis, we
detected a significant interaction between rs4143094 (10p14/near GATA3) and
processed meat consumption (OR = 1.17; p = 8.7E-09), which was consistently
observed across studies (p heterogeneity = 0.78). The risk of colorectal cancer
associated with processed meat was increased among individuals with the
rs4143094-TG and -TT genotypes (OR = 1.20 and OR = 1.39, respectively) and null
among those with the GG genotype (OR = 1.03). Our results identify a novel
gene-diet interaction with processed meat for colorectal cancer, highlighting
that diet may modify the effect of genetic variants on disease risk, which may
have important implications for prevention.

PMCID: PMC3990510
PMID: 24743840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:923135. doi: 10.1155/2014/923135. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Polarization of ILC2s in peripheral blood might contribute to immunosuppressive
microenvironment in patients with gastric cancer.

Bie Q(1), Zhang P(1), Su Z(1), Zheng D(1), Ying X(1), Wu Y(1), Yang H(1), Chen
D(2), Wang S(1), Xu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Xuefu Road 301, Zhenjiang 212013, China. (2)Institute of
Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212001, China.

Newly identified nuocytes or group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) play an
important role in Th2 cell mediated immunity such as protective immune responses 
to helminth parasites, allergic asthma, and chronic rhinosinusitis. However, the 
contributions of ILC2s in the occurrence and development of cancer remain
unknown. Our previous study found that there was a predominant Th2 phenotype in
patients with gastric cancer. In this study, the ILC2s related genes or molecules
in PBMC from patients with gastric cancer were measured, and the potential
correlation between them was analyzed. The expression levels of RORa, GATA3,
T1/ST2, IL-17RB, CRTH2, IL-33, IL-5, and IL-4 mRNA were significantly increased
in patients, but no significant changes were found in ICOS, CD45, and IL-13
expression, and there was a positive correlation between RORa or IL-13 and other 
related factors, such as ICOS and CD45. The increased frequency of ILC2s was also
found in PBMC of patients by flow cytometry. In addition, the mRNA of Arg1 and
iNOS were also significantly increased in patients. These results suggested that 
there are polarized ILC2s in gastric cancer patients which might contribute to
immunosuppressive microenvironment and closely related to the upregulation of
MDSCs and M2 macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3987940
PMID: 24741632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014 Jun;20(6):967-77. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000028.

Multigene analysis unveils distinctive expression profiles of helper
T-cell-related genes in the intestinal mucosa that discriminate between
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.

Iboshi Y(1), Nakamura K, Ihara E, Iwasa T, Akiho H, Harada N, Nakamuta M,
Takayanagi R.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; and Department of Gastroenterology,
Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization, Kyushu Medical Center, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although the involvement of helper T (Th) and regulatory T (Treg)
cell-related immune molecules in pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is widely accepted, no discriminatory mucosal expression profiles of these
molecules between ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) have been
clarified.
METHODS: Mucosal expression of 17 cytokines and transcription factors related to 
Th1, Th2, Th17, and Treg were measured by quantitative PCR in endoscopic biopsies
from inflamed (40 from UC [UCI] and 20 from CD [CDI]) and noninflamed (47, 22,
and 25 from UC, CD, and controls, respectively) colon or ileum. The
discriminatory power of these markers to differentiate between the 2 diseases was
evaluated by linear discriminant analysis and, unsupervised, principal component 
analysis.
RESULTS: By univariate analysis, many targets were markedly increased in inflamed
versus noninflamed areas. However, marker expression was almost comparable
between UCI and CDI, with the largest difference in UCI-predominant interleukin
(IL) 21 and IL-13 with area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC) values of 0.704 and 0.664, respectively. In contrast, combinations of 2 to 
7 markers improved UCI versus CDI discrimination with AUC = 0.875 to 0.975. Among
these, a 5-maker set (interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-12 p35, T-bet, GATA3, and IL-21)
demonstrated an AUC of 0.949 and a misclassification rate of 8.3%. Principal
component analysis also markedly separated UCI and CDI.
CONCLUSIONS: Inflamed mucosae from UC and CD could be discriminated with high
accuracy using combinations of Th cell-related markers. Multigene analysis,
possibly reflecting the underlying pathogenesis, is expected to be useful for
diagnosis, monitoring and further defining distinctive characteristics in
inflammatory bowel disease.

PMID: 24739631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Clin Epigenetics. 2014 Apr 15;6(1):8. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-6-8. eCollection
2014.

The interplay of DNA methylation over time with Th2 pathway genetic variants on
asthma risk and temporal asthma transition.

Zhang H(1), Tong X(2), Holloway JW(3), Rezwan FI(4), Lockett GA(4), Patil V(5),
Ray M(2), Everson TM(2), Soto-Ramírez N(1), Arshad SH(6), Ewart S(7), Karmaus
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Environmental Health, School of
Public Health, University of Memphis, 236A Robison Hall, Memphis, TN 38152, USA. 
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Arnold School of Public Health, 
University of South Carolina, 800 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.
(3)Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK ; Human Development and
Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, University Road,
Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. (4)Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. (5)The
David Hide Asthma and Allergy Research Centre, St Mary's, Hospital, Parkhurst
Road, Newport, Isle of Wight PO30 5TG, UK. (6)Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17
1BJ, UK ; The David Hide Asthma and Allergy Research Centre, St Mary's, Hospital,
Parkhurst Road, Newport, Isle of Wight PO30 5TG, UK. (7)Department of Large
Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University, 3700 East Gull Lake Drive,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genetic effects on asthma of genes in the T-helper 2 (Th2) pathway
may interact with epigenetic factors including DNA methylation. We hypothesized
that interactions between genetic variants and methylation in genes in this
pathway (IL4, IL4R, IL13, GATA3, and STAT6) influence asthma risk, that such
influences are age-dependent, and that methylation of some CpG sites changes over
time in accordance with asthma transition. We tested these hypotheses in
subsamples of girls from a population-based birth cohort established on the Isle 
of Wight, UK, in 1989.
RESULTS: Logistic regression models were applied to test the interaction effect
of DNA methylation and SNP on asthma within each of the five genes. Bootstrapping
was used to assess the models identified. From 1,361 models fitted at each age of
10 and 18 years, 8 models, including 4 CpGs and 8 SNPs, showed potential
associations with asthma risk. Of the 4 CpGs, methylation of cg26937798 (IL4R)
and cg23943829 (IL4) changes between ages 10 and 18 (both higher at 10;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.14<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6) and 1.07<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5), respectively). At age 10, the odds of asthma
tended to decrease as cg12405139 (GATA3) methylation increased (log-OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>-12.15; 
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.049); this effect disappeared by age 18. At age 18, methylation of
cg09791102 (IL4R) was associated with higher risk of asthma among subjects with
genotype GG compared to AG (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), increased cg26937798 methylation among
subjects with rs3024685 (IL4R) genotype AA (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) or rs8832 (IL4R) genotype 
GG (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01) was associated with a lower asthma risk; these CpGs had no effect
at age 10. Increasing cg26937798 methylation over time possibly reduced the risk 
of positive asthma transition (asthma-free at age 10<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>asthma at age 18;
log-OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>-3.11; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.069) and increased the likelihood of negative transition
(asthma at age 10<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>asthma-free at age 18; log-OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.97; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.074).
CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of DNA methylation and SNPs in Th2 pathway genes is 
likely to contribute to asthma risk. This effect may vary with age. Methylation
of some CpGs changed over time, which may influence asthma transition.

PMCID: PMC4023182
PMID: 24735657  [PubMed]


407. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:476357. doi: 10.1155/2014/476357. Epub 2014 Mar 9.

Importins and exportins regulating allergic immune responses.

Aggarwal A(1), Agrawal DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology & Immunology and Center for Clinical &
Translational Science, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE 68178, 
USA.

Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of macromolecules is a well-controlled process
involving importins and exportins. These karyopherins recognize and bind to
receptor-mediated intracellular signals through specific signal sequences that
are present on cargo proteins and transport into and out of the nucleus through
nuclear pore complexes. Nuclear localization signals (NLS) present on cargo
molecules to be imported while nuclear export signals (NES) on the molecules to
be exported are recognized by importins and exportins, respectively. The
classical NLS are found on many transcription factors and molecules that are
involved in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. In addition, several immune
modulators, including corticosteroids and vitamin D, elicit their cellular
responses by regulating the expression and activity of importin molecules. In
this review article, we provide a comprehensive list of importin and exportin
molecules and their specific cargo that shuttled between cytoplasm and the
nucleus. We also critically review the role and regulation of specific importin
and exportin involved in the transport of activated transcription factors in
allergic diseases, the underlying molecular mechanisms, and the potential target 
sites for developing better therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3964845
PMID: 24733961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cell. 2014 Apr 10;157(2):340-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.030.

Differentiation of type 1 ILCs from a common progenitor to all helper-like innate
lymphoid cell lineages.

Klose CS(1), Flach M(2), Möhle L(3), Rogell L(4), Hoyler T(2), Ebert K(1),
Fabiunke C(1), Pfeifer D(5), Sexl V(6), Fonseca-Pereira D(7), Domingues RG(7),
Veiga-Fernandes H(7), Arnold SJ(8), Busslinger M(9), Dunay IR(3), Tanriver Y(10),
Diefenbach A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical
Centre, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55131 Mainz, Germany; Department of Medical 
Microbiology and Hygiene, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
University of Freiburg Medical Centre, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg,
Germany; Renal Division, University of Freiburg Medical Centre, Hugstetter
Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and
Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical Centre, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55131
Mainz, Germany; Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Institute of
Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical Centre,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Medical
Microbiology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Leipziger Strasse 44, 39120
Magdeburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University 
of Mainz Medical Centre, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55131 Mainz, Germany;
Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Institute of Medical Microbiology
and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical Centre, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11,
79104 Freiburg, Germany; Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics,
Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. (5)Genomics Lab, Department of Hematology, 
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (6)Institute of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210
Vienna, Austria. (7)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, Edifício Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.
(8)Renal Division, University of Freiburg Medical Centre, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 
79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS, Centre of Biological Signalling Studies, Albert
Ludwigs University Freiburg, Schänzlestrasse 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohrgasse 7, 
1020 Vienna, Austria. (10)Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical
Centre, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Renal Division,
University of Freiburg Medical Centre, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany. (11)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz
Medical Centre, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55131 Mainz, Germany. Electronic
address: diefenbach@uni-mainz.de.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are a recently recognized group of lymphocytes that 
have important functions in protecting epithelial barriers against infections and
in maintaining organ homeostasis. ILCs have been categorized into three distinct 
groups, transcriptional circuitry and effector functions of which strikingly
resemble the various T helper cell subsets. Here, we identify a common,
Id2-expressing progenitor to all interleukin 7 receptor-expressing, "helper-like"
ILC lineages, the CHILP. Interestingly, the CHILP differentiated into ILC2 and
ILC3 lineages, but not into conventional natural killer (cNK) cells that have
been considered an ILC1 subset. Instead, the CHILP gave rise to a peculiar
NKp46(+) IL-7Ra(+) ILC lineage that required T-bet for specification and was
distinct of cNK cells or other ILC lineages. Such ILC1s coproduced high levels of
IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF and protected against infections with the intracellular parasite
Toxoplasma gondii. Our data significantly advance our understanding of ILC
differentiation and presents evidence for a new ILC lineage that protects barrier
surfaces against intracellular infections.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24725403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Sci Rep. 2014 Apr 11;4:4649. doi: 10.1038/srep04649.

Mast cell-derived serine proteinase regulates T helper 2 polarization.

Liu ZQ(1), Song JP(2), Liu X(3), Jiang J(1), Chen X(4), Yang L(5), Hu T(5), Zheng
PY(6), Liu ZG(7), Yang PC(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] ENT Institute of Shenzhen University, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory
Disease for Allergy at Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy & 
Immunology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China [2] Longgang 
Central Hospital, ENT Hospital, Shenzhen ENT Institute, Shenzhen, China [3].
(2)1] State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China [2]. (3)1] ENT Institute of Shenzhen
University, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease for Allergy at Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy & Immunology, Shenzhen University 
School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China [2]. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China. (5)Longgang Central Hospital, ENT Hospital, Shenzhen ENT
Institute, Shenzhen, China. (6)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China. (7)ENT Institute of Shenzhen University, State Key 
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease for Allergy at Shenzhen University, Shenzhen
Key Laboratory of Allergy & Immunology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine,
Shenzhen, China.

Although mast cells play a critical role in allergic reactions, the cells are
also involved in the protective immunity in the body. This study aims to
investigate the role of mast cells in immune regulation during aberrant T helper 
(Th)2 responses. In this study, an adoptive antigen-specific Th2 response model
was established with mast cell-deficient mice to test the role of mast cell in
the immune regulation. Cell culture was employed to test the role of mast cells
in the modulation of the expression of B cell lymphoma 6 protein (Bcl-6) in Th2
cells. The results showed that after adoptive transfer with immune cells, the
mast cell-deficient mice showed stronger Th2 pattern responses in the intestine
than that in the mast cell-sufficient mice. Mast cell-derived mouse mast cell
protease-6 increased the expression of Bcl-6 in Th2 cells. Bcl-6 inhibited the
expression of GATA-3 in Th2 cells, subsequently, forkhead box P3 was increased
and the Th2 cytokines were reduced in the cells; the cells thus showed the immune
regulatory properties similar to regulatory T cells. We conclude that bedsides
initiating immune inflammation, mast cells also contribute to the immune
regulation on Th2 polarization.

PMCID: PMC3983597
PMID: 24721951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Transl Oncol. 2014 Apr;7(2):196-205.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2014.02.004. Epub
2014 Mar 4.

Combined PTEN Mutation and Protein Expression Associate with Overall and
Disease-Free Survival of Glioblastoma Patients.

Xu J(1), Li Z(2), Wang J(3), Chen H(4), Fang JY(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China. Electronic
address: xujieletter@gmail.com. (2)Viral Genetics Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (3)Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Renji
Hospital, Shanghai, China. (4)Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: chenhaoyan@gmail.com. (5)Key
Laboratory of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ministry of Health, Shanghai,
China. Electronic address: fangjingyuan_new@163.com.

Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a tumor
suppressor commonly inactivated in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), but the
prognostic significance of PTEN remains controversial. Here, we demon- strate
significant prognostic value of combined PTEN mutation and expression for the
survival of patients with GBM on the basis of analysis of large-scale cancer
genomic data. PTEN nonsense mutations associated with sig- nificantly shorter
disease-free survival and overexpression of PTEN protein linked to shorter
disease-free and overall survival of patients with GBM. PTEN nonsense mutations
correlated with decreased p53 and Gata3 protein levels and increased genomic
instability in human GBM tissues. Expression of nonsense PTEN mutant decreased
p53 and Gata3 levels, producing increased DNA damage both in vitro and in vivo.
Mice carrying xenograft tumors with nonsense PTEN mutant displayed significantly 
shorter survival. Our data demonstrated the prognostic value of combined PTEN
mutation and protein expression for patients with GBM and highlighted distinct
biologic effects of nonsense and missense mutations of PTEN.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4101389
PMID: 24721394  [PubMed]


411. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Oct;29(10):1808-14. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12592.

Imbalances of CD4(+) T-cell subgroups in Crohn's disease and their relationship
with disease activity and prognosis.

Chao K(1), Zhang S, Yao J, He Y, Chen B, Zeng Z, Zhong B, Chen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The CD4(+) T-cell subgroups play central pathophysiological
roles in Crohn's disease (CD); however, their clinical relevance requires
additional clarification and remains controversial. We investigated their balance
in Chinese CD patients and explored their clinical significance.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells and serum were collected from 46
Chinese CD patients and 23 healthy donors. Circulating Treg, Th1, Th2, and Th17
cells were flow cytometrically analyzed. Subgroup-restricted transcription factor
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Serum
concentrations of the main cytokines produced by each subgroup were measured by
cytometric bead arrays or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Lower Treg proportion (6.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.2% vs 7.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.5%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030), FOXP3 mRNA 
expression (0.58-fold, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030), and circulating soluble TGFß-1 (19.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>9.9 vs 
32.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>16.8<U+2009>ng/mL, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038) were observed in CD patients versus controls. The
Th1 and Th17 proportions were higher in CD patients (17.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>6.6% vs 7.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.5%,
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001; and 3.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.8% vs 1.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.7%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022, respectively), as were
transcription factors T-bet (4.6-fold, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.043) and ROR<U+03B3>t (14-fold, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) 
and related cytokines (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Th2 proportion, GATA3 mRNA expression, and
serum interleukin-4 concentration in CD patients were similar to controls
(P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Treg/Th1 and Treg/Th17 ratios were higher in inactive versus active
CD patients (0.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.4 vs 0.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.1, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022; and 3.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.0 vs 1.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.4,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013, respectively). During follow-up, patients with lower Treg/Th1 and
Treg/Th17 ratios were at higher recurrence risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Imbalances among Treg, Th1, and Th17 subgroups were found in Chinese
CD patients. Treg/Th1 and Treg/Th17 ratios are associated with disease activity
and are potential prognostic indicators for predicting CD recurrence.

© 2014 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24720272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Am J Clin Pathol. 2014 May;141(5):648-55. doi: 10.1309/AJCP0Q9UQTEESLHN.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of GATA-3 expression in ER-negative breast
carcinomas.

Liu H(1), Shi J, Prichard JW, Gong Y, Lin F.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Laboratory Medicine, MC 01-31, Geisinger Medical Center, 100 N Academy
Ave, Danville, PA 17822; hliu1@geisinger.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Estrogen receptor (ER), gross cystic disease fluid protein 15
(GCDFP-15), and mammaglobin (MGB) are commonly used breast-specific
immunomarkers; however, about half of metastatic breast carcinomas are negative
for all three. GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) has emerged recently as a
sensitive and relatively specific immunomarker for breast and urothelial
carcinomas, but the data documenting its expression in ER-negative breast
carcinomas are limited; this often poses a dilemma in the setting of metastases. 
The purpose of this study is to investigate expression of GATA-3 in ER-negative
breast carcinomas.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical evaluation of GATA-3, GCDFP-15, and MGB on 96
ER-negative breast carcinomas was performed.
RESULTS: Overall, 69% (66/96), 15% (14/96), and 35% (34/96) of ER-negative breast
carcinomas expressed GATA-3, GCDFP-15, and MGB, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that GATA-3 is, so far, the best breast-specific
immunomarker, especially when encountering ER-negative metastatic breast
carcinomas. GATA-3 should be included in the panel of immunomarkers in the workup
of tumors of unknown primary.

PMID: 24713735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cancer Cytopathol. 2014 Jun;122(6):468-73. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21424. Epub 2014 Apr
7.

Usefulness of GATA3 and p40 immunostains in the diagnosis of metastatic
urothelial carcinoma in cytology specimens.

Brandler TC(1), Aziz MS, Rosen LM, Bhuiya TA, Yaskiv O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Lake
Success, New York.

BACKGROUND: GATA3 (GATA-binding protein 3) expression in urothelial carcinoma
(UC) and mammary carcinomas has been recently reported. However, to the authors' 
knowledge, studies examining GATA3 staining of metastatic UC (MUC) in cytology
specimens are lacking. Delta Np63 (p40) has been shown to be expressed highly
selectively in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) but the literature concerning the 
expression of p40 in UC is limited and controversial. In the current study, the
authors evaluated the usefulness of GATA3 and p40 in the diagnosis of MUC in
cytology specimens.
METHODS: Thirty-two MUC cytology cases and 44 controls (22 UC cases and 22 SCC
cases) were stained for GATA3, p40, and p63 and nuclear staining intensity and
the percentage of positive cells were recorded and compared.
RESULTS: MUC cytology cases stained positive for GATA3, p40, and p63 in 78.13%,
80.65%, and 61.29% of cases, respectively, with moderate/strong staining
intensity. MUC cases had a significantly higher percentage of GATA3 positivity
compared with SCC controls (P<.001), but GATA3 positivity was not found to be
significantly different from UC controls (90.91%) (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.28). For p40 positivity, 
there was no significant difference observed between MUC cases, UC controls
(95.45%), and SCC controls (90.91%) (P=.29). p63 positivity was found to be
significantly lower in MUC cases compared with UC controls (95.45%) and SCC
controls (95.45%) (P<.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the current study demonstrate that GATA3 is useful in
confirming the diagnosis of MUC in cytology specimens and in distinguishing
between MUC and SCC. p40 is a valuable adjunct to GATA3 in the diagnosis of MUC
in cytology specimens, especially when SCC is not part of the clinical
differential diagnosis.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24711443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Inflammation. 2014 Oct;37(5):1476-85. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-9873-6.

Protective effect of curcumin on acute airway inflammation of allergic asthma in 
mice through Notch1-GATA3 signaling pathway.

Chong L(1), Zhang W, Nie Y, Yu G, Liu L, Lin L, Wen S, Zhu L, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, the Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Xue-yuan West Road 109,
Wenzhou, 325000, Zhejiang, China.

Curcumin, a natural product derived from the plant Curcuma longa, has been found 
to have anti-inflammatory, antineoplastic and antifibrosis effects. It has been
reported that curcumin attenuates allergic airway inflammation in mice through
inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B and its downstream transcription factor GATA3. It also has been 
proved the antineoplastic effect of curcumin through down-regulating Notch1
receptor and its downstream nuclear transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B levels. In this
study, we aimed to investigate the anti-inflammatory effect of curcumin on acute 
allergic asthma and its underlying mechanisms. 36 male BALB/c mice were randomly 
divided into four groups (normal, asthma, asthma+budesonide and asthma+curcumin
groups). BALF (bronchoalveolar lavage fluid) and lung tissues were analyzed for
airway inflammation and the expression of Notch1, Notch2, Notch3, Notch4 and the 
downstream transcription factor GATA3. Our findings showed that the levels of
Notch1 and Notch2 receptors were up-regulated in asthma group, accompanied by the
increased expression of GATA3. But the expression of Notch2 receptor was lower
than Notch1 receptor. Curcumin pretreatment improved the airway inflammatory
cells infiltration and reversed the increasing levels of Notch1/2 receptors and
GATA3. Notch3 receptor was not expressed in all of the four groups. Notch4
receptor protein and mRNA expression level in the four groups had no significant 
differences. The results of the present study suggested that Notch1 and Notch2
receptor, major Notch1 receptor, played an important role in the development of
allergic airway inflammation and the inhibition of Notch1-GATA3 signaling pathway
by curcumin can prevent the development and deterioration of the allergic airway 
inflammation. This may be a possible therapeutic option of allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC4174331
PMID: 24706026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 May 28;154(1):131-47. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.03.041. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

BuShenYiQi Formula strengthens Th1 response and suppresses Th2-Th17 responses in 
RSV-induced asthma exacerbated mice.

Wang J(1), Wu J(1), Kong L(1), Nurahmat M(2), Chen M(3), Luo Q(1), Li B(1), Wu
X(1), Dong J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12
Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai 200040, China; Institute of Integrated Traditional
Chinese and Western Medicine, Fudan University, 12 Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai
200040, China. (2)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan
University, 12 Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai 200040, China; Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 501 Haike Road, Shanghai 201203,
China; Xinjiang Uygur Medical College, 370 West Beijing Road, Hotan, Xinjiang
848000, China. (3)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan
University, 12 Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai 200040, China; Institute of
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Fudan University, 12 Middle 
Urumqi Road, Shanghai 200040, China; Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 501 Haike Road, Shanghai 201203, China.
(4)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12
Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai 200040, China; Institute of Integrated Traditional
Chinese and Western Medicine, Fudan University, 12 Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai
200040, China. Electronic address: jcdong2004@126.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The prevalence of allergic asthma has been
increased rapidly in recent years. About 20% of all these sufferers have
experienced asthma exacerbation. Although corticosteroids and ß-agonists therapy 
improves serious asthma symptoms, they can<U+05F3>t completely cure these allergic
diseases. BuShenYiQi Formula (BSYQF) has been widely used to treat bronchial
asthma and its exacerbation for decades in Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, 
China. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of BSYQF' anti-asthmatic effects haven<U+05F3>t been
fully elucidated. In this study, we evaluated the involvement of Th1, Th2 and
Th17 cells in the anti-asthmatic effects of BSYQF in Respiratory Syncytial Virus 
(RSV)-induced asthma exacerbated mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: BALB/c mice were challenged with ovalbumin (OVA), followed
by RSV infections for establishment of asthma exacerbated model. Airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR) was examined by direct airway resistance analysis.
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was assessed for inflammatory cell counts and
secreted levels of cytokines. Lung tissues were detected for inflammatory cell
infiltration and mucus hypersecretion. Subsequently, CD4(+)T cells and alveolar
macrophages were sorted and purified from mice lungs in different groups. CD4(+)T
cell subpopulations including the expression levels of important transcription
factors in T lymphocyte polarization were examined. In asthma exacerbation group,
the purified CD4(+)T cells and macrophages were co-cultured, and the changes of
co-cultured cells with BSYQF treatment were further analyzed in vitro.
RESULTS: BSYQF significantly attenuated airway hyperresponsiveness and inhibited 
inflammatory cell infiltration, especially for excessive infiltration of
eosinophils and neutrophils. Histopathological analysis showed that BSYQF could
suppress airway inflammation and RSV replication. The decreases of
antigen-specific IgE, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-17a and increases of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 were
observed in BALF, lung homogenate or serum after BSYQF treatment. We further
confirmed that BSYQF could down-regulate Th2-Th17 cell proportions with lower
expressions of GATA3, STAT6 and ROR<U+03B3>T, and up-regulate Th1 cell proportion with
higher expression of T-bet. And as a result of strengthened Th1-response,
activated macrophages were also observed by remarkable enhancement of signature
gene expressions and phagocytosis.
CONCLUSIONS: BSYQF can significantly attenuate RSV-induced asthma exacerbation.
These effects may be mediated at least partially by regulating the balance
between Th1 and Th2-Th17 responses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Allergy. 2014 May;69(5):658-67. doi: 10.1111/all.12396. Epub 2014 Mar 29.

Distinct regulation of tonsillar immune response in virus infection.

Jartti T(1), Palomares O, Waris M, Tastan O, Nieminen R, Puhakka T, Rückert B,
Aab A, Vuorinen T, Allander T, Vahlberg T, Ruuskanen O, Akdis M, Akdis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The relationships between tonsillar immune responses, and viral
infection and allergy are incompletely known.
OBJECTIVE: To study intratonsillar/nasopharyngeal virus detections and in vivo
expressions of T-cell- and innate immune response-specific cytokines,
transcription factors, and type I/II/III interferons in human tonsils.
METHODS: Palatine tonsil samples were obtained from 143 elective tonsillectomy
patients. Adenovirus, bocavirus-1, coronavirus, enteroviruses, influenza virus,
metapneumovirus, parainfluenza virus, rhinovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus
were detected using PCR. The mRNA expression levels of IFN-a, IFN-ß, IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-10, IL-13, IL-17, IL-28, IL-29, IL-37, TGF-ß, FOXP3, GATA3, RORC2, and Tbet
were directly analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Fifty percentage of subjects reported allergy, 59% had =1 nasopharyngeal
viruses, and 24% had =1 intratonsillar viruses. Tonsillar virus detection showed 
a strong negative association with age; especially rhinovirus or parainfluenza
virus detection showed positive association with IFN-<U+03B3> and Tbet expressions.
IL-37 expression was positively associated with atopic dermatitis, whereas IFN-a,
IL-13, IL-28, and Tbet expressions were negatively associated with allergic
diseases. Network analyses demonstrated strongly polarized clusters of immune
regulatory (IL-10, IL-17, TGF-ß, FOXP3, GATA3, RORC2, Tbet) and antiviral (IFN-a,
IFN-ß, IL-28, IL-29) genes. These two clusters became more distinctive in the
presence of viral infection or allergy. A negative correlation between antiviral 
cytokines and IL-10, IL-17, IL-37, FOXP3, and RORC2 was observed only in the
presence of viruses, and interestingly, IL-13 strongly correlated with antiviral 
cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Tonsillar cytokine expression is closely related to existing viral
infections, age, and allergic illnesses and shows distinct clusters between
antiviral and immune regulatory genes.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24684577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. BMC Biol. 2014 Mar 27;12:25. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-12-25.

LIM homeodomain transcription factor Isl1 directs normal pyloric development by
targeting Gata3.

Li Y, Pan J, Wei C, Chen J, Liu Y, Liu J, Zhang X, Evans SM, Cui Y(1), Cui S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
dryancui@yahoo.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Abnormalities in pyloric development or in contractile function of
the pylorus cause reflux of duodenal contents into the stomach and increase the
risk of gastric metaplasia and cancer. Abnormalities of the pyloric region are
also linked to congenital defects such as the relatively common neonatal
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, and primary duodenogastric reflux. Therefore,
understanding pyloric development is of great clinical relevance. Here, we
investigated the role of the LIM homeodomain transcription factor Isl1 in pyloric
development.
RESULTS: Examination of Isl1 expression in developing mouse stomach by
immunohistochemistry, whole mount in situ hybridization and real-time
quantitative PCR demonstrated that Isl1 is highly expressed in developing mouse
stomach, principally in the smooth muscle layer of the pylorus. Isl1 expression
was also examined by immunofluorescence in human hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
where the majority of smooth muscle cells were found to express Isl1. Isl1
function in embryonic stomach development was investigated utilizing a
tamoxifen-inducible Isl1 knockout mouse model. Isl1 deficiency led to nearly
complete absence of the pyloric outer longitudinal muscle layer at embryonic day 
18.5, which is consistent with Gata3 null mouse phenotype. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation, luciferase assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed that Isl1 ensures normal pyloric development by directly targeting
Gata3.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the Isl1-Gata3 transcription regulatory
axis is essential for normal pyloric development. These findings are highly
clinically relevant and may help to better understand pathways leading to pyloric
disease.

PMCID: PMC4021819
PMID: 24674670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Ann Surg. 2015 Apr;261(4):751-9. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000000653.

Association between gene expression biomarkers of immunosuppression and blood
transfusion in severely injured polytrauma patients.

Torrance HD(1), Brohi K, Pearse RM, Mein CA, Wozniak E, Prowle JR, Hinds CJ,
O'Dwyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Adult Critical Care Unit, Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust,
London Centre for Trauma Sciences, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London Centre
for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, William Harvey Research Institute,
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, Charterhouse Square, London §Genome Centre, John Vane Science Centre,
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, Charterhouse Square, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the hypothesis that blood transfusion contributes to an
immunosuppressed phenotype in severely injured patients.
BACKGROUND: Despite trauma patients using disproportionately large quantities of 
blood and blood products, the immunomodulatory effects of blood transfusion in
this group are inadequately described.
METHODS: A total of 112 ventilated polytrauma patients were recruited. Messenger 
RNA (mRNA) was extracted from PAXGene tubes collected within 2 hours of the
trauma, at 24 hours, and at 72 hours. T-helper cell subtype specific cytokines
and transcription factors were quantified using real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Median injury severity score was 29. Blood transfusion was administered 
to 27 (24%) patients before the 2-hour sampling point. Transfusion was associated
with a greater immediate rise in IL-10 (P = 0.003) and IL-27 (P = 0.04) mRNA
levels. Blood products were transfused in 72 (64%) patients within the first 24
hours. There was an association between transfusion at 24 hours and higher IL-10 
(P < 0.0001), lower Foxp3 (P = 0.01), GATA3 (P = 0.006), and ROR<U+03B3>t (P = 0.05)
mRNA levels at 24 hours. There were greater reductions in T-bet (P = 0.03) mRNA
levels and lesser increases in TNFa (P = 0.015) and IFN<U+03B3> (P = 0.035) at 24 hours 
in those transfused. Multiple regression models confirmed that the transfusion of
blood products was independently associated with altered patterns of gene
expression. Blood stream infections occur in 15 (20.8%) of those transfused in
the first 24 hours, compared with 1 patient (2.5%) not transfused (OR = 10.3
[1.3-81], P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: The primarily immunosuppressive inflammatory response to polytrauma 
may be exacerbated by the transfusion of blood products. Furthermore, transfusion
was associated with an increased susceptibility to nosocomial infections.

PMID: 24670848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Clin Lab. 2014;60(2):291-5.

Research on the roles of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in aplastic
anemia.

Chen H, Luo Z, Shen H, Ren C, Li Z, Tang J, Wang J, Wu T.

BACKGROUND: Aplastic anemia (AA) is a type of bone marrow hematopoietic system
disease. The immune mediated hematopoietic inhibition is recognized as the most
common pathogenesis of AA. However, the roles of the T-bet/GATA-3-mediated cell
immune disorder in aplastic anemia (AA) is still unknown.
METHODS: Experimental samples were obtained from 27 patients with AA, including
15 cases of severe AA (SAA) and 12 cases of immune mediated AA (MAA), and 25
healthy volunteers (control group). The secretory levels of IFN-gamma and IL-4
cytokines were determined by ELISA. The mRNA expression levels of transcription
factors T-bet, GATA-3, and FoxP3 were measured in PBMCs by RT-PCR. Th1, Th2, and 
T lymphocyte subsets were detected in peripheral blood by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Compared to the healthy control group, the expression of T-bet mRNA and 
the percentage of Th1-type cells in the AA group significantly increased (p <
0.01), while the expression of GATA-3 and FoxP3 mRNA and the percentage of
Th2-type cells decreased sharply (p < 0.05, p < 0.01). Compared with MAA, the
expression of T-bet mRNA and the percentage of Th1-type cells increased
significantly in SAA (p < 0.01); meanwhile, the expression of GATA-3 mRNA and the
proportion of Th2-type cells decreased noticeably (p < 0.05, p < 0.01).
Particularly, the percentage of CD3+ and CD3+CD8+ T cells in the AA group
increased (p < 0.05), while the percentage of CD3+CD4+, CD4+CD25+, and CD4+CD8+
cells decreased (p < 0.05, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal expression of the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3
contributes to the imbalance of Thl/Th2 lymphocytes associated with immune
dysfunction, leading to the development and progression of AA.

PMID: 24660543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Aug;22(5):408-13. doi: 10.1177/1066896914527608. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Whorled Urothelial Cell Carcinoma: A Neglected Variant.

Patriarca C(1), Comperat E(2), Bollito E(3), Ussia A(4), Scola G(4), Cavallero
A(4), Ferrari L(4), Giunta P(5), Conti G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera Sant'Anna, Como, Italy carlo.patriarca@hsacomo.org.
(2)Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. (3)Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria S. Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano, Turin, Italy. (4)Azienda
Ospedaliera Sant'Anna, Como, Italy. (5)Azienda Ospedaliera di Melegnano, Milan,
Italy.

Twelve cases of urothelial cell papillary carcinoma with a whorled pattern of
growth are described. This variant is reported with clinicopathological
correlations and immunohistochemical findings. All cases showed this peculiar and
distinctive curlicue histological pattern, ranging from 50% to 100% of the
neoplastic population. Despite the disordered/turbulent growth pattern, the
cytological grade was uniformly low. All the lesions were Ta staged and no
patient experienced progression after transurethral resection, while 2 showed
clinical recurrences. The immunophenotype (low p53, high p27, low Ki67, and high 
GATA3) of the cases contributes to define this rare variant as a low-grade tumor.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24651908  [PubMed - in process]


421. Biomed Rep. 2014 Jan;2(1):75-78. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Expression of CD39 mRNA is altered in the peripheral blood of patients with
allergic asthma.

Wang LL(1), Tang PH(2), Shi CG(1), Wan YH(1), Tang W(1), Hou XX(1), Pan NL(1),
Shi YB(1), Tao QL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Pulmonary Medicine, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University School of
Medicine, Qingdao, Shandong 266011.

The ectoenzyme CD39 hydrolyzes extracellular adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP),
which possesses pro-inflammatory properties. However, the role of CD39 in
allergic asthma has not been fully elucidated. A total of 18 patients with
persistent asthma who were allergic to house dust mites and 19 healthy volunteers
were enrolled in this study. The expression of CD39, GATA3, RAR-related orphan
receptor <U+03B3> (ROR-<U+03B3>t) and forkhead box P3 (FoxP3) mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was determined by SYBR-Green I quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR). The cytokines interleukin (IL)-4, IL-17A, transforming
growth factor ß (TGF-ß) and DP.sIgE were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay. Our data demonstrated that the expression of CD39 mRNA in PBMCs from
asthmatic patients was significantly lower compared to that in normal controls
[(1.49±0.59)×10(-3) vs. (2.17±0.77)×10(-3), respectively; P<0.01]. CD39 mRNA was 
negatively correlated with serum IL-4, IL-17A and GATA3 expression (r=-0.468,
P<0.05; r=-0.550, P<0.05; and r=-0.424, P<0.01, respectively) and positively
correlated with FoxP3 and TGF-ß expression (r=0.373, P<0.05; and r=0.425, P<0.05,
respectively). There was no obvious correlation between CD39 and ROR-<U+03B3>t
expression (r=-0.259, P=0.122). These data suggested that CD39 mRNA expression
was downregulated in allergic asthma, which was positively correlated with serum 
IL-4, IL-17A and GATA3 expression and negatively correlated with serum TGF-ß and 
FoxP3 expression, whereas there was no correlation with ROR-<U+03B3>t. Therefore, it was
hypothesized that CD39 may participate in the occurrence and progression of
allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC3917046
PMID: 24649072  [PubMed]


422. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(11):1929-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01659-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
17.

GATA2 regulates body water homeostasis through maintaining aquaporin 2 expression
in renal collecting ducts.

Yu L(1), Moriguchi T, Souma T, Takai J, Satoh H, Morito N, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA2 plays pivotal roles in early renal development,
but its distribution and physiological functions in adult kidney are largely
unknown. We examined the GATA2 expression pattern in the adult kidney by tracing 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) fluorescence in Gata2(GFP/+) mice that
recapitulate endogenous GATA2 expression and found a robust GFP expression
specifically in the renal medulla. Upon purification of the GFP-positive cells,
we found that collecting duct (CD)-specific markers, including aquaporin 2
(Aqp2), an important channel for water reabsorption from urine, were abundantly
expressed. To address the physiological function of GATA2 in the CD cells, we
generated renal tubular cell-specific Gata2-deficient mice (Gata2-CKO) by
crossing Gata2 floxed mice with inducible Pax8-Cre mice. We found that the
Gata2-CKO mice showed a significant decrease in Aqp2 expression. The Gata2-CKO
mice exhibited high 24-h urine volume and low urine osmolality, two important
signs of diabetes insipidus. We introduced biotin-tagged GATA2 into a mouse
CD-derived cell line and conducted chromatin pulldown assays, which revealed
direct GATA2 binding to conserved GATA motifs in the Aqp2 promoter region. A
luciferase reporter assay using an Aqp2 promoter-reporter showed that GATA2 trans
activates Aqp2 through the GATA motifs. These results demonstrate that GATA2
regulates the Aqp2 gene expression in CD cells and contributes to the maintenance
of the body water homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4019060
PMID: 24636993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Jul;134(1):228-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.01.027. 
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

GATA binding protein 3<U+207A> group 2 innate lymphoid cells are present in cord blood
and in higher proportions in male than in female neonates.

Forsberg A(1), Bengtsson M(2), Eringfält A(2), Ernerudh J(2), Mjösberg J(3),
Jenmalm MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Unit of Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address: anna.forsberg@liu.se. (2)Division of
Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Unit of
Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine, Center for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska University 
Hospital Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

PMID: 24636083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Wound Repair Regen. 2014 Mar-Apr;22(2):220-7. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12142.

Deregulation of epidermal stem cell niche contributes to pathogenesis of
nonhealing venous ulcers.

Stojadinovic O(1), Pastar I, Nusbaum AG, Vukelic S, Krzyzanowska A, Tomic-Canic
M.

Author information: 
(1)Wound Healing and Regenerative Medicine Research Program, Department of
Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL.

The epidermis is maintained by epidermal stem cells (ESCs) that reside in
distinct niches and contribute to homeostasis and wound closure. Keratinocytes at
the nonhealing edges of venous ulcers (VUs) are healing-incompetent,
hyperproliferative, and nonmigratory, suggesting deregulation of ESCs. To date,
genes which regulate ESC niches have been studied in mice only. Utilizing
microarray analysis of VU nonhealing edges, we identified changes in expression
of genes harboring regulation of ESCs and their fate. In a prospective clinical
study of 10 VUs, we confirmed suppression of the bone morphogenetic protein
receptor (BMPR) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) as well as inhibitors of
DNA-binding proteins 2 and 4 (ID2 and ID4). We also found decreased levels of
phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), nuclear presence of ß-catenin, 
and overexpression of its transcriptional target, c-myc, indicating activation of
the Wnt pathway. Additionally, we found down-regulation of leucine-rich repeats
and immunoglobulin-like domains protein 1 (LRIG1), a gene important for
maintaining ESCs in a quiescent state, and absence of keratin 15 (K15), a marker 
of the basal stem cell compartment suggesting local depletion of ESCs. Our study 
shows that loss of genes important for regulation of ESCs and their fate along
with activation of ß-catenin and c-myc in the VU may contribute to ESC
deprivation and a hyperproliferative, nonmigratory healing incapable wound edge.

© 2014 The Wound Healing Society.

PMCID: PMC4329920
PMID: 24635172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2915-23. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-536359. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Gene expression signatures delineate biological and prognostic subgroups in
peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Wright G, Wang C, Rosenwald A, Gascoyne RD, Weisenburger DD, Greiner 
TC, Smith L, Guo S, Wilcox RA, Teh BT, Lim ST, Tan SY, Rimsza LM, Jaffe ES, Campo
E, Martinez A, Delabie J, Braziel RM, Cook JR, Tubbs RR, Ott G, Geissinger E,
Gaulard P, Piccaluga PP, Pileri SA, Au WY, Nakamura S, Seto M, Berger F, de Leval
L, Connors JM, Armitage J, Vose J, Chan WC, Staudt LM; Lymphoma Leukemia
Molecular Profiling Project and the International Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma
Project.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2909-10.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) encompasses a heterogeneous group of neoplasms 
with generally poor clinical outcome. Currently 50% of PTCL cases are not
classifiable: PTCL-not otherwise specified (NOS). Gene-expression profiles on 372
PTCL cases were analyzed and robust molecular classifiers and oncogenic pathways 
that reflect the pathobiology of tumor cells and their microenvironment were
identified for major PTCL-entities, including 114 angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma (AITL), 31 anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive and 48 ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, 14 adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and 44
extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma that were further separated into NK-cell and
gdT-cell lymphomas. Thirty-seven percent of morphologically diagnosed PTCL-NOS
cases were reclassified into other specific subtypes by molecular signatures.
Reexamination, immunohistochemistry, and IDH2 mutation analysis in reclassified
cases supported the validity of the reclassification. Two major molecular
subgroups can be identified in the remaining PTCL-NOS cases characterized by high
expression of either GATA3 (33%; 40/121) or TBX21 (49%; 59/121). The GATA3
subgroup was significantly associated with poor overall survival (P = .01). High 
expression of cytotoxic gene-signature within the TBX21 subgroup also showed poor
clinical outcome (P = .05). In AITL, high expression of several signatures
associated with the tumor microenvironment was significantly associated with
outcome. A combined prognostic score was predictive of survival in an independent
cohort (P = .004).

PMCID: PMC4014836
PMID: 24632715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Eur Urol. 2014 Oct;66(4):623-7. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.02.054. Epub 2014 Mar 
4.

Seminal vesicle intraepithelial neoplasia versus basal cell hyperplasia in a
seminal vesicle.

Montironi R(1), Lopez-Beltran A(2), Cheng L(3), Galosi AB(4), Montorsi F(5),
Scarpelli M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pathological Anatomy, Polytechnic University of the Marche Region, 
School of Medicine, United Hospitals, Ancona, Italy. Electronic address:
r.montironi@univpm.it. (2)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery,
Faculty of Medicine, Cordoba, Spain; Fundação Champalimaud, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (4)Urology Division, Murri Hospital, Fermo,
Italy. (5)Department of Urology, University Vita-Salute, Scientific Institute H
San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. (6)Section of Pathological Anatomy, Polytechnic
University of the Marche Region, School of Medicine, United Hospitals, Ancona,
Italy.

In the examination of >3000 radical prostatectomy specimens and their seminal
vesicles (SVs), we came across a unique case of an intraepithelial abnormality in
preexisting ducts and acini in the left SV of a 73-yr-old patient with prostatic 
adenocarcinoma. At low magnification, the epithelial lining was thicker than the 
surrounding normal ducts with obliteration of the acinar lumen. At high
magnification, there were varying degrees of cell stratification.
Prostate-specific antigen, prostate-specific acid phosphatase, prostate-specific 
membrane antigen, prostein (P501S), alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase, and GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3) were negative; p63, 34betaE12, cytokeratin 5/6, and p53
were positive in cells in basal and suprabasal positions, whereas CA-125 was
expressed in the luminal cells. The case shows morphologic and
immunohistochemical features similar to those of basal cell hyperplasia of the
prostate and is different from the early neoplastic epithelial changes of the SV 
in the transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate model (ie, SV intraepithelial
neoplasia). To the best of our knowledge, there are no previous reports of such a
change in a human SV. The clinical significance of this lesion is not known and
is overshadowed by the presence of prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2014 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24631410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Immunity. 2014 Mar 20;40(3):378-88. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.01.012. Epub 2014 
Mar 13.

The transcription factor GATA3 is critical for the development of all
IL-7Ra-expressing innate lymphoid cells.

Yagi R(1), Zhong C(1), Northrup DL(2), Yu F(1), Bouladoux N(3), Spencer S(3), Hu 
G(2), Barron L(3), Sharma S(1), Nakayama T(4), Belkaid Y(3), Zhao K(2), Zhu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Systems
Biology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Immunology,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are critical in innate immune responses to pathogens
and lymphoid organ development. Similar to CD4(+) T helper (Th) cell subsets, ILC
subsets positive for interleukin-7 receptor a (IL-7Ra) produce distinct sets of
effector cytokines. However, the molecular control of IL-7Ra(+) ILC development
and maintenance is unclear. Here, we report that GATA3 was indispensable for the 
development of all IL-7Ra(+) ILC subsets and T cells but was not required for the
development of classical natural killer cells. Conditionally Gata3-deficient mice
had no lymph nodes and were susceptible to Citrobactor rodentium infection. After
the ILCs had fully developed, GATA3 remained important for the maintenance and
functions of ILC2s. Genome-wide gene expression analyses indicated that GATA3
regulated a similar set of cytokines and receptors in Th2 cells and ILC2s, but
not in ILC3s. Thus, GATA3 plays parallel roles in regulating the development and 
functions of CD4(+) T cells and IL-7Ra(+) ILCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4026797
PMID: 24631153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Otol Neurotol. 2014 Apr;35(4):577-81. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000238.

Auditory and vestibular phenotypes associated with GATA3 mutation.

Chien WW(1), Leiding JW, Hsu AP, Zalewski C, King K, Holland SM, Brewer C.

Author information: 
(1)*National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, and
National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda; and Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: To report the auditory and vestibular phenotypes of patients with
GATA3 mutation.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series of 6 patients.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: All patients had the classic triad of GATA3 deficiency:
hypoparathyroidism, hearing loss, and renal dysplasia. Patients (29-60 yr old;
mean age, 42.5 yr; 3 male and 3 female subjects) were confirmed to have
heterozygous mutations involving GATA3 by Sanger sequencing.
INTERVENTIONS: Behavioral audiometry, distortion product otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs), and auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) were used to assess hearing.
Rotational vestibular testing was used to assess vestibular function.
RESULTS: All patients with GATA3 mutation presented with hearing loss during
childhood. The mean 3-frequency (0.5/1/2 kHz) pure tone average was 67 dB HL
(range, 50-83 dB HL; SD, 9.3). The average speech discrimination score was 73%
(range, 36%-100%; SD, 15.9). DPOAEs were absent in all patients. ABRs were
remarkably robust and provided no evidence of retrocochlear dysfunction. Some
patients complained of dizziness, but rotary chair testing was normal across
participants for whom testing occurred.
CONCLUSION: Patients with GATA3 mutation present with early-onset sensorineural
hearing loss (SNHL). DPOAEs were absent, supporting outer hair cell dysfunction, 
whereas ABRs were present and robust. Rotational vestibular testing revealed no
evidence of abnormal horizontal semicircular canal function.

PMCID: PMC4108448
PMID: 24622013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e88991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088991. eCollection
2014.

Association of autoimmune Addison's disease with alleles of STAT4 and GATA3 in
European cohorts.

Mitchell AL(1), Macarthur KD(1), Gan EH(1), Baggott LE(1), Wolff AS(2),
Skinningsrud B(3), Platt H(4), Short A(4), Lobell A(5), Kämpe O(5), Bensing S(6),
Betterle C(7), Kasperlik-Zaluska A(8), Zurawek M(9), Fichna M(9), Kockum I(10),
Nordling Eriksson G(11), Ekwall O(12), Wahlberg J(13), Dahlqvist P(14), Hulting
AL(15), Penna-Martinez M(16), Meyer G(16), Kahles H(16), Badenhoop K(16), Hahner 
S(17), Quinkler M(18), Falorni A(19), Phipps-Green A(20), Merriman TR(20), Ollier
W(4), Cordell HJ(1), Undlien D(3), Czarnocka B(21), Husebye E(22), Pearce SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)CIGMR, Institute of Population Health,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (5)Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (6)Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Department of Medicine, University of Padua School of
Medicine, Padua, Italy. (8)Department of Endocrinology, Center for Postgraduate
Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland. (9)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy
of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (10)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience and Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (12)The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (13)Department of Medical and Health Sciences,
Division of Endocrinology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. (14)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (15)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Department Medicine (Division Endocrinology), University Hospital Frankfurt, 
Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany. (17)University Hospital Wuerzburg
(Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetology), Wuerzburg, Germany.
(18)Clinical Endocrinology, Charité Campus Mitte, Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (19)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (20)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago,
Otago, New Zealand. (21)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center 
for Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland. (22)Department of Clinical
Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of Medicine, Haukeland 
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e102428.

BACKGROUND: Gene variants known to contribute to Autoimmune Addison's disease
(AAD) susceptibility include those at the MHC, MICA, CIITA, CTLA4, PTPN22,
CYP27B1, NLRP-1 and CD274 loci. The majority of the genetic component to disease 
susceptibility has yet to be accounted for.
AIM: To investigate the role of 19 candidate genes in AAD susceptibility in six
European case-control cohorts.
METHODS: A sequential association study design was employed with genotyping using
Sequenom iPlex technology. In phase one, 85 SNPs in 19 genes were genotyped in UK
and Norwegian AAD cohorts (691 AAD, 715 controls). In phase two, 21 SNPs in 11
genes were genotyped in German, Swedish, Italian and Polish cohorts (1264 AAD,
1221 controls). In phase three, to explore association of GATA3 polymorphisms
with AAD and to determine if this association extended to other autoimmune
conditions, 15 SNPs in GATA3 were studied in UK and Norwegian AAD cohorts, 1195
type 1 diabetes patients from Norway, 650 rheumatoid arthritis patients from New 
Zealand and in 283 UK Graves' disease patients. Meta-analysis was used to compare
genotype frequencies between the participating centres, allowing for
heterogeneity.
RESULTS: We report significant association with alleles of two STAT4 markers in
AAD cohorts (rs4274624: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00016; rs10931481: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0007). In addition,
nominal association of AAD with alleles at GATA3 was found in 3 patient cohorts
and supported by meta-analysis. Association of AAD with CYP27B1 alleles was also 
confirmed, which replicates previous published data. Finally, nominal association
was found at SNPs in both the NF-<U+03BA>B1 and IL23A genes in the UK and Italian
cohorts respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the STAT4 gene, previously associated with other
autoimmune conditions, confer susceptibility to AAD. Additionally, we report
association of GATA3 variants with AAD: this adds to the recent report of
association of GATA3 variants with rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3948621
PMID: 24614117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Histol Histopathol. 2014 Oct;29(10):1295-303. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Adenocarcinoma of the paraurethral glands: a case report.

Massari F(1), Ciccarese C(2), Modena A(2), Maines F(2), Segala D(3), Luchini
C(3), Marcolini L(3), Cavicchioli F(4), Cavalleri S(4), Bria E(2), Brunelli M(3),
Martignoni G(3), Artibani W(4), Tortora G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata (A.O.U.I.),
University of Verona, Verona, Italy. fmassari79@gmail.com. (2)Medical Oncology,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata (A.O.U.I.), University of Verona,
Verona, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Integrata (A.O.U.I.), University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(4)Urology Clinic, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata (A.O.U.I.),
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

Adenocarcinoma of the paraurethral glands represents a very rare neoplasm of the 
urinary tract. Due to the rarity of this disease, there is no standard
therapeutic approach. We report a case of adenocarcinoma of the paraurethral
glands in a 56-year-old woman, presenting with abnormal serous vaginal
discharges. The radiologic examination revealed a 5-cm mass around the urethra,
which underwent surgical resection. After surgical resection, the histology
revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, probably arising from the
paraurethral glands. One month later, a pelvic recurrent mass was radiologically 
diagnosed; consequently, an anterior pelvic exenteration with lymph node
dissection was performed. Histological examination revealed a moderately
differentiated adenocarcinoma, with glandular and micropapillary architecture,
with multiple lymph node metastases. The absence of modifications such as
urethritis cystic glandularis on the urethral mucosa, as well as the lack of a
lesion in situ, associated with the immunohistochemical expression of PAX8 and
negativity for GATA3 and S100p, suggested that the adenocarcinoma originated from
the paraurethral glands rather than from the urethral mucosa. Post-surgery CT
scans revealed no evidence of metastatic disease. The patient received 6 courses 
of adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel. One year after the
pelvic exenteration, because of inguinal lymph node progression, an inguinal
lymphadenectomy was performed. Four months later, a TC-PET revealed a
multidistrectual lymph node and a lung micronodule disease progression. Invasive 
micropapillary carcinomas have been characterized as a rare distinctive variant
of carcinomas in several anatomic sites and are distinguished by a marked
tendency to lymphovascular invasion, justifying the association with high-stage
disease and poor prognosis. In the present case, both the poor prognosis
connected with micropapillary structure and the lymph node involvement,
encouraged adjuvant cisplatinum-based chemotherapy.

PMID: 24604416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(3):e91097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091097. eCollection 
2014.

Expression of genes related to anti-inflammatory pathways are modified among
farmers' children.

Frei R(1), Roduit C(2), Bieli C(3), Loeliger S(2), Waser M(4), Scheynius A(5),
van Hage M(6), Pershagen G(7), Doekes G(8), Riedler J(9), von Mutius E(10),
Sennhauser F(3), Akdis CA(1), Braun-Fahrländer C(4), Lauener RP(11); as part of
the PARSIFAL study team.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), University of Zurich,
Davos, Switzerland; Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and Education,
Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and
Education, Zurich, Switzerland; Children's Hospital, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Children's Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (4)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland;
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (5)Translational Immunology Unit,
Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute and University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. (6)Clinical Immunology and Allergy Unit, Department of
Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute and University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
(7)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (9)Children's Hospital Schwarzach, Schwarzach, Austria. (10)Dr. von 
Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich,
Germany. (11)Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and Education, Zurich,
Switzerland; Kantonsspital St.Gallen, St.Gallen, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The hygiene hypothesis states that children exposed to higher loads
of microbes such as farmers' children suffer less from allergies later in life.
Several immunological mechanisms underpinning the hygiene hypothesis have been
proposed such as a shift in T helper cell balance, T regulatory cell activity, or
immune regulatory mechanisms induced by the innate immunity.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the proposed immunological mechanisms for the
hygiene hypotheses are found in farmers' children.
METHODS: We assessed gene expression levels of 64 essential markers of the innate
and adaptive immunity by quantitative real-time PCR in white blood cells in 316
Swiss children of the PARSIFAL study to compare farmers' to non-farmers'
expressions and to associate them to the prevalence of asthma and
rhinoconjunctivitis, total and allergen-specific IgE in serum, and expression of 
Ce germ-line transcripts.
RESULTS: We found enhanced expression of genes of the innate immunity such as
IRAK-4 and RIPK1 and enhanced expression of regulatory molecules such as IL-10,
TGF-ß, SOCS4, and IRAK-2 in farmers' children. Furthermore, farmers' children
expressed less of the TH1 associated cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> while TH2 associated
transcription factor GATA3 was enhanced. No significant associations between the 
assessed immunological markers and allergic diseases or sensitization to
allergens were observed.
CONCLUSION: Farmers' children express multiple increased innate immune response
and immune regulatory molecules, which may contribute to the mechanisms of action
of the hygiene hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC3946278
PMID: 24603716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Anticancer Res. 2014 Mar;34(3):1307-19.

Cell identity disruption in breast cancer precursors.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P, Oriana S, Biganzoli E, Ambrogi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Community Health Sciences, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, 20133, Milan,
Italy. danila.coradini@yahoo.it.

BACKGROUND: Mammary epithelial cell identity depends on a set of genes
epigenetically-regulated by maintenance proteins, the best-characterized of which
belong to the Trithorax and Polycomb groups. Perturbations in expression of these
proteins may disrupt cell identity and trigger tumor initiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The pattern of expression of a panel of genes involved in 
control of cell identity and mammary gland remodeling was investigated in two
precancerous lesions, atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) and compared to the corresponding histologically normal tissue.
RESULTS: ADH and DCIS showed a close association in overexpression of Polycomb
complex components, silencing of Homeobox A (HOXA) cluster gene, and
overexpression of the genes involved in estrogen signaling, specifically,
forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) pioneer factors, and
estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1).
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that disruption of epigenetic
control is associated with loss of cell identity and acquisition of a
constitutive estrogen-dependent terminally-differentiated luminal phenotype.

PMID: 24596378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Urol. 2014 Sep;192(3):981-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.02.095. Epub 2014 Mar 1.

An intricate network of conserved DNA upstream motifs and associated
transcription factors regulate the expression of uromodulin gene.

Srivastava R(1), Micanovic R(2), El-Achkar TM(3), Janga SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biohealth Informatics, School of Informatics and Computing,
Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
Electronic address: telachka@iu.edu. (4)Department of Biohealth Informatics,
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Medical and Molecular
Genetics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address:
scjanga@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: Uromodulin is a kidney specific glycoprotein whose expression can
modulate kidney homeostasis. However, the set of sequence specific transcription 
factors that regulate the uromodulin gene UMOD and their upstream binding
locations are not well characterized. We built a high resolution map of its
transcriptional regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We applied in silico phylogenetic footprinting on the
upstream regulatory regions of a diverse set of human UMOD orthologs to identify 
conserved binding motifs and corresponding position specific weight matrices. We 
further analyzed the predicted binding motifs by motif comparison, which
identified transcription factors likely to bind these discovered motifs.
Predicted transcription factors were then integrated with experimentally known
protein-protein interactions available from public databases and tissue specific 
expression resources to delineate important regulators controlling UMOD
expression.
RESULTS: Analysis allowed the identification of a reliable set of binding motifs 
in the upstream regulatory regions of UMOD to build a high confidence compendium 
of transcription factors that could bind these motifs, such as GATA3, HNF1B, SP1,
SMAD3, RUNX2 and KLF4. ENCODE deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity sites in the
UMOD upstream region of the mouse kidney confirmed that some of these binding
motifs were open to binding by predicted transcription factors. The transcription
factor-transcription factor network revealed several highly connected
transcription factors, such as SP1, SP3, TP53, POU2F1, RARB, RARA and RXRA, as
well as the likely protein complexes formed between them. Expression levels of
these transcription factors in the kidney suggest their central role in
controlling UMOD expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings will form a map for understanding the regulation
of uromodulin expression in health and disease.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24594405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Diagn Cytopathol. 2014 Sep;42(9):809-15. doi: 10.1002/dc.23131. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

GATA3 expression in metastatic urothelial carcinoma in fine needle aspiration
cell blocks: a review of 25 cases.

Siddiqui MT(1), Seydafkan S, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University Hospital,
Atlanta, Georgia.

GATA binding protein 3 is a zinc finger transcription factor with high affinity
for urothelial tissue and is a promising immunohistochemical marker in detection 
of urothelial carcinomas (UC). We studied its usefulness in metastatic high-grade
UC. This study was performed on cell blocks (CB) of fine needle aspirates from 25
cases of metastatic high-grade UC in patients with previously resected high-grade
UC. Immunohistochemical staining for GATA3, thrombomodulin, uroplakin,
cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin 20 was performed. Twenty-three of 25 cases of
metastatic UC expressed GATA3 (92%); positive staining for cytokeratin 7 was
present in 23 of 25 cases (92%), 20 of 25 (80%) stained for thrombomodulin, and
13 of 25 (52%) stained for cytokeratin 20. No case expressed uroplakin. Five
hundred forty-seven non-urothelial carcinomas, including breast ductal carcinoma 
(77), hepatocellular carcinoma (100), colonic adenocarcinoma (81), pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (28), gastric adenocarcinoma (31), endometrial carcinoma (27),
ovarian serous carcinoma (27), lung adenocarcinoma (27), lung squamous cell
carcinoma (26), malignant melanoma (27), renal cell carcinoma (48), and prostatic
adenocarcinoma (48) in tissue microarrays were also analyzed and were GATA3
negative except for 35 of 77 (45.5%) of GATA3 positive breast ductal carcinoma.
GATA3 has high sensitivity and specificity for detection of metastatic UC and
thus may play an important role in diagnosing metastatic UC in CB samples.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24578300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jun;44(6):1835-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344098. Epub 2014 Mar 
25.

A unique DNA methylation signature defines a population of IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4
double-positive T cells during helminth infection.

Deaton AM(1), Cook PC, De Sousa D, Phythian-Adams AT, Bird A, MacDonald AS.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.

Th1 and Th2 cell fates are traditionally viewed as mutually exclusive, but recent
work suggests that these lineages may be more plastic than previously thought.
When isolating splenic CD4(+) T cells from mice infected with the parasitic
helminth Schistosoma mansoni, we observed a defined population of IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4
double-positive cells. These IFN-<U+03B3>(+) IL-4(+) cells showed differences in DNA
methylation at the Ifng and Il4 loci when compared with IFN-<U+03B3>(+) IL-4(-) (Th1)
and IFN-<U+03B3>(-) IL-4(+) (Th2) cells, demonstrating that they represent a distinct
effector cell population. IFN-<U+03B3>(+) IL-4(+) cells also displayed a discrete DNA
methylation pattern at a CpG island within the body of the Gata3 gene, which
encodes the master regulator of Th2 identity. DNA methylation at this region
correlated with decreased Gata3 levels, suggesting a possible role in controlling
Gata3 expression. These data provide important insight into the molecular
mechanisms behind the co-existence of Th1 and Th2 characteristics.

© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4231227
PMID: 24578067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell Signal. 2014 Jun;26(6):1155-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.02.003. Epub
2014 Feb 18.

Mature miR-183, negatively regulated by transcription factor GATA3, promotes
3T3-L1 adipogenesis through inhibition of the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway by targeting LRP6.

Chen C(1), Xiang H(2), Peng YL(3), Peng J(4), Jiang SW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Agricultural Ministry and Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry
of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, PR China; Hunan Institute of Animal & Veterinary
Science, Changsha 410131, PR China. (2)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and
Breeding of Agricultural Ministry and Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China.
(3)Hunan Institute of Animal & Veterinary Science, Changsha 410131, PR China.
(4)Department of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China. Electronic 
address: pjhzau@163.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of
Agricultural Ministry and Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China. Electronic 
address: jswhzau@163.com.

Differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes and the formation of the
subsequent adipose tissue are critical for mammalian growth and development. The 
molecular mechanism relating to preadipocyte differentiation and adipogenesis
from the perspective of miRNAs is not yet completely understood. Here we
investigated whether miR-183 functioned in the differentiation process. Both
gain-of-function and loss-of-function assays demonstrated that miR-183 positively
regulated 3T3-L1 differentiation by enhancing the expression of adipogenic marker
genes such as CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), adiponectin and fatty acid synthase
(FAS), as well as the triglyceride content and accumulation of lipid droplets.
Meanwhile, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) was known to
impair the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and thereafter reduce c-myc 
and nuclear ß-catenin protein. We showed that the inhibition of LRP6 by siRNA
promoted 3T3-L1 adipogenic differentiation and adipogenesis. Further analysis
showed that mouse miR-183 gene had its own transcription unit containing CpG
islands, transcription start site (TSS), coding sequence (CDS) and polyA signal
within the flanking sequences 2500 nt upstream and downstream of mouse miR-183 in
genome. The core promoter of miR-183 gene was identified and transcription factor
GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3) significantly inhibited the expression of mature
miR-183 by binding to its core promoter in vivo, as indicated by the chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. These results suggest that miR-183, though
negatively regulated by transcription factor GATA3, enhances 3T3-L1 preadipocyte 
differentiation and adipogenesis through the inhibition of the canonical
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by targeting LRP6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24556500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Apr;144(2):249-61. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-2867-0. 
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Differential expression of progesterone receptor, FOXA1, GATA3, and p53 between
pre- and postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Hosoda M(1), Yamamoto M, Nakano K, Hatanaka KC, Takakuwa E, Hatanaka Y, Matsuno
Y, Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Hokkaido University Hospital, Kita 14 Nishi 5,
Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8648, Japan.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is essential for estrogen-dependent growth, and its level 
of expression is considered a crucial determinant of response to endocrine
therapy and prognosis in ER-positive breast cancer. On the other hand, the
clinical role of progesterone receptor (PgR) in ER-positive breast cancer remains
controversial, although testing of PgR by immunohistochemistry (IHC) has become
routine. Recent studies indicated that plasma estradiol levels were related to
the expression levels of estrogen-responsive genes in ER-positive breast cancer
tissues in both pre- and postmenopausal women. In this study, we analyzed the
expression levels of estrogen-responsive genes (PgR and TFF1), a
progesterone-responsive gene (RANKL), ER-related genes (FOXA1 and GATA3), HER2,
Ki67 and p53 in ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer tissues by IHC.
Correlations between the expression levels of these molecular markers and
clinicopathological factors, including prognosis, were compared between pre- and 
postmenopausal women. Serum levels of estrone, estradiol, progesterone, and
testosterone were also measured. Expression levels of PgR, TFF1, RANKL, and GATA3
were significantly higher in premenopausal women than in postmenopausal women.
Serum estradiol levels were positively correlated with Ki67 labeling index (LI)
in premenopausal women, but not in postmenopausal women. High expression of FOXA1
and GATA3 was significantly associated with improved disease-free survival in
premenopausal women, but not in postmenopausal women, whereas high expression of 
PgR and low expression of p53 were significantly correlated with the improved
disease-free survival in postmenopausal women, but not in premenopausal women.
Moreover, the best cutoff points of Ki67 LI for disease-free survival were 30 %
for premenopausal women and 14 % for postmenopausal women. Expression levels of
ER, TFF1, and RANKL were not associated with the disease-free survival in either 
pre- or postmenopausal women. Our results suggest that the mechanisms of
development and estrogen-dependent growth of ER-positive breast cancer might
differ according to menopausal status.

PMID: 24549642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1523-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3030. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

GATA5 CpG island hypermethylation is an independent predictor for poor clinical
outcome in renal cell carcinoma.

Peters I(1), Gebauer K(1), Dubrowinskaja N(1), Atschekzei F(1), Kramer MW(1),
Hennenlotter J(2), Tezval H(1), Abbas M(3), Scherer R(4), Merseburger AS(1),
Stenzl A(2), Kuczyk MA(1), Serth J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of Urology, Eberhard-Karls University, D-72076
Tuebingen, Germany. (3)Department of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany. (4)Department of Biometry, Hannover Medical School, D-30625
Hannover, Germany.

Transcriptional inactivation and CpG island (CGI) methylation of GATA
transcription factor family members GATA3 and GATA5 have been reported for a few 
types of human cancer. Whether high-density CGI methylation of GATA3 or GATA5 is 
associated with the clinical course of patients with renal cell cancer (RCC) has 
not been clarified. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR assays were carried out
to analyze 25 tumor cell lines including 6 RCC lines and 119 RCC and 87 adjacent 
normal tissues for the presence of densely methylated sequences. Methylation
values were statistically compared with clinicopathological and recurrence-free
survival (RFS) data for patients. Comparison of GATA3 and GATA5 methylation in
different tumor cell lines revealed a marker-specific methylation characteristic 
with high and frequent signals for both methylation marks in RCC lines. GATA3 and
GATA5 CGI relative methylation levels were found to be strongly associated with
the state of metastasis (P=0.003 and P<0.001, respectively) and advanced disease 
(P=0.024 and P<0.001, respectively). Moreover, an independent decrease in RFS in 
Cox proportional hazard analysis was found for tumors exhibiting high GATA5
methylation (P<0.001, hazard ratio, 19.3; 95% confidence interval, 4.58-81.6).
Epigenetic alterations in GATA family members may be associated with aggressive
tumor phenotypes in RCC, and in the case of GATA5, may serve as a new independent
molecular marker for aggressiveness and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3975988
PMID: 24549248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Apr;9(4):1171-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1947. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Fusion protein of tapasin and hepatitis B core antigen 18-27 enhances T helper
cell type 1/2 cytokine ratio and antiviral immunity by inhibiting suppressors of 
cytokine signaling family members 1/3 in hepatitis B virus transgenic mice.

Tang Y(1), Chen X(1), Zhang Y(1), Tang Z(1), Zhuo M(1), Li D(1), Wang P(1), Zang 
G(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China.

Persistent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is characterized by a weak adaptive 
immune response, which is considered to be due to an imbalance of T helper cell
types 1 and 2 (Th1/Th2). Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family members,
particularly SOCS1 and SOCS3, have been demonstrated to be important in the
regulation of T cell differentiation. Previous studies by our group showed that
the expressed and purified fusion protein of cytoplasmic transduction peptide
(CTP) and HBV core antigen 18-27 (HBcAg18-27)-tapasin was able to enter the
cytoplasm of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs), promoting the
maturation of BMDCs and efficiently enhancing T cell immune responses in vitro.
In the present study, HBcAg-specific immune responses induced by
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin in HBV were assessed in transgenic mice, and SOCS1 and
SOCS3 were identified as negative regulators of this response. The Th1/Th2
cytokine ratio was analyzed by ELISA. The expression of T cell-specific T-box
transcription factor (T-bet) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3), SOCS1 and SOCS3
were detected by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western
blot analysis. The results demonstrated that CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin significantly
increased the Th1/Th2 cytokine ratio in HBV transgenic mice.
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin immunization more efficiently suppressed the expression of
serum hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), HBV DNA as well as liver HBsAg and
HBcAg in HBV transgenic mice. Furthermore, CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin promotes T-bet 
but reduces GATA-3 expression. In addition, the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 was
significantly downregulated in the CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin group compared with the
control groups. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin enhanced the Th1/Th2 cytokine ratio and antiviral immunity
by suppressing SOCS1/3 in HBV transgenic mice.

PMID: 24535102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jun;95(6):931-40. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0413209. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Flagellin and LPS each restores rat lymphocyte populations after colorectal
irradiation.

Lacave-Lapalun JV(1), Benderitter M(1), Linard C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiopathology and Experimental Therapies, Institute for
Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(2)Laboratory of Radiopathology and Experimental Therapies, Institute for
Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France
christine.linard@irsn.fr.

Radiation-induced gastrointestinal toxicity, including its shift of the immune
balance, remains a major limitation to delivering tumoricidal doses of abdominal 
radiation therapy. This study evaluates the effect on the colon's innate and
adaptive immune responses to moderate irradiation doses and the therapeutic
possibilities of maintaining immune homeostasis. We investigated whether
administration of the TLR4 agonist LPS or of the TLR5 agonist flagellin, 3 days
after a single 20-Gy colorectal irradiation, modified recruitment of neutrophils,
NK cells, or CD4<U+207A> or CD8<U+207A> T cells, 7 days postirradiation. Flow cytometric
analysis showed that LPS and flagellin reduced irradiation-induced neutrophil
infiltration and normalized NK frequency. LPS normalized the CD4<U+207A> population and 
enhanced the CD8<U+207A> population, whereas flagellin maintained the radiation-induced 
elevation in the frequencies of both. Irradiation also modified TLR4 and TLR5
expression on the surface of both populations, but LPS and flagellin each
subsequently normalized them. LPS and flagellin were strong inducers of Th1
cytokines (IL-12p35, IL-12p40, and IFN-<U+03B3>) and thus, contributed to a shift from
the Th2 polarization induced by irradiation toward a Th1 polarization, confirmed 
by an increase of the T-bet:GATA3 ratio, which assesses the Th1 or Th2 status in 
mixed cell populations. LPS and flagellin treatment resulted in overexpression of
FoxP3, IL-2Ra (CD25), IL-2, and OX40, all expressed specifically and involved in 
high levels of Treg cell expansion. We observed no variation in Treg
function-related expression of IL-10 or CTLA-4. These data suggest that the use
of TLR ligands limits the effects of irradiation on innate and adaptive immunity.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24532644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Case Rep Nephrol. 2013;2013:261907. doi: 10.1155/2013/261907. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Seizure, deafness, and renal failure: a case of barakat syndrome.

Maleki N(1), Bashardoust B(1), Iranparvar Alamdari M(1), Tavosi Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Ardabil University of
Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Shohadaye
Khalije Fars Hospital, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran.

Barakat syndrome (also known as HDR syndrome) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal disease
caused by mutation of the GATA3 gene located at chromosome 10p15. The exact
prevalence of this disorder is not known but is very rare, with only about a
dozen cases reported in the literature. Here, we report a case of 58-year-old man
from Ardabil who presented with seizure due to hypocalcemia. Further history
revealed bilateral deafness. Audiogram confirmed sensorineural hearing loss of
both sides. His laboratory data were consistent with hypoparathyroidism and renal
failure. He was diagnosed to have Barakat syndrome based on his clinical and
laboratory data. In conclusion, we need to be aware of rare inherited conditions 
in a patient with abnormal physical and laboratory findings even though their
initial presentation was seizure and hypocalcemia.

PMCID: PMC3914172
PMID: 24527244  [PubMed]


443. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Mar;14(3):133. doi: 10.1038/nri3629. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Innate lymphoid cells: on the origin of ILCs.

Bordon Y.

PMID: 24525836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):288-90. doi: 10.1111/his.12388. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

GATA3 shows differential immunohistochemical expression across thyroid and
parathyroid lesions.

Betts G(1), Beckett E, Nonaka D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,
UK.

PMID: 24512009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nature. 2014 Apr 17;508(7496):397-401. doi: 10.1038/nature13047. Epub 2014 Feb 9.

A committed precursor to innate lymphoid cells.

Constantinides MG(1), McDonald BD(1), Verhoef PA(1), Bendelac A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, Department of Pathology, The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) specialize in the rapid secretion of polarized sets 
of cytokines and chemokines to combat infection and promote tissue repair at
mucosal barriers. Their diversity and similarities with previously characterized 
natural killer (NK) cells and lymphoid tissue inducers (LTi) have prompted a
provisional classification of all innate lymphocytes into groups 1, 2 and 3
solely on the basis of cytokine properties, but their developmental pathways and 
lineage relationships remain elusive. Here we identify and characterize a novel
subset of lymphoid precursors in mouse fetal liver and adult bone marrow that
transiently express high amounts of PLZF, a transcription factor previously
associated with NK T cell development, by using lineage tracing and transfer
studies. PLZF(high) cells were committed ILC progenitors with multiple ILC1, ILC2
and ILC3 potential at the clonal level. They excluded classical LTi and NK cells,
but included a peculiar subset of NK1.1(+)DX5(-) 'NK-like' cells residing in the 
liver. Deletion of PLZF markedly altered the development of several ILC subsets, 
but not LTi or NK cells. PLZF(high) precursors also expressed high amounts of ID2
and GATA3, as well as TOX, a known regulator of PLZF-independent NK and LTi
lineages. These findings establish novel lineage relationships between ILC, NK
and LTi cells, and identify the common precursor to ILCs, termed ILCP. They also 
reveal the broad, defining role of PLZF in the differentiation of innate
lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC4003507
PMID: 24509713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Apr;19(2):399-404. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.01.022.
Epub 2014 Feb 4.

Effect of Bavachinin and its derivatives on T cell differentiation.

Chen X(1), Shen Y(1), Liang Q(1), Flavell R(2), Hong Z(3), Yin Z(3), Wang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, Ministry of Education,
College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin
300457, China. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA. (3)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology,
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Bavachinin, which can be isolated from the Chinese herb Fructus Psoraleae, has
the potential as a potent anti-asthma drug. However, the extremely low water
solubility of Bavachinin limits its application. In this study, two new
derivatives of Bavachinin, i.e., compounds A and B, whose water solubility is
better than that of Bavachinin, were synthesized via biotransformation. A
comparative investigation was then performed on the effects of these two new
derivatives, along with Bavachinin, on T cell differentiation. The results showed
that they have different effects. Bavachinin and compound B inhibited green
fluorescent protein (GFP) production from the T cells of IL-4-GFP-enhanced
transcript (4GET) mice, whereas compound A did not. The effect was mainly
attributed to the inhibition of GATA-3 protein production. Bavachinin and
compound B can inhibit the production of GATA-3 mRNA, but they showed different
effects on the production of T-bet mRNA. Compound B increased the production of
T-bet mRNA, whereas Bavachinin did not. The results will be very useful for
optimizing Bavachinin so that potent anti-allergic drugs can be developed. The
structure-activity relationship of Th2 was revealed based on the difference
between Bavachinin and compound B. This finding can enrich the database of
preliminary drug screening from their chemical structures.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 4;9(2):e87195. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087195. eCollection 
2014.

Decreased expression of the GATA3 gene is associated with poor prognosis in
primary gastric adenocarcinoma.

Keshari RP(1), Wang W(1), Zhang Y(2), Wang DD(3), Li YF(1), Yuan SQ(1), Qiu
HB(1), Huang CY(1), Chen YM(1), Xia JC(3), Zhou ZW(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China ; Department of Gastric and Pancreatic Surgery, Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China ; Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology
in South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China ;
Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China ;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China ; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine,
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) was recently proposed to function as a
tumor suppressor gene in some types of human cancer. This study aims to
investigate GATA3 expression and its prognostic significance in primary gastric
adenocarcinoma.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and
immunohistochemical staining methods, GATA3 expression was analyzed in tissue
samples from a consecutive series of 402 gastric adenocarcinoma patients who
underwent resections between 2003 and 2006. The relationship between GATA3
expression, clinicopathological factors, and patient survival was investigated.
The expression status of GATA3 was shown to be clearly reduced in the tumor
tissue samples compared with that in the matched adjacent non-tumor tissue
samples by RT-qPCR (P = 0.0014). Immunohistochemistry analysis indicated that
GATA3 expression was significantly decreased in 225 of the 402 (56%) gastric
adenocarcinoma cases. Reduced GATA3 expression was also observed in patients with
large tumors (P = 0.017), signet ring cell carcinoma or mucinous carcinoma (P =
0.005) and tumors with lymphatic or venous invasion (P = 0.040). Additionally,
reduced expression of GATA3 was more commonly observed in tumors that were staged
as T4a/b (P<0.001), N3 (P<0.001), or M1 (P<0.001). Kaplan-Meier survival curves
revealed that reduced expression of GATA3 was associated with poor prognosis in
gastric adenocarcinoma patients (P<0.001). Multivariate Cox analysis identified
GATA3 expression as an independent prognostic factor for overall survival (HR =
5.375, 95% CI = 3.647-7.921, P<0.001). To investigate the predictive ability of
the models with and without containing GATA3 gene expression, Harrell's c-index
was calculated as a measure of predictive accuracy of survival outcome. The
c-index values revealed that model containing GATA3 expression (c-index = 0.897) 
had superior discrimination ability to the model without containg it (c-index =
0.811).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that GATA3 plays an important role in 
tumor progression and that reduced GATA3 expression independently predicts an
unfavorable prognosis in primary gastric adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3913598
PMID: 24504018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jul;38(7):941-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000178.

Pseudopapillary features in prostatic adenocarcinoma mimicking urothelial
carcinoma: a diagnostic pitfall.

Gordetsky J(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Urology Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

High-grade prostate adenocarcinoma can have overlapping morphologic features with
high-grade urothelial carcinoma, a critical distinction as treatments differ
substantially. Pseudopapillary features have not previously been described in
high-grade acinar prostate adenocarcinoma. We reviewed our consult cases (2006 to
2013) for cases of high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma, in which the Gleason score
was equal to 5+4=9 or 5+5=10, and the differential diagnosis included high-grade 
urothelial carcinoma. We identified 7 consult cases of high-grade prostate
adenocarcinoma with pseudopapillary features, mimicking urothelial carcinoma.
Three cases were originally misdiagnosed as urothelial carcinoma. In 3 cases, the
outside diagnosis was urothelial carcinoma versus prostate adenocarcinoma, and 1 
case had no submitting diagnosis. All cases were transurethral resections, with
tumor involving the prostatic urethra in 5 cases and 6 with bladder involvement. 
Three patients had a known history of prostate adenocarcinoma. The tumors grew in
nests and sheets, 1 with microacinar differentiation and another with focal, rare
glands. In places, tumors formed papillary-appearing structures with central
blood vessels. In most cases, the nuclei were uniform with prominent nucleoli.
One case had pleomorphic giant cell features, and another had sarcomatoid
features. Necrosis was present in 2 cases. One case had a separate focus of
low-grade noninvasive urothelial carcinoma present in the bladder and a
better-differentiated prostate adenocarcinoma (Gleason score 4+3=7) involving the
prostate on needle biopsy. In all cases, the pseudopapillary areas showed
negative immunohistochemical staining for bladder markers including GATA3 (5
cases), p63 (5 cases), CK903 (4 cases), and thrombomodulin (3 cases). All cases
showed positivity for prostatic markers including PSA (5 cases), p501s (6 cases),
PSMA (4 cases), and NKX3.1 (5 cases). One case showed focal, nonspecific staining
for p63, and another showed focal staining for p63 and CK903 in an area with
squamous differentiation, contributing to the diagnostic difficulty. In summary, 
high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma can present in the urinary bladder and
prostatic urethra, clinically mimicking urothelial carcinoma. Although high-grade
prostate adenocarcinoma typically has relatively uniform cytology, it can have
pleomorphic giant cell features overlapping with urothelial carcinoma. The
presence of pseudopapillary features in high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma is a
newly recognized morphologic overlap that can lead to further diagnostic
difficulty in distinguishing the 2 entities. For high-grade tumors involving the 
prostatic urethra without typical admixed lower-grade prostate adenocarcinoma,
immunohistochemical studies for bladder and prostate markers should be carried
out.

PMID: 24503758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087131. eCollection
2014.

IL-12 directs further maturation of ex vivo differentiated NK cells with improved
therapeutic potential.

Lehmann D(1), Spanholtz J(2), Sturtzel C(1), Tordoir M(2), Schlechta B(3),
Groenewegen D(2), Hofer E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for Physiology 
and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (2)Glycostem
Therapeutics, s-Hertogenbosch, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The possibility to modulate ex vivo human NK cell differentiation towards
specific phenotypes will contribute to a better understanding of NK cell
differentiation and facilitate tailored production of NK cells for immunotherapy.
In this study, we show that addition of a specific low dose of IL-12 to an ex
vivo NK cell differentiation system from cord blood CD34(+) stem cells will
result in significantly increased proportions of cells with expression of CD62L
as well as KIRs and CD16 which are preferentially expressed on mature CD56(dim)
peripheral blood NK cells. In addition, the cells displayed decreased expression 
of receptors such as CCR6 and CXCR3, which are typically expressed to a lower
extent by CD56(dim) than CD56(bright) peripheral blood NK cells. The increased
number of CD62L and KIR positive cells prevailed in a population of
CD33(+)NKG2A(+) NK cells, supporting that maturation occurs via this subtype.
Among a series of transcription factors tested we found Gata3 and TOX to be
significantly downregulated, whereas ID3 was upregulated in the IL-12-modulated
ex vivo NK cells, implicating these factors in the observed changes. Importantly,
the cells differentiated in the presence of IL-12 showed enhanced cytokine
production and cytolytic activity against MHC class I negative and positive
targets. Moreover, in line with the enhanced CD16 expression, these cells
exhibited improved antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity for B-cell leukemia
target cells in the presence of the clinically applied antibody rituximab.
Altogether, these data provide evidence that IL-12 directs human ex vivo NK cell 
differentiation towards more mature NK cells with improved properties for
potential cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3909052
PMID: 24498025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):3007-15. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-544809. Epub 2014
Feb 4.

GATA-3 expression identifies a high-risk subset of PTCL, NOS with distinct
molecular and clinical features.

Wang T(1), Feldman AL, Wada DA, Lu Y, Polk A, Briski R, Ristow K, Habermann TM,
Thomas D, Ziesmer SC, Wellik LE, Lanigan TM, Witzig TE, Pittelkow MR, Bailey NG, 
Hristov AC, Lim MS, Ansell SM, Wilcox RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2909-10.

The cell of origin and the tumor microenvironment's role remain elusive for the
most common peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs). As macrophages promote the
growth and survival of malignant T cells and are abundant constituents of the
tumor microenvironment, their functional polarization was examined in T-cell
lymphoproliferative disorders. Cytokines that are abundant within the tumor
microenvironment, particularly interleukin (IL)-10, were observed to promote
alternative macrophage polarization. Macrophage polarization was signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 dependent and was impaired by the
Janus kinase inhibitor ruxolitinib. In conventional T cells, the production of T 
helper (Th)2-associated cytokines and IL-10, both of which promote alternative
macrophage polarization, is regulated by the T-cell transcription factor
GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3). Therefore, its role in the T-cell lymphomas was 
examined. GATA-3 expression was observed in 45% of PTCLs, not otherwise specified
(PTCL, NOS) and was associated with distinct molecular features, including the
production of Th2-associated cytokines. In addition, GATA-3 expression identified
a subset of PTCL, NOS with distinct clinical features, including inferior
progression-free and overall survival. Collectively, these data suggest that
further understanding the cell of origin and lymphocyte ontogeny among the T-cell
lymphomas may improve our understanding of the tumor microenvironment's
pathogenic role in these aggressive lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC4014843
PMID: 24497534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cancer. 2014 May 1;120(9):1329-37. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28566. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

GATA3 mutations define a unique subtype of luminal-like breast cancer with
improved survival.

Jiang YZ(1), Yu KD, Zuo WJ, Peng WT, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Cancer Center and Cancer Institute, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2778-9.
    Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;120(17):2779-80.

BACKGROUND: The GATA3 gene (GATA-binding protein 3) is one of the most frequently
mutated genes in breast cancer. The objective of the current study was to
determine the clinicopathologic characteristics of patients with breast cancer
harboring GATA3 mutations.
METHODS: The authors examined the somatic mutation status of GATA3 and performed 
survival analysis in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort (n=934) and the Fudan 
University Shanghai Cancer Center (FUSCC) cohort (n=308). Patient
characteristics, including age; menopausal status; tumor laterality; tumor size; 
lymph node status; tumor grade; molecular subtypes; adjuvant radiotherapy,
chemotherapy, and endocrine therapy; and prognosis, together with PIK3CA
(phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha) and
TP53 (tumor protein p53) mutation status, were collected.
RESULTS: GATA3 mutations were detected in 8.8% of patients (82 of 934 patients)
in the TCGA cohort and 14.9% of patients (46 of 308 patients) in the FUSCC
cohort. GATA3 mutations were found to be significantly associated with
luminal-like breast cancer (P=.002 in the TCGA cohort and P<.001 in the FUSCC
cohort), and were highly mutually exclusive to PIK3CA mutations (P=.001 in the
TCGA cohort and P=.003 in the FUSCC cohort) and TP53 mutations (P<.001 in both
cohorts). Furthermore, GATA3 mutations were correlated with improved overall
survival in the entire population (P=.025 in the TCGA cohort and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.043 in the 
FUSCC cohort) as well as in patients with luminal-like disease who received
adjuvant endocrine therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA3 mutations mainly occur in patients with luminal-like breast
cancer and have identifiable clinicopathologic and genetic characteristics,
highlighting a subgroup of patients with breast cancer in whom limited therapy
may be appropriate.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24477928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Med. 2014 Mar 20;20:93-108. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2013.00127.

Conditional knockout of the RNA-binding protein HuR in CD4<U+207A> T cells reveals a
gene dosage effect on cytokine production.

Gubin MM(1), Techasintana P(1), Magee JD(1), Dahm GM(1), Calaluce R(1),
Martindale JL(2), Whitney MS(1), Franklin CL(1), Besch-Williford C(1),
Hollingsworth JW(3), Abdelmohsen K(2), Gorospe M(2), Atasoy U(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America. (3)Department of Medicine, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

The posttranscriptional mechanisms by which RNA binding proteins (RBPs) regulate 
T-cell differentiation and cytokine production in vivo remain unclear. The RBP
HuR binds to labile mRNAs, usually leading to increases in mRNA stability and/or 
translation. Previous work demonstrated that HuR binds to the mRNAs encoding the 
Th2 transcription factor trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor
(GATA-3) and Th2 cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13, thereby regulating their
expression. By using a novel conditional HuR knockout (KO) mouse in which HuR is 
deleted in activated T cells, we show that Th2-polarized cells from heterozygous 
HuR conditional (OX40-Cre HuR(fl/+)) KO mice had decreased steady-state levels of
Gata3, Il4 and Il13 mRNAs with little changes at the protein level. Surprisingly,
Th2-polarized cells from homozygous HuR conditional (OX40-Cre HuR(fl/fl)) KO mice
showed increased Il2, Il4 and Il13 mRNA and protein via different mechanisms.
Specifically, Il4 was transcriptionally upregulated in HuR KO T cells, whereas
Il2 and Il13 mRNA stabilities increased. Additionally, when using the standard
ovalbumin model of allergic airway inflammation, HuR conditional KO mice mounted 
a robust inflammatory response similar to mice with wild-type HuR levels. These
results reveal a complex differential posttranscriptional regulation of cytokines
by HuR in which gene dosage plays an important role. These findings may have
significant implications in allergies and asthma, as well as autoimmune diseases 
and infection.

PMCID: PMC3960399
PMID: 24477678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Clin Periodontol. 2014 May;41(5):451-9. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12236.

Activation of RANKL-induced osteoclasts and memory T lymphocytes by Porphyromonas
gingivalis is serotype dependant.

Vernal R(1), Díaz-Zúñiga J, Melgar-Rodríguez S, Pujol M, Diaz-Guerra E, Silva A, 
Sanz M, Garcia-Sanz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain; Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Department 
of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de
Chile, Chile.

AIM: Destructive periodontitis is associated with a Th1-Th17 immune response and 
activation of RANKL-induced osteoclasts. In addition, Porphyromonas gingivalis K1
and K2 serotypes induce a strong Th1-Th17 response. This study aimed to
investigate whether these P. gingivalis serotypes induce higher osteoclasts
activation, by increased Th17-associated RANKL production, and an
antigen-specific memory T-lymphocyte response.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The RANKL production and TRAP(+) osteoclast induction were 
quantified on naïve T lymphocytes stimulated with dendritic cells primed with the
P. gingivalis serotypes. The T-bet, GATA-3, RORC2 and Foxp3 expression was
correlated with RANKL production. The frequency of proliferating memory T
lymphocytes in response to P. gingivalis serotypes was determined in both
periodontitis and healthy subjects.
RESULTS: T lymphocytes stimulated by K1 or K2-primed dendritic cells elicited
higher levels of RANKL and TRAP(+) osteoclasts than cells stimulated with the
other serotypes. RANKL positively correlated with RORC2. Whereas periodontitis
patients had a higher frequency of memory T lymphocytes responding to K1 or K2,
healthy subjects had a higher frequency of memory T lymphocytes responding to K4 
or K(-) .
CONCLUSIONS: P. gingivalis serotypes K1 and K2, but not others, are associated
with an increased production of the osteoclastogenesis-related factor RANKL. This
important information suggests that these serotypes could elicit a greater bone
resorption in vivo and have a role in the periodontitis pathogenesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24476556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Feb;112(2):154-62. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2013.11.015. Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Effect of vitamin D on T-helper type 9 polarized human memory cells in chronic
persistent asthma.

Keating P(1), Munim A(2), Hartmann JX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida. Electronic address:
patriciakeating27@gmail.com. (2)Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D suppresses inflammation and vitamin D deficiency is linked 
to the severity of asthma symptoms. T-helper type 9 (TH9) cells are important in 
the pathogenesis, yet the effects of vitamin D on this subset of inflammatory
T-helper cells from patients with chronic asthma is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of vitamin D and dexamethasone on TH9 memory 
cells from adults with chronic persistent asthma and on a recall response to dust
mite allergen.
METHODS: T-helper memory cells were cultured with cytokines that drive TH9
polarization with vitamin D and/or dexamethasone. Peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) from patients with radioallergosorbent test results for house dust 
mite were stimulated with allergen in the presence or absence of vitamin D.
Intracellular cytokines, transcription factors, and identification of cell
surface phenotypic markers were determined by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Vitamin D decreased interleukin (IL)-9, IL-5, and IL-8 but increased
IL-13(+) cells in TH9 cultures. Transcription factors PU.1 and interferon
regulatory factor 4 were downregulated by vitamin D but not GATA3 and c-MAF. When
PBMCs from patients with positive radioallergosorbent test results were
stimulated with dust mite allergen, vitamin D decreased IL-9, IL-5, and IL-13 in 
T-helper cells (CD4(+)). TH9 cells present in a recall response were classically 
TH2 (CD294(+)), and polarization by transforming growth factor-ß and IL-4 altered
that phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Vitamin D decreased inflammatory cytokine profiles in TH9 memory
cells and CD4(+) cells stimulated with dust mite allergen. Vitamin D is additive 
with dexamethasone in decreasing inflammatory cytokine production from T-cell
subsets implicated in asthma.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24468256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Allergy. 2014 Mar;69(3):406-10. doi: 10.1111/all.12366. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Allergen-specific Th2 responses in young children precede sensitization later in 
life.

Reubsaet LL(1), Meerding J, Scholman R, Arets B, Prakken BJ, van Wijk F, Knol EF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Immunology, Department of Pediatric Immunology,
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.

Allergic sensitization is initiated by allergen-specific Th2-cell responses. Data
on early allergen-specific T-cell responses in allergic children are scarce. We
hypothesized that allergen-specific Th2-cell responses can be detected preceding 
sensitization. Therefore, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of
nonsensitized, 'not-yet' sensitized or sensitized children were cultured with
highly purified allergens. Cytokine levels in supernatant were determined using
multiplex assay and GATA3 expression by flow cytometry. PBMC of sensitized
children aged 3 and 5 years showed higher production of IL4, IL5 and IL13 and
higher expression of GATA3 in response to purified allergens compared to
nonsensitized children. PBMC of children that were 'not-yet' sensitized already
showed higher levels of IL5 and IL13 and higher GATA3 expression at age 3 years. 
This shows that allergen-specific in vitro Th2 responses precede the detection of
allergen-specific IgE, which can provide a window of opportunity for novel
therapeutic interventions.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24467266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jan 23;15(2):1700-18. doi: 10.3390/ijms15021700.

Regulation of an autoimmune model for multiple sclerosis in Th2-biased GATA3
transgenic mice.

Fernando V(1), Omura S(2), Sato F(3), Kawai E(4), Martinez NE(5), Elliott SF(6), 
Yoh K(7), Takahashi S(8), Tsunoda I(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Tumor and Molecular
Virology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA
71130, USA. viromi.fernando@gmail.com. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Center for Tumor and Molecular Virology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA. omura.s@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Tumor and Molecular
Virology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA
71130, USA. fsato@lsuhsc.edu. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Center for Tumor and Molecular Virology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA. ekawai-thk@umin.ac.jp. (5)Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Tumor and Molecular Virology,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.
nmarti@lsuhsc.edu. (6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Tumor
and Molecular Virology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA 71130, USA. Iloveham2011@yahoo.com. (7)Department of Nephrology,
Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. k-yohnpr@umin.ac.jp. (8)Department of Anatomy
and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, International Institute for Integrative
Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), Life Science Center, Tsukuba Research Alliance (TARA),
Laboratory Animal Resource Center (LARC), University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. satoruta@md.tsukuba.ac.jp. (9)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Tumor and Molecular Virology, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.
itsuno@lsuhsc.edu.

T helper (Th)2 cells have been proposed to play a neuroprotective role in
multiple sclerosis (MS). This is mainly based on "loss-of-function" studies in an
animal model for MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), using
blocking antibodies against Th2 related cytokines, and knockout mice lacking
Th2-related molecules. We tested whether an increase of Th2 responses
("gain-of-function" approach) could alter EAE, the approach of novel GATA binding
protein 3 (GATA3)-transgenic (tg) mice that overexpress GATA3, a transcription
factor required for Th2 differentiation. In EAE induced with myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)35-55 peptide, GATA3-tg mice had a
significantly delayed onset of disease and a less severe maximum clinical score, 
compared with wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Histologically, GATA3-tg mice had decreased
levels of meningitis and demyelination in the spinal cord, and anti-inflammatory 
cytokine profiles immunologically, however both groups developed similar levels
of MOG-specific lymphoproliferative responses. During the early stage, we
detected higher levels of interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10, with MOG and mitogen
stimulation of regional lymph node cells in GATA3-tg mice. During the late stage,
only mitogen stimulation induced higher IL-4 and lower interferon-<U+03B3> and IL-17
production in GATA3-tg mice. These results suggest that a preexisting bias toward
a Th2 immune response may reduce the severity of inflammatory demyelinating
diseases, including MS.

PMCID: PMC3958817
PMID: 24463292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Dec;17(4):1067-74.

Administration of mycobacterial Ag85A and IL-17A fusion protein attenuates airway
inflammation in a murine model of asthma.

Jin R, Guo S, Wang MY, Li YH, Wu LX, Ma H, Lowrie DB, Fan XY, Zhang JH.

Interleukin (IL)-17A contributes to the development of asthma, especially in
severe asthma which has characteristic neutrophil infiltration in airways.
However, IL-17A-blocking antibody could escalate T helper (Th) 2 cytokines, such 
as IL-13, IL-4 in murine models. We aimed at determining the effect of
mycobacterial Ag85A and IL-17A fusion proteinAg85A-IL-17A on airway inflammation
in a murine model of asthma. IL-17A recombinant protein fused mycobacterial
immunodominant antigen Ag85A was constructed, expressed and purified. The fusion 
protein was then administrated into BALB/c mice and its anti-inflammatory effects
in the infiltration of inflammatory cells, Th2/Th17 cytokines in BALF,
histopathological changes of lung tissues as well as chemokines in lung tissues
were evaluated in the murine model of asthma. We found that administration of
mycobacterial Ag85A and IL-17A fusion protein induced IL-17A specific
immunoglobulin (Ig)G in sera and significantly decreased IL-17A and IL-6 levels
in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Ag85A-IL-17A vaccinated mice also showed 
marked reduction in the infiltration of inflammatory cells in peribronchiolar
region and significant decrease in total cells, eosinophil cells and neutrophil
cells in BALF. The increased levels of IL-13 and IL-4 in BALF of
ovalbumin-sensitized mice were significantly reduced by the administration of
Ag85A-IL-17A. Furthermore, CD3+CD4+IL-13+ splenocytes stimulated with OVA and
CXCL1 mRNA, CCL2 mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA expressed in lung tissues were decreased
markedly in Ag85A-IL-17A vaccinated group. Our results demonstrate remarkable
antiallergic effects of Ag85A-IL-17A in a murine model of asthma and it may have 
protective effects on allergic asthma.

PMID: 24455775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Apr;15(4):428-35. doi: 10.4161/cbt.27631. Epub 2014 Jan
21.

Loss of GATA3 in bladder cancer promotes cell migration and invasion.

Li Y(1), Ishiguro H(2), Kawahara T(2), Kashiwagi E(3), Izumi K(4), Miyamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of Rochester
Medical Center; Rochester, NY USA; Department of Urology; 2nd Affiliated
Hospital; Zhejiang University School of Medicine; Hangzhou, PR China.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of Rochester
Medical Center; Rochester, NY USA; Departments of Pathology and Urology; Johns
hopkins University school of Medicine; Baltimore, MD UsA. (3)Departments of
Pathology and Urology; Johns hopkins University school of Medicine; Baltimore, MD
UsA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of Rochester 
Medical Center; Rochester, NY USA.

The transcription factor GATA3 is known as a breast tumor suppressor as well as a
urothelial marker, and its loss is often seen in high-grade invasive bladder
cancer. Nonetheless, GATA3 functions in bladder cancer cells remain largely
unknown. In this study, we assessed the effects of GATA3 silencing via RNA
interference on cell migration, invasion, and proliferation of bladder cancer.
GATA3 expression was downregulated in all four bladder cancer lines examined,
compared with a non-neoplastic urothelial line SVHUC. Knockdown of GATA3 in the
bladder cancer lines (5637, TCC-SUP, J82) resulted in promotion of cell migration
and invasion as well as increases in the expression of their related molecules,
such as vascular endothelial growth factor, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, and
MMP-9, and the activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9. GATA3 loss was also associated with
an increasing level of a mesenchymal marker N-cadherin and a decreasing level of 
an epithelial marker ß-catenin. Consistent with these findings, enforced
expression of GATA3 in UMUC3 inhibited cell migration and invasion. However,
GATA3 showed marginal effects on bladder cancer cell viability and the expression
of cell cycle- or apoptosis-related molecules. Additionally, in contrast to
bladder cancer lines, no significant effects of GATA3 silencing on cell migration
were seen in SVHUC. These findings suggest that GATA3 plays an important role in 
the prevention of bladder cancer progression and metastasis by inhibiting cell
migration and invasion as well as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

PMCID: PMC3979820
PMID: 24448324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Audiol Neurootol. 2014;19(2):106-14. doi: 10.1159/000356303. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Audiometric characteristics of a dutch family with a new mutation in GATA3
causing HDR syndrome.

van Beelen E(1), Leijendeckers JM, Admiraal RJ, Huygen PL, Hoefsloot LH, Pennings
RJ, Snik AF, Kunst HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

We present the case of a Dutch family with a new mutation (c523_528dup) in GATA3 
causing HDR syndrome. HDR syndrome is characterised by hypoparathyroidism,
deafness and renal defects. In this study, we describe the audiometric
characteristics of 5 patients from this family. Their hearing impairment was
congenital, bilateral and symmetric. Audiograms showed mild-to-moderate hearing
impairment with a flat audiogram configuration. Higher frequencies tended to be
affected more strongly. Cross-sectional analyses showed no progression, and a
mean audiogram was established. Psychophysical measurements in 3 HDR patients -
including speech reception in noise, loudness scaling, gap detection and
difference limen for frequency - were obtained to assess hearing function in
greater detail. Overall, the results of the psychophysical measurements indicated
characteristics of outer hair cell loss. CT scanning showed no anomalies in 3 of 
the HDR patients. Although 2 patients displayed vestibular symptoms, no anomalies
in the vestibular system were found by vestibulo-ocular examination. Our results 
are in agreement with the theory that outer hair cell malfunctioning can play a
major role in HDR syndrome.

PMID: 24434941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Kidney Int. 2014 Jun;85(6):1429-33. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.508. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Mutations in 12 known dominant disease-causing genes clarify many congenital
anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.

Hwang DY(1), Dworschak GC(2), Kohl S(3), Saisawat P(4), Vivante A(3), Hilger
AC(5), Reutter HM(6), Soliman NA(7), Bogdanovic R(8), Kehinde EO(9), Tasic V(10),
Hildebrandt F(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Division of Nephrology,
Department of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)1] Division of Nephrology, Department of
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA [2] Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany. (3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (5)Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (6)1] Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany [2] Department of Neonatology,
Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (7)1] Department of
Pediatrics, Kasr Al Ainy School of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt [2]
Egyptian Group for Orphan Renal Diseases (EGORD), Cairo, Egypt. (8)Medical
Faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. (9)Department of Surgery,
Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait. (10)Department of Pediatric Nephrology,
University Children's Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia. (11)1] Division of Nephrology,
Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase,
Maryland, USA.

Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) account for
approximately half of children with chronic kidney disease. CAKUT can be caused
by monogenic mutations; however, data are lacking on their frequency. Genetic
diagnosis has been hampered by genetic heterogeneity and lack of
genotype-phenotype correlation. To determine the percentage of cases with CAKUT
that can be explained by mutations in known CAKUT genes, we analyzed the coding
exons of the 17 known dominant CAKUT-causing genes in a cohort of 749 individuals
from 650 families with CAKUT. The most common phenotypes in this CAKUT cohort
were vesicoureteral reflux in 288 patients, renal hypodysplasia in 120 patients, 
and unilateral renal agenesis in 90 patients. We identified 37 different
heterozygous mutations (33 novel) in 12 of the 17 known genes in 47 patients from
41 of the 650 families (6.3%). These mutations include (number of families): BMP7
(1), CDC5L (1), CHD1L (5), EYA1 (3), GATA3 (2), HNF1B (6), PAX2 (5), RET (3),
ROBO2 (4), SALL1 (9), SIX2 (1), and SIX5 (1). Furthermore, several mutations
previously reported to be disease-causing are most likely benign variants. Thus, 
in a large cohort over 6% of families with isolated CAKUT are caused by a
mutation in 12 of 17 dominant CAKUT genes. Our report represents one of the most 
in-depth diagnostic studies of monogenic causes of isolated CAKUT in children.

PMCID: PMC4040148
PMID: 24429398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;99(3):E469-73. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3136. Epub 
2014 Jan 1.

Analysis of AP2S1, a calcium-sensing receptor regulator, in familial and sporadic
isolated hypoparathyroidism.

Lambert AS(1), Grybek V, Francou B, Esterle L, Bertrand G, Bouligand J,
Guiochon-Mantel A, Hieronimus S, Voitel D, Soskin S, Magdelaine C, Lienhardt A,
Silve C, Linglart A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 986 (A.-S.L., V.G., C.S., A.Lin.), Hôpital Bicêtre-Paris-Sud;
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service d'Endocrinologie et Diabétologie
de l'Enfant (L.E., A.Lin.), Hôpital Bicêtre-Paris-Sud Centre de Référence des
Maladies Rares du Métabolisme du Calcium et du Phosphore (L.E., C.S., A.Lin.);
and Faculté de Médecine ( (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M., A.Lin.) and INSERM Unité Mixte de
Recherche en Santé 693 (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M.), Université Paris Sud, 94270 Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, France; Service de Pédiatrie (A.-S.L., A.Lie.) and Service de
Génétique et Cytogénétique (C.M.), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Limoges,
87000 Limoges, France; Service de Génétique Moléculaire (G.B., C.S.), Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Bichat, 75870 Paris, France; Service de Génétique
Moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique, et Hormonologie (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M.), Hôpital
Bicêtre-Paris-Sud, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 94270 Paris, France;
Service d'Endocrinologie et Métabolisme (S.H.), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Nice, 06000 Nice, France; Service de Médecine Interne (D.V.), Centre Hospitalier 
Louis Mourier, 92700 Colombes, France; and Service de Pédiatrie (S.S.), Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Strasbourg, 67085 Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: Except after neck surgery, hypoparathyroidism is a rare disease
caused by defects in genes involved in parathyroid gland development
(TBX1/22q11.2 del, GCMB, GATA3, TBCE) or function [calcium sensing receptor
(CASR), GNA11, PTH], or the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (AIRE).
Approximately 90% of sporadic cases and 30% of familial cases of isolated
hypoparathyroidism remain unexplained. Recurrent missense mutations in AP2S1, a
calcium-sensing receptor regulator, have been recently identified in familial
hyperparathyroidism.
AIM: The aim of the study was to investigate AP2S1 as a putative
hypoparathyroidism-causing gene.
METHODS: Sequencing analysis and quantitative genomic PCR of the AP2S1 gene in a 
large cohort of 10 index cases (from nine families) and 50 sporadic cases
affected with isolated hypoparathyroidism were investigated.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: None of the 60 patients presented with nucleotidic
changes or copy number variation in the AP2S1 gene, thereby excluding AP2S1
defects as a frequent cause of isolated hypoparathyroidism.

PMID: 24423332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Cancer Cytopathol. 2014 Apr;122(4):307-12. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21393. Epub 2014 Jan
13.

GATA3: a promising marker for metastatic breast carcinoma in serous effusion
specimens.

Shield PW(1), Papadimos DJ, Walsh MD.

Author information: 
(1)Cytology Department, Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology, Taringa, Queensland,
Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The usefulness of GATA3 (GATA-binding protein 3 to DNA sequence
[A/T]GATA[A/G]) as a marker for metastatic breast carcinoma in serous effusion
specimens was investigated.
METHODS: Cell block sections from 74 serous effusion specimens (32 ascitic, 2
pericardial, and 40 pleural fluids) were stained with an anti-GATA3 murine
monoclonal antibody. The specimens included 62 confirmed metastatic carcinomas
from the breast (30 specimens), female genital tract (13 specimens),
gastrointestinal tract (7 specimens), lung adenocarcinoma (9 specimens), pancreas
(1 specimen), kidney (1 specimen), and bladder (1 specimen). The breast carcinoma
cases included 15 ductal carcinomas and 8 lobular carcinomas; the histology
subtype was not available for 7 specimens. Twelve cases containing florid
reactive mesothelial cells were also stained. The breast carcinoma cases were
also stained for mammaglobin and gross cystic disease fluid protein of 15
kilodaltons (GCDFP-15) to compare their sensitivity with GATA3.
RESULTS: Positive nuclear staining for GATA3 was found to be present in 90% of
metastatic breast carcinoma specimens (27 of 30 specimens). All nonbreast
metastatic carcinomas tested were negative with the exception of the single case 
of metastatic urothelial carcinoma. No staining was observed in any of the benign
reactive cases or in benign mesothelial cells present in the malignant cell block
preparations. Two cases demonstrated weak positivity of benign lymphoid cells.
Staining results were unambiguous because all positive cases demonstrated intense
nuclear staining in > 50% of tumor cells. Mammaglobin (57% staining; 17 of 30
cases) and GCDFP-15 (33% staining; 10 of 30 cases) were found to be less
sensitive markers of breast carcinoma. If used in a panel, mammaglobin and
GCFP-15 staining would have identified only 1 additional case compared with those
stained with GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA3 may be a useful addition to immunostaining panels for serous
effusion specimens when metastatic breast carcinoma is a consideration.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24421220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Exp Med. 2014 Feb 10;211(2):199-208. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131038. Epub 2014 Jan
13.

Gata3 drives development of ROR<U+03B3>t+ group 3 innate lymphoid cells.

Serafini N(1), Klein Wolterink RG, Satoh-Takayama N, Xu W, Vosshenrich CA,
Hendriks RW, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Unit, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris,
France.

Group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3) include IL-22-producing NKp46(+) cells and
IL-17A/IL-22-producing CD4(+) lymphoid tissue inducerlike cells that express
ROR<U+03B3>t and are implicated in protective immunity at mucosal surfaces. Whereas the 
transcription factor Gata3 is essential for T cell and ILC2 development from
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and for IL-5 and IL-13 production by T cells and 
ILC2, the role for Gata3 in the generation or function of other ILC subsets is
not known. We found that abundant GATA-3 protein is expressed in
mucosa-associated ILC3 subsets with levels intermediate between mature B cells
and ILC2. Chimeric mice generated with Gata3-deficient fetal liver hematopoietic 
precursors lack all intestinal ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILC3 subsets, and these mice show
defective production of IL-22 early after infection with the intestinal pathogen 
Citrobacter rodentium, leading to impaired survival. Further analyses
demonstrated that ILC3 development requires cell-intrinsic Gata3 expression in
fetal liver hematopoietic precursors. Our results demonstrate that Gata3 plays a 
generalized role in ILC lineage determination and is critical for the development
of gut ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILC3 subsets that maintain mucosal barrier homeostasis. These
results further extend the paradigm of Gata3-dependent regulation of diversified 
innate ILC and adaptive T cell subsets.

PMCID: PMC3920560
PMID: 24419270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Nutr Res. 2014 Jan;34(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2013.10.010. Epub 2013 Oct 
29.

Acute exposure to high-fat diets increases hepatic expression of genes related to
cell repair and remodeling in female rats.

Miller CN(1), Morton HP(2), Cooney PT(3), Winters TG(3), Ramseur KR(3), Rayalam
S(4), Della-Fera MA(5), Baile CA(6), Brown LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(3)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
Greensboro, NC. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Philadelphia College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Suwanee, GA. (5)Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. (6)Department of Foods and Nutrition,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA; Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. Electronic address: cbaile@uga.edu.

High-fat diets (HFD) promote the development of both obesity and fatty liver
disease through the up-regulation of hepatic lipogenesis. Insulin resistance, a
hallmark of both conditions, causes dysfunctional fuel partitioning and increases
in lipogenesis. Recent work has demonstrated that systemic insulin resistance
occurs in as little as the first 72 hours of an HFD, suggesting the potential for
hepatic disruption with HFD at this time point. The current study sought to
determine differences in expression of lipogenic genes between sexes in
3-month-old male and female Long-Evans rats after 72 hours of a 40% HFD or a 17% 
fat (chow) diet. Owing to the response of estrogen on hepatic signaling, we
hypothesized that a sexual dimorphic response would occur in the expression of
lipogenic enzymes, inflammatory cytokines, apoptotic, and cell repair and
remodeling genes. Both sexes consumed more energy when fed an HFD compared with
their low fat-fed controls. However, only the males fed the HFD had a significant
increase in body fat. Regardless of sex, HFD caused down-regulation of lipogenic 
and inflammatory genes. Interestingly, females fed an HFD had up-regulated
expression of apoptotic and cell repair-related genes compared with the males.
This may suggest that females are more responsive to the acute hepatic injury
effects caused by HFDs. In summary, neither male nor female rats displayed
disrupted hepatic metabolic pathways after 72 hours of the HFD treatment. In
addition, female rats appear to have protection from increases in fat deposition,
possibly due to increased caloric expenditure; male rats fed an HFD were less
active, as demonstrated by distance traveled in their home cage.

© 2013.

PMID: 24418250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1385-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301888. Epub 2014
Jan 10.

Enforced expression of Gata3 in T cells and group 2 innate lymphoid cells
increases susceptibility to allergic airway inflammation in mice.

KleinJan A(1), Klein Wolterink RG, Levani Y, de Bruijn MJ, Hoogsteden HC, van
Nimwegen M, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam,
3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands;

Airway inflammation in allergic asthma reflects a threshold response of the
innate immune system, including group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2), followed by
an adaptive Th2 cell-mediated response. Transcription factor Gata3 is essential
for differentiation of both Th2 cells and ILC2. We investigated the effects of
enforced Gata3 expression in T cells and ILC2 on the susceptibility of mice to
allergic airway inflammation (AAI). We used CD2-Gata3 transgenic (Tg) mice with
enforced Gata3 expression driven by the CD2 promoter, which is active both in T
cells and during ILC2 development. CD2-Gata3 Tg mice and wild-type (WT)
littermates were analyzed in mild models of AAI without adjuvants. Whereas OVA
allergen exposure did not induce inflammation in WT controls, CD2-Gata3 Tg mice
showed clear AAI and enhanced levels of IL-5 and IL-13 in bronchoalveolar lavage.
Likewise, in house dust mite-driven asthma, CD2-Gata3 Tg mice were significantly 
more susceptible to AAI than WT littermates, whereby both ILC2 and Th2 cells were
important cellular sources of IL-5 and IL-13 in bronchoalveolar lavage and lung
tissue. Compared with WT littermates, CD2-Gata3 Tg mice contained increased
numbers of ILC2, which expressed high levels of IL-33R and contributed
significantly to early production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. CD2-Gata3 Tg mice
also had a unique population of IL-33-responsive non-B/non-T lymphoid cells
expressing IFN-<U+03B3>. Enforced Gata3 expression is therefore sufficient to enhance
Th2 and ILC2 activity, and leads to increased susceptibility to AAI after mild
exposure to inhaled harmless Ags that otherwise induce Ag tolerance.

PMID: 24415780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Mar;19(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.025. Epub 
2014 Jan 7.

Imbalanced expression of human Tim-1 and Tim-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells from immune thrombocytopenia patients.

Zhang XM(1), Shan NN(2), Sun M(3), Wang X(1), Feng XM(1), Liu X(1), Li Y(1), Yuan
D(1), Ding M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shandong provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, 250021,China. (2)Department of Hematology, Shandong provincial
Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 250021,China. Electronic
address: snning@126.com. (3)Department of Hematology, Linzi District People's
Hospital, Zibo, 255100,China.

BACKGROUND: The T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-(Tim)-1 molecule and Tim-3
are mainly expressed on activated T helper (Th) 2 and Th1 cells, respectively,
and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of some autoimmune diseases. Immune 
thrombocytopenia (ITP) is a common autoimmune disorder, and the complex
dysregulation of cellular immunity has been observed; however, the relationship
between Tims and excessive immune responses in ITP remains unclear.
METHODS: Using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), the
mRNA expression levels of Tim-1, Tim-3, T-box transcription factor (T-bet) and
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) were measured in the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) of 45 newly diagnosed patients with active ITP, 34 ITP patients in 
remission and 31 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: Tim-3 mRNA expression in PBMCs in newly diagnosed patients was
significantly decreased. At the same time, Tim-1 mRNA was not significantly
declined, which resulted in a decreased ratio of Tim-3 to Tim-1 in ITP patients
with active disease. During the remission stages, the levels of these
transcription factors were comparable with those observed in healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The reduced levels of Tim-3/Tim-1 in PBMCs during active stages of
the disease suggest a possible role in the pathogenesis and course of ITP.
Regulating the balance of Tim-1 and Tim-3 in ITP patients could also be a
therapeutic approach against ITP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013 Oct 15;4(5):125. doi: 10.1186/scrt336.

Mesenchymal stem cells from umbilical cord matrix, adipose tissue and bone marrow
exhibit different capability to suppress peripheral blood B, natural killer and T
cells.

Ribeiro A, Laranjeira P, Mendes S, Velada I, Leite C, Andrade P, Santos F,
Henriques A, Grãos M, Cardoso CM, Martinho A, Pais M, da Silva CL, Cabral J,
Trindade H, Paiva A.

INTRODUCTION: The ability to self-renew, be easily expanded in vitro and
differentiate into different mesenchymal tissues, render mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) an attractive therapeutic method for degenerative diseases. The subsequent
discovery of their immunosuppressive ability encouraged clinical trials in
graft-versus-host disease and auto-immune diseases. Despite sharing several
immunophenotypic characteristics and functional capabilities, the differences
between MSCs arising from different tissues are still unclear and the published
data are conflicting.
METHODS: Here, we evaluate the influence of human MSCs derived from umbilical
cord matrix (UCM), bone marrow (BM) and adipose tissue (AT), co-cultured with
phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (MNC), on 
T, B and natural killer (NK) cell activation; T and B cells' ability to acquire
lymphoblast characteristics; mRNA expression of interleukin-2 (IL-2), forkhead
box P3 (FoxP3), T-bet and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), on purified T cells,
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), perforin and granzyme B on purified NK
cells.
RESULTS: MSCs derived from all three tissues were able to prevent CD4+ and CD8+ T
cell activation and acquisition of lymphoblast characteristics and CD56 dim NK
cell activation, wherein AT-MSCs showed a stronger inhibitory effect. Moreover,
AT-MSCs blocked the T cell activation process in an earlier phase than BM- or
UCM-MSCs, yielding a greater proportion of T cells in the non-activated state.
Concerning B cells and CD56 bright NK cells, UCM-MSCs did not influence either
their activation kinetics or PHA-induced lymphoblast characteristics, conversely 
to BM- and AT-MSCs which displayed an inhibitory effect. Besides, when
co-cultured with PHA-stimulated MNC, MSCs seem to promote Treg and Th1
polarization, estimated by the increased expression of FoxP3 and T-bet mRNA
within purified activated T cells, and to reduce TNF-a and perforin production by
activated NK cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, UCM-, BM- and AT-derived MSCs hamper T cell, B cell and NK 
cell-mediated immune response by preventing their acquisition of lymphoblast
characteristics, activation and changing the expression profile of proteins with 
an important role in immune function, except UCM-MSCs showed no inhibitory effect
on B cells under these experimental conditions. Despite the similarities between 
the three types of MSCs evaluated, we detect important differences that should be
taken into account when choosing the MSC source for research or therapeutic
purposes.

PMCID: PMC3854702
PMID: 24406104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):1055-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1320850111. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Lysine deacetylase inhibition prevents diabetes by chromatin-independent
immunoregulation and ß-cell protection.

Christensen DP(1), Gysemans C, Lundh M, Dahllöf MS, Noesgaard D, Schmidt SF,
Mandrup S, Birkbak N, Workman CT, Piemonti L, Blaabjerg L, Monzani V, Fossati G, 
Mascagni P, Paraskevas S, Aikin RA, Billestrup N, Grunnet LG, Dinarello CA,
Mathieu C, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Endocrinological Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Type 1 diabetes is due to destruction of pancreatic ß-cells. Lysine deacetylase
inhibitors (KDACi) protect ß-cells from inflammatory destruction in vitro and are
promising immunomodulators. Here we demonstrate that the clinically
well-tolerated KDACi vorinostat and givinostat revert diabetes in the nonobese
diabetic (NOD) mouse model of type 1 diabetes and counteract inflammatory target 
cell damage by a mechanism of action consistent with transcription factor--rather
than global chromatin--hyperacetylation. Weaning NOD mice received low doses of
vorinostat and givinostat in their drinking water until 100-120 d of age.
Diabetes incidence was reduced by 38% and 45%, respectively, there was a 15%
increase in the percentage of islets without infiltration, and pancreatic insulin
content increased by 200%. Vorinostat treatment increased the frequency of
functional regulatory T-cell subsets and their transcription factors Gata3 and
FoxP3 in parallel to a decrease in inflammatory dendritic cell subsets and their 
cytokines IL-6, IL-12, and TNF-a. KDACi also inhibited LPS-induced Cox-2
expression in peritoneal macrophages from C57BL/6 and NOD mice. In
insulin-producing ß-cells, givinostat did not upregulate expression of the
anti-inflammatory genes Socs1-3 or sirtuin-1 but reduced levels of IL-1ß +
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced proinflammatory Il1a, Il1b, Tnfa, Fas, Cxcl2, and reduced
cytokine-induced ERK phosphorylation. Further, NF-<U+03BA>B genomic iNos promoter
binding was reduced by 50%, and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent mRNA expression was blocked.
These effects were associated with NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65 hyperacetylation. Taken
together, these data provide a rationale for clinical trials of safety and
efficacy of KDACi in patients with autoimmune disease such as type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3903225
PMID: 24395784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Feb;18(2):311-24. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.009.
Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Oleanolic acid suppresses ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation and Th2-mediated 
allergic asthma by modulating the transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and 
Foxp3 in asthmatic mice.

Kim SH(1), Hong JH(2), Lee YC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine & Bioscience, Daejeon University, Daejeon
300-716, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Herbology, College of Oriental
Medicine, Sangji University, Wonju 220-702, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Herbology, College of Oriental Medicine, Sangji University, Wonju 220-702,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: lyc072@sangji.ac.kr.

The natural product oleanolic acid is commonly found in a variety of medicinal
plants. It is a triterpenoid compound known for its anti-inflammatory effects as 
well as various other pharmacological properties. The aim of the current study
was to use a mouse model of allergic asthma to investigate whether oleanolic acid
has anti-asthmatic effects, and if so, to determine the mechanism of these
effects. Oleanolic acid suppressed eosinophil infiltration, allergic airway
inflammation, and Penh, which occurred by suppressing the production of IL-5,
IL-13, IL-17, and ovalbumin-specific IgE through the upregulation of T-bet and
Foxp3, and the downregulation of GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t. The therapeutic effect of
oleanolic acid was due to suppression of Th2 cytokines (IL-5 and IL-13), B
cell-dependent production of OVA-specific IgE, and Gr-1 expression through the
T-bet, GATA-3, retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3> t (ROR<U+03B3> t) and forkhead
box p3 (Foxp3) transcription pathways. It is therefore reasonable to suggest that
the anti-inflammatory and anti-asthmatic effects of oleanolic acid may be exerted
through inhibition of the GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24374304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Phys Act Health. 2014 Sep;11(7):1386-92. doi: 10.1123/jpah.2012-0508. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Moderate physical activity of music aerobic exercise increases lymphocyte counts,
specific subsets, and differentiation.

Yeh SH(1), Lai HL, Hsiao CY, Lin LW, Chuang YK, Yang YY, Yang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medical Research & Development, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Moderate physical activity has been shown to promote immunity.
Different moderate physical activities may have different effects on immunity.
This study investigated the impacts of a 12-week regular music aerobic exercise
(MAE) program on leukocyte distribution, lymphocyte subsets, and lymphocyte
polarization.
METHODS: The study used a case-control design with pretest and posttest.
Forty-seven middle-age women were recruited for this study. Three participants
dropped out, 22 completed the 12-week MAE program, and the other 22 participants 
who had heat-intolerance or limited schedule eligibility were enrolled as the
control group without the MAE exercise.
RESULTS: Results showed that the MAE exercise for 12 weeks didn't change red
blood cells or total leukocytes but increased lymphocyte counts. The women in MAE
group revealed significant increases (P = 0.01) of CD3CD4, CD3CD8, and CD4CD25
cells, associated with Treg polarization showing enhanced FoxP3 but not T-bet,
Gata-3, or ROR<U+03B3>T expression (P < .01). The control group without exercise
revealed insignificant change of lymphocyte subsets or lymphocyte polarization.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that MAE increases specific lymphocyte subsets and 
enhances Treg cell differentiation. It is suggested to encourage moderate
physical activity of music aerobic exercise to enhance lymphocyte function of
middle-aged women.

PMID: 24368695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Feb;18(2):213-6. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.013.
Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Therapeutic effect of Halofuginone on ITP mice by regulating the differentiation 
of Th cell subsets.

Jin C(1), Jia Y(2), Jin C(1), Dong H(1), Cheng P(1), Zhou J(1), Wang Y(3), Zheng 
B(4), Liu F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Section of Attached Hospital of Jining Medical College, Jining,
Shandong Province, PR China. (2)Radiology Department of Jining First People's
Hospital, Jining, Shandong Province, PR China. (3)Pediatric Emergency Department 
of Attached Hospital of Jining Medical College, Jining, Shandong Province, PR
China. (4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Guangdong Medical College,
Dongguan, Guangdong Province, PR China. (5)Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan, Guangdong Province, PR China. 
Electronic address: jincq2008@163.com.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the therapeutic effect of
halofuginone (HF) in the treatment of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
and explore the underlying mechanism. Sixty ITP mice were divided into four
groups including control group, low dose group (25 mg/kg HF), medium dose group
(50 mg/kg HF), and high dose group (100 mg/kg HF). Corresponding dose of HF was
administrated by gavage daily in HF groups for 7 days, and the same volume of
saline was given in control group. Platelet counts were 28.87 ± 3.91 × 10(9)/L,
57.13 ± 2.75 × 10(9)/L, 86.73 ± 3.06 × 10(9)/L and 89.73 ± 2.84 × 10(9)/L in
control group, low dose group, medium dose group, and high dose group
respectively, on day 7 after intragastrically administration of HF or saline.
Compared with control group, three HF groups showed significantly increased
levels of INF-<U+03B3> and IL-2 (all P < 0.05), and significantly decreased
concentrations of IL-4 and IL-10(all P < 0.05). The expression of T-bet mRNA
increased and the expression of GATA-3 mRNA decreased (all P < 0.05) in ITP mice 
after intragastric administration with different dose of HF. HF significantly
recovered peripheral platelet counts in ITP mice through promoting Th1 cell
differentiation and attenuating Th2 differentiation in ITP mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):985-95. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302378. Epub 2013 Dec
23.

Bach2 regulates homeostasis of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells and protects against
fatal lung disease in mice.

Kim EH(1), Gasper DJ, Lee SH, Plisch EH, Svaren J, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706;

Variants of the Bach2 gene are linked to vitiligo, celiac disease, and type 1
diabetes, but the underlying immunological mechanisms are unknown. In this study,
we demonstrate that Bach2 plays crucial roles in maintaining T cell quiescence
and governing the differentiation, activation, and survival of Foxp3(+)
regulatory T (Treg) cells. Bach2-deficient T cells display spontaneous activation
and produce elevated levels of Th1/Th2-type cytokines. Without Bach2, Treg cells 
exhibit diminished Foxp3 expression, depleted numbers, hyperactivation, enhanced 
proliferation, and profound loss of competitive fitness in vivo. Mechanistically,
reduced survival of Bach2-deficient Treg cells was associated with reduced Bcl-2 
and Mcl-1 levels and elevated Bim/Bcl-2 ratio. Additionally, Bach2 deficiency
induced selective loss of Helios(-)Foxp3(+) Treg cells and a Treg cell
transcriptome skewed toward the Th1/Th2 effector program at the expense of the
Treg program. In vitro experiments confirmed that Bach2: 1) is indispensable for 
TCR/TGF-ß-induced Foxp3 expression; and 2) mitigates aberrant differentiation of 
Treg cells by repression of the competing Gata3-driven Th2 effector program.
Importantly, perturbations in the differentiation of induced Treg cells was
linked to a fatal Th2-type chronic inflammatory lung disease in Bach2-deficient
mice. Thus, Bach2 enforces T cell quiescence, promotes the development and
survival of Treg lineage, restrains aberrant differentiation of Treg cells, and
protects against immune-mediated diseases.

PMCID: PMC3946995
PMID: 24367030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Inflamm Res. 2014 Apr;63(4):255-65. doi: 10.1007/s00011-013-0700-6. Epub 2013 Dec
22.

Linking GATA-3 and interleukin-13: implications in asthma.

Rayees S(1), Malik F, Bukhari SI, Singh G.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Division, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (CSIR), Jammu,
India.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma is one of the serious global health problems and cause of
huge mortality and morbidity. It is characterized by persistent airway
inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, increased IgE levels and mucus
hypersecretion. Asthma is mediated by dominant Th2 immune response, causing
enhanced expression of Th2 cytokines. These cytokines are responsible for the
various pathological changes associated with allergic asthma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The role of Th2 cells in the pathogenesis of the asthma is
primarily mediated through the cytokine IL-13, also produced by type 2 innate
lymphoid cells, that comes under the transcriptional regulation of GATA3. In this
review we will try to explore the link between IL-13 and GATA3 in the progression
and regulation of asthma and its possible role as a therapeutic target.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of GATA3 activity or blockade of GATA3 expression may
attenuate the interleukin-13 mediated asthma phenotypes. So, GATA3 might be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of allergic asthma.

PMID: 24363163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jan;58:85-94. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.12.006. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

RNA interference targeting Bcl-6 ameliorates experimental autoimmune myasthenia
gravis in mice.

Xin N(1), Fu L(2), Shao Z(1), Guo M(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(3), Dou C(1), Zheng
S(1), Shen X(4), Yao Y(5), Wang J(1), Wang J(1), Cui G(1), Liu Y(1), Geng D(1),
Xiao C(1), Zhang Z(1), Dong R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Lab of Infection 
and Immunology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of 
Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu,
China. Electronic address: zy20037416@163.com. (4)Department of Neurology, The
Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. Electronic
address: xiashenxuyi@163.com. (5)Department of Radiation Therapy, The Affiliated 
Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells are dedicated to providing help to B cells and
are strongly associated with antibody-mediated autoimmune disease. B cell
lymphoma 6 (Bcl-6) is a key transcription factor of Tfh cells, and IL-21 is known
to be a critical cytokine produced by Tfh cells. We silenced Bcl-6 gene
expression using RNA interference (RNAi) delivered by a lentiviral vector, to
evaluate the therapeutic role of Bcl-6 short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in
experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG). Our data demonstrate that
CD4(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(+) Tfh cells, Bcl-6 and IL-21 were significantly increased in 
EAMG mice, compared with controls. In addition, we found that frequencies of Tfh 
cells were positively correlated with the levels of serum anti-AChR Ab. In-vivo
transduction of lenti-siRNA-Bcl6 ameliorates the severity of ongoing EAMG with
decreased Tfh cells, Bcl-6 and IL-21 expression, and leads to decreased anti-AChR
antibody levels. Furthermore, we found that siRNA knockdown of Bcl-6 expression
increases the expression of Th1(IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet) and Th2 markers (IL-4 and GATA3),
but failed to alter the expression of Th17-related markers (ROR<U+03B3>t, IL-17) and
Treg markers (FoxP3). Our study suggests that Tfh cells contribute to the
antibody production and could be one of the most important T cell subsets
responsible for development and progression of EAMG or MG. Bcl-6 provides a
promising therapeutic target for immunotherapy not only for MG, but also for
other antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 Mar;306(2):201-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1435-5. Epub
2013 Dec 18.

GATA3 inhibits proliferation and induces expression of both early and late
differentiation markers in keratinocytes of the human epidermis.

Masse I(1), Barbollat-Boutrand L, Kharbili ME, Berthier-Vergnes O, Aubert D,
Lamartine J.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, 69003, Lyon, France, ingrid.masse@univ-lyon1.fr.

GATA3 belongs to the GATA transcription factor family and is a crucial regulator 
of lymphocyte differentiation. More recently, GATA3 was shown to be involved in
skin cell lineage determination, in morphogenesis and maintenance of hair
follicle keratinocytes as well as in epidermal barrier formation in mouse. In
human, the potential role of GATA3 in the regulation of interfollicular epidermal
homeostasis was still poorly explored. We thus investigated whether GATA3 could
play a role in the regulation of proliferation and/or differentiation processes
in human primary keratinocytes. We silenced the expression of GATA3 by small
interfering RNA in either proliferating or differentiated human primary
keratinocytes and analyzed the effect on cell proliferation and differentiation. 
We showed that GATA3 inhibition increased cell number, BrdU incorporation and
expression of the proliferation markers PCNA and Ki67, demonstrating that GATA3
can inhibit keratinocyte proliferation. Moreover, GATA3 seems to be able to
induce keratinocyte differentiation since its silencing leads to a decrease of
both early and late differentiation markers such as Keratins 1 and 10, Involucrin
and Loricrin. Our results demonstrate that GATA3 transcription factor inhibits
proliferation and induces differentiation of primary keratinocytes, which suggest
that it may regulate human interfollicular epidermal renewal.

PMID: 24346062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Infect Immun. 2014 Mar;82(3):1052-63. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01378-13. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection-induced CD11b+ Gr1+ cells
ameliorate allergic airway inflammation.

Ganesh V(1), Baru AM, Hesse C, Friedrich C, Glage S, Gohmert M, Jänke C,
Sparwasser T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection Immunology, Twincore, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, Hanover, Germany.

Allergies are mainly characterized as an unrestrained Th2-biased immune response.
Epidemiological data associate protection from allergic diseases with the
exposure to certain infectious agents during early stages of life. Modulation of 
the immune response by pathogens has been considered to be a major factor
influencing this protection. Recent evidence indicates that immunoregulatory
mechanisms induced upon infection ameliorate allergic disorders. A longitudinal
study has demonstrated reduced frequency and incidence of asthma in children who 
reported a prior infection with Salmonella. Experimental studies involving
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium-infected murine models have confirmed
protection from induced allergic airway inflammation; however, the underlying
cause leading to this amelioration remains incompletely defined. In this study,
we aimed to delineate the regulatory function of Salmonella Typhimurium infection
in the amelioration of allergic airway inflammation in mice. We observed a
significant increase in CD11b+ Gr1+ myeloid cell populations in mice after
infection with S. Typhimurium. Using in vitro and in vivo studies, we confirmed
that these myeloid cells reduce airway inflammation by influencing Th2 cells.
Further characterization showed that the CD11b+ Gr1+ myeloid cells exhibited
their inhibitory effect by altering GATA-3 expression and interleukin-4 (IL-4)
production by Th2 cells. These results indicate that the expansion of myeloid
cells upon S. Typhimurium infection could potentially play a significant role in 
curtailing allergic airway inflammation. These findings signify the contribution 
of myeloid cells in preventing Th2-mediated diseases and suggest their possible
application as therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3958017
PMID: 24343652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Hum Pathol. 2014 Feb;45(2):320-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.09.007. Epub 2013
Dec 14.

Cutaneous and mammary apocrine carcinomas have different immunoprofiles.

Piris A(1), Peng Y(2), Boussahmain C(3), Essary LR(4), Gudewicz TM(1), Hoang
MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114;
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114. (2)Department 
of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235. 
(3)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75235. (5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114; Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02114. Electronic address: mhoang@partners.org.

Often the distinction of cutaneous apocrine carcinoma from metastatic mammary
apocrine carcinoma to the skin can be a diagnostic dilemma because both tumors
share similar histologic features and have overlapping immunohistochemical
profile. We compared the expression of adipophilin, cytokeratin 5/6, p63, GATA3, 
mammaglobin, androgen receptor, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and
HER2 by immunohistochemistry in 14 cutaneous apocrine carcinomas (11 primary
tumors, 3 metastases) and 26 primary apocrine carcinomas of the breast. Whereas
focal adipophilin staining was seen in 36% (5/14) of cutaneous apocrine
carcinoma, strong and diffuse adipophilin staining was seen in 88% (22/25) of
mammary apocrine carcinoma (P = .0013). Differences in estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor expression were also statistically significant (P = .018
and .043). Androgen receptor was strongly positive in all cutaneous and mammary
cases. Although there was no significant difference in the frequency of
expression of cytokeratin 5/6, p63, HER2, GATA3, and mammaglobin in cutaneous
apocrine carcinoma versus mammary apocrine carcinoma, strong and diffuse
cytokeratin 5/6 and/or mammaglobin expression were seen only in cutaneous
apocrine carcinoma. In conclusion, cutaneous apocrine carcinoma is likely
adipophilin- ER+ PR+/- HER2- and can exhibit strong and diffuse cytokeratin 5/6
and/or mammaglobin expression. On the contrary, a mammary apocrine carcinoma is
likely adipophilin+ ER- PR- and often exhibit 3+ HER2 with corresponding HER2
gene amplification. A panel of adipophilin, ER, PR, HER2, cytokeratin 5/6, and
mammaglobin may be helpful in distinguishing cutaneous apocrine carcinoma from
mammary apocrine carcinoma.

© 2014.

PMID: 24342430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2013;(7):53-6.

[Association of polymorphism Rs6737848 in the Socs5 gene with bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Saltykova IV, Freidin MB, Bragina EIu, Ogorodova LM, Puzyrev VP.

AIM: To investigate the role of polymorphic variants of immune-response modifying
genes in predisposition to asthma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The analysis of restriction fragments length polymorphism
was used to investigate 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms: IFNG rs2069705,
IFNGR2 rs17880053, IL4 rs 2070874, IL4RA rs 1805010, GATA3 rs10905277, TBX21
rs11652969, PIASY rs3760903, PIAS3 rs12756687, STATS rs16967593, and SOCS5
rs6737848 in 106 asthma patients and 115 healthy people.
RESULTS: The rs6737848 SOCS5 polymorphism was significantly associated with
asthma in additive model (p = 0.05, OR = 0.338, 95% CI 0.158-0.723) and in
dominant model (p = 0.02, OR = 0.284, CI 0.126-0.638). None of the polymorphisms 
of the studied genes was associated with total IgE levels.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on the association of rs6737848 SOCS5 with 
asthma.

PMID: 24340963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e81110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081110. eCollection
2013.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib induces an inhibitory chromatin environment
at a distal enhancer of the estrogen receptor-a gene.

Powers GL(1), Rajbhandari P, Solodin NM, Bickford B, Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratories for Cancer Research and
University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Expression of the estrogen receptor-a (ERa) gene, ESR1, is a clinical biomarker
used to predict therapeutic outcome of breast cancer. Hence, there is significant
interest in understanding the mechanisms regulating ESR1 gene expression.
Proteasome activity is increased in cancer and we previously showed that
proteasome inhibition leads to loss of ESR1 gene expression in breast cancer
cells. Expression of ESR1 mRNA in breast cancer cells is controlled predominantly
through a proximal promoter within ~400 base pair (bp) of the transcription start
site (TSS). Here, we show that loss of ESR1 gene expression induced by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is associated with inactivation of a distal
enhancer located 150 kilobases (kb) from the TSS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays reveal several bortezomib-induced changes at the distal site including
decreased occupancy of three critical transcription factors, GATA3, FOXA1, and
AP2<U+03B3>. Bortezomib treatment also resulted in decreased histone H3 and H4
acetylation and decreased occupancy of histone acetyltransferase, p300. These
data suggest a mechanism to explain proteasome inhibitor-induced loss of ESR1
mRNA expression that highlights the importance of the chromatin environment at
the -150 kb distal enhancer in regulation of basal expression of ESR1 in breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3855213
PMID: 24339902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Dec 2;12(4):6032-9. doi: 10.4238/2013.December.2.1.

HMGB3 characterization in gastric cancer.

Gong Y(1), Cao Y, Song L, Zhou J, Wang C, Wu B.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Department of Southern Building, PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Gastric cancer is a major health problem worldwide; it is the second most common 
cause of cancer death in the world. Recent studies indicate that the
high-mobility group (HMG) of chromosomal proteins is associated with cancer
progression. However, HMGB3 has been little studied. We analyzed the
co-expression network between HMGB3 and differentially-expressed genes in the
GSE17187 database, identifying the relevant transcription factors, and the
conserved domain of HMGB3 to understand the underlying regulation mechanisms
involved in gastric cancer. Thirty-one relationships between 11
differentially-expressed genes were included in a co-expression network; many of 
these genes have been identified as related to cancer, including TBX5 and TFR2.
Further analysis identified nine transcription factors, these being GATA3, MZF1, 
GATA1, GATA2, SRY, REL, NFYB, NFYC, and NFYA, which could interact with HMGB3 to 
regulate target gene expression and consequently regulate gastric cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. The HMG-box domain was very similar in
various species, with only a few amino acid changes, indicating conserved
functions in HMG-box. This information helps to provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms of HMGB3 in human gastric cancer.

PMID: 24338397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2014;38(2):183-9. doi: 10.1007/s11239-013-1036-3.

Downregulation of T-bet/GATA-3 ratio induced by IL-11 treatment is responsible
for Th1/Th2 balance restoration in human immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).

Yao R(1), Lin Y, Li Q, Zhou X, Pan X, Bao Y, He M, Zhu B, Guo W, Lin X, Jin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
College, Wenzhou, 325000, China, yaorongxin@126.com.

Abnormal cellular immunity induced by deranged Th1/Th2 profile has been revealed 
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of immune thrombocytopenic purpura
(ITP). Correction of the shifted Th1/Th2 balance represents a potential
therapeutic approach to treat ITP. Here, we investigated the effects of IL-11 on 
the restoration of Th1/Th2 balance in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) isolated from adult ITP patients. As shown here, we observed a higher
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR in the PBMCs 
from ITP patients, consistent with the presence of an abnormally high Th1/Th2
ratio. Remarkably, upon IL-11 treatment, a reversal of T-bet/GATA-3 ratio in ITP 
was achieved and was shown to be responsible for the restoration of Th1/Th2
balance, with IL-11 at 100 ng/ml demonstrating the highest efficiency. T-bet and 
GATA-3 are the two transcriptional factors that have been indicated to be the
master regulators for Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment, respectively. In the
presence of 100 ng/ml IL-11, GATA-3 transcript abundance rose up to ~85-fold of
that measured in untreated cells, whereas T-bet transcripts were lowered merely
to ~41%, suggesting that GATA-3 was the major contributor for the reversal of
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Thus, our findings may very well encourage the development of
novel medicines that specifically target and correct the T-bet/GATA-3 imbalance
identified in ITP.

PMID: 24338248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2755-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.493650. Epub 2013 
Dec 12.

The role of prolyl hydroxylase domain protein (PHD) during rosiglitazone-induced 
adipocyte differentiation.

Kim J(1), Kwak HJ, Cha JY, Jeong YS, Rhee SD, Cheon HG.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology School of Medicine and.

Rosiglitazone, a well known insulin sensitizer, stimulates adipocyte
differentiation via the activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). Previous two-dimensional proteomics studies using C3H10T1/2 murine
mesenchymal pluripotent stem cells revealed that prolyl hydroxylase domain
protein (PHD) levels significantly increased during rosiglitazone-induced
adipocyte differentiation (RIAD). In this study, we investigated the functional
role played by PHD during RIAD. Three PHD isoforms (PHD1, 2, and 3) were found to
be up-regulated in C3H10T1/2 cells during RIAD, whereas PHD knockdown and
treatment with PHD inhibitors (dimethyloxalyl glycine or
ethyl-3,4-dihydroxybenzoate) blocked RIAD. PHD inhibition was found to be
associated with increases in the levels of anti-adipogenic proteins such as
GATA-3, KLF-2, and transcriptional coactivator with PDZ binding motif (TAZ), with
their reduced ubiquitination, suggesting that PHDs evoke the
ubiquitination/proteasomal degradation of anti-adipogenic proteins. On the other 
hand, MG-132 (a proteasomal inhibitor) prevented the degradation of
anti-adipogenic proteins and retarded RIAD. PPAR<U+03B3> antagonists (bisphenol A
diglycidyl ether or GW9662) blunted the effects of rosiglitazone on PHD
regulation. Furthermore, putative PPAR<U+03B3> binding sites were identified in the
promoter region of PHDs by ChIP-PCR, implying that rosiglitazone may induce PHD
up-regulation directly by PPAR<U+03B3> activation. Consistent with in vitro results,
oral administration of rosiglitazone to ob/ob mice for 2 weeks increased adipose 
PHD levels and decreased anti-adipogenic protein levels by increasing their
ubiquitination. These results suggest that rosiglitazone increases PHD expression
in a PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent manner and that this leads to the commitment of
anti-adipogenic proteins to the ubiquitination-proteasomal pathway and to the
subsequent induction of adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3908408
PMID: 24338020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Placenta. 2014 Feb;35(2):125-31. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2013.11.007. Epub 2013
Dec 1.

A comprehensive analysis of the human placenta transcriptome.

Saben J(1), Zhong Y(2), McKelvey S(3), Dajani NK(3), Andres A(1), Badger TM(1),
Gomez-Acevedo H(1), Shankar K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. (2)Arkansas Children's Nutrition
Center, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. (4)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
Electronic address: ShankarKartik@uams.edu.

As the conduit for nutrients and growth signals, the placenta is critical to
establishing an environment sufficient for fetal growth and development. To
better understand the mechanisms regulating placental development and gene
expression, we characterized the transcriptome of term placenta from 20 healthy
women with uncomplicated pregnancies using RNA-seq. To identify genes that were
highly expressed and unique to the placenta we compared placental RNA-seq data to
data from 7 other tissues (adipose, breast, hear, kidney, liver, lung, and smooth
muscle) and identified several genes novel to placental biology (QSOX1, DLG5, and
SEMA7A). Semi-quantitative RT-PCR confirmed the RNA-seq results and
immunohistochemistry indicated these proteins were highly expressed in the
placental syncytium. Additionally, we mined our RNA-seq data to map the relative 
expression of key developmental gene families (Fox, Sox, Gata, Tead, and Wnt)
within the placenta. We identified FOXO4, GATA3, and WNT7A to be amongst the
highest expressed members of these families. Overall, these findings provide a
new reference for understanding of placental transcriptome and can aid in the
identification of novel pathways regulating placenta physiology that may be
dysregulated in placental disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3978120
PMID: 24333048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Anim Sci J. 2014 Apr;85(4):388-94. doi: 10.1111/asj.12156. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Expression and in situ localization of GATA4, 5 and 6 mRNAs in ovine conceptuses 
and uterine endometria during the peri-implantation period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In vertebrates, six GATA transcription factors, GATA1 through GATA6, have been
identified and GATA1-3 is known to be involved in hematopoietic developments,
while GATA4-6 play roles in cardiac and endoderm developments. Recently, we and
others have found that GATA2 and GATA3 found in the trophectoderm plays a role in
gene expression specific to this cell type, but GATA4-6 have not been well
characterized in early embryonic developments. Using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and in situ hybridization, we examined the expression of
GATA4, 5 and 6 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in ovine conceptuses and uteri during the
peri-implantation period. In ovine conceptuses, GATA4, 5 and 6 transcripts were
present on days 15, 17 and 21 (day 0<U+2009>=<U+2009>day of mating), and high GATA5 and 6 mRNAs
were found on day 21, most of which were localized in the trophectoderm and
endoderm. Moreover, minute and substantial GATA4 and 5 mRNAs were found in days
15 and 21 uterine endometria, respectively. Increase in GATA4-6 transcripts in
day 21 uteri indicates that in addition to GATA1-3, GATA4-6 may also play a
potentially novel role in the development of ovine trophectoderm, endoderm and/or
uterine endometria following conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24329758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Elife. 2013 Dec 10;2:e01341. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01341.

A Gata3-Mafb transcriptional network directs post-synaptic differentiation in
synapses specialized for hearing.

Yu WM(1), Appler JM, Kim YH, Nishitani AM, Holt JR, Goodrich LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.

Information flow through neural circuits is determined by the nature of the
synapses linking the subtypes of neurons. How neurons acquire features distinct
to each synapse remains unknown. We show that the transcription factor Mafb
drives the formation of auditory ribbon synapses, which are specialized for rapid
transmission from hair cells to spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs). Mafb acts in SGNs
to drive differentiation of the large postsynaptic density (PSD) characteristic
of the ribbon synapse. In Mafb mutant mice, SGNs fail to develop normal PSDs,
leading to reduced synapse number and impaired auditory responses. Conversely,
increased Mafb accelerates synaptogenesis. Moreover, Mafb is responsible for
executing one branch of the SGN differentiation program orchestrated by the Gata3
transcriptional network. Remarkably, restoration of Mafb rescues the synapse
defect in Gata3 mutants. Hence, Mafb is a powerful regulator of cell-type
specific features of auditory synaptogenesis that offers a new entry point for
treating hearing loss. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01341.001.

PMCID: PMC3851837
PMID: 24327562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Exp Med. 2013 Dec 16;210(13):2939-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130351. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

A role for IL-25 and IL-33-driven type-2 innate lymphoid cells in atopic
dermatitis.

Salimi M(1), Barlow JL, Saunders SP, Xue L, Gutowska-Owsiak D, Wang X, Huang LC, 
Johnson D, Scanlon ST, McKenzie AN, Fallon PG, Ogg GS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Human Immunology Unit, National Institute for
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Radcliffe Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, England, UK.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s, nuocytes, NHC) require RORA and GATA3 for
their development. We show that human ILC2s express skin homing receptors and
infiltrate the skin after allergen challenge, where they produce the type 2
cytokines IL-5 and IL-13. Skin-derived ILC2s express the IL-33 receptor ST2,
which is up-regulated during activation, and are enriched in lesional skin
biopsies from atopic patients. Signaling via IL-33 induces type 2 cytokine and
amphiregulin expression, and increases ILC2 migration. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that E-cadherin ligation on human ILC2 dramatically inhibits IL-5 and
IL-13 production. Interestingly, down-regulation of E-cadherin is characteristic 
of filaggrin insufficiency, a cardinal feature of atopic dermatitis (AD). ILC2
may contribute to increases in type 2 cytokine production in the absence of the
suppressive E-cadherin ligation through this novel mechanism of barrier sensing. 
Using Rag1(-/-) and RORa-deficient mice, we confirm that ILC2s are present in
mouse skin and promote AD-like inflammation. IL-25 and IL-33 are the predominant 
ILC2-inducing cytokines in this model. The presence of ILC2s in skin, and their
production of type 2 cytokines in response to IL-33, identifies a role for ILC2s 
in the pathogenesis of cutaneous atopic disease.

PMCID: PMC3865470
PMID: 24323357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Histopathology. 2014 May;64(6):872-9. doi: 10.1111/his.12345. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Microcystic urothelial carcinoma: morphology, immunohistochemistry and clinical
behaviour.

Lopez Beltran A(1), Montironi R, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain; Fundação Champalimaud, Lisbon, Portugal.

AIMS: To report on the clinicopathological features of 20 cases of microcystic
urothelial bladder carcinoma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The extent of microcystic component varied from 50-100% of
the specimens. The cysts were round-oval and of varying sizes; the periphery of
large cysts was frequently punctuated by many smaller cysts. The cysts were lined
by urothelial, low columnar cells or by a single layer of flattened epithelium of
low-intermediate nuclear grade. Focal high-grade conventional urothelial
carcinoma was present in eight cases. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated variable 
positivity for cytokeratins 7 and 20, MUC1, MUC5AC, p63 and GATA3. Extent of
expression of Ki67, p53 and p27(kip1) ranged from 20-60%, 10-40% and 10-30% of
cells, respectively. On follow-up, 11 patients died of disease at 11-56 months
and three patients were alive with disease at 26-37 months. Univariate survival
analysis showed no differences for microcystic carcinoma versus conventional
urothelial carcinoma (P = 0.548).
CONCLUSIONS: Microcystic urothelial carcinoma may pose diagnostic difficulties,
especially in limited biopsy samples, where it may be mistaken for cystitis
glandularis or adenocarcinoma of the bladder. Histological features, clinical
history and appropriate immunohistochemical studies should help to distinguish it
from its mimics. Aggressiveness seems to be related to higher stage at diagnosis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24321001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Jan 29;62(4):902-11. doi: 10.1021/jf404752c. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Structural characterization of a novel polysaccharide from pulp tissues of Litchi
chinensis and its immunomodulatory activity.

Jing Y(1), Huang L, Lv W, Tong H, Song L, Hu X, Yu R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnological Institute of Chinese Materia Medica and Department of
Pharmacology, Jinan University , 601 Huangpu Avenue West, Guangzhou 510632, China
.

A novel polysaccharide (LCP50W) with a molecular weight of 4.72 × 10(4) Da was
isolated from the pulp tissues of Litchi chinensis . The chemical structure of
LCP50W was characterized using physicochemical and instrumental analyses. The
results indicated that the main chain of LCP50W consisted of (1<U+2192>3)-linked
ß-L-rhamnopyranosyl, (1<U+2192>6)-linked a-D-glucopyranosyl, and (1<U+2192>2,6)-linked
a-D-glucopyranosyl residues, which branched at O-6. The three branches consisted 
of (1<U+2192>2)-linked a-L-rhamnopyranosyl, (1<U+2192>3)-linked a-D-galactopyranosyl, and
(1<U+2192>3)-linked a-L-mannopyranosyl residues, terminated with (1<U+2192>)-linked
a-L-arabinopyranosyl residues, respectively. The in vitro immunomodulatory assay 
revealed that LCP50W promoted the proliferation of mouse splenocytes and enhanced
the cytotoxicity of NK cells. LCP50W boosted the secretion of Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> 
while it inhibited the secretion of Th2 cytokine IL-4; it also enhanced the
expression of T-bet while it inhibited the expression of GATA-3. Additionally,
LCP50W promoted the development of cell cycle toward the S phase.

PMID: 24320227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jan;124(1):174-87. doi: 10.1172/JCI70103. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

Diverting T helper cell trafficking through increased plasticity attenuates
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Califano D, Sweeney KJ, Le H, VanValkenburgh J, Yager E, O'Connor W Jr, Kennedy
JS, Jones DM, Avram D.

Naive T helper cells differentiate into functionally distinct effector subsets
that drive specialized immune responses. Recent studies indicate that some of the
effector subsets have plasticity. Here, we used an EAE model and found that Th17 
cells deficient in the transcription factor BCL11B upregulated the Th2-associated
proteins GATA3 and IL-4 without decreasing RAR-related orphan receptor <U+03B3> (ROR<U+03B3>t),
IL-17, and GM-CSF levels. Surprisingly, abnormal IL-4 production affected Th17
cell trafficking, diverting migration from the draining lymph nodes/CNS route to 
the mesenteric lymph nodes/gut route, which ameliorated EAE without overt
colitis. T helper cell rerouting in EAE was dependent on IL-4, which enhanced
retinoic acid (RA) production by dendritic cells, which further induced
expression of gut-homing receptors CCR9 and a4ß7 on Bcl11b-deficient CD4+ T
cells. Furthermore, IL-4 treatment or Th2 immunization of wild-type mice with EAE
caused no alteration in Th17 cytokines or ROR<U+03B3>t, but diverted T helper cell
trafficking to the gut, which improved EAE outcome without overt colitis. Our
data demonstrate that Th17 cells are permissive to Th2 gene expression without
affecting Th17 gene expression. This Th17 plasticity has an impact on
trafficking, which is a critical component of the immune response and may
represent a possible avenue for treating multiple sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3871236
PMID: 24316973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Jan;36(1):299-304. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.11.016.
Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Role of CD4(+) and CD8a(+) T cells in protective immunity against Edwardsiella
tarda infection of ginbuna crucian carp, Carassius auratus langsdorfii.

Yamasaki M(1), Araki K(2), Nakanishi T(3), Nakayasu C(4), Yamamoto A(5).

Author information: 
(1)The United Graduate School of Agricultural Sciences, Kagoshima University,
1-21-24 Korimoto, Kagoshima 890-8580, Japan. (2)Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima
University, 4-50-20 Shimoarata, Kagoshima 890-0056, Japan. Electronic address:
araki@fish.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon
University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0880, Japan. (4)National
Research Institute of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Agency, Minami-ise, Mie
516-0193, Japan. (5)Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima University, 4-50-20
Shimoarata, Kagoshima 890-0056, Japan.

Edwardsiella tarda is an intracellular pathogen that causes edwardsiellosis in
fish. Our previous study suggests that cell-mediated immunity (CMI) plays an
essential role in protection against E. tarda infection. In the present study, we
adoptively transferred T-cell subsets sensitized with E. tarda to isogenic naïve 
ginbuna crucian carp to determination the T-cell subsets involved in protecting
fish from E. tarda infection. Recipients of CD4(+) and CD8a(+) cells acquired
significant resistance to infection with E. tarda 8 days after sensitization,
indicating that helper T cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes plays crucial roles in
protective immunity to E. tarda. Moreover, transfer of sensitized CD8a(+) cells
up-regulated the expression of genes encoding interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and perforin, 
suggesting that protective immunity to E. tarda involves cell-mediated
cytotoxicity and interferon-<U+03B3>-mediated induction of CMI. The results establish
that CMI plays a crucial role in immunity against E. tarda. These findings
provide novel insights into understanding the role of CMI to intracellular
pathogens of fish.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Hum Pathol. 2014 Feb;45(2):244-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.08.020. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

Comprehensive profile of GATA binding protein 3 immunohistochemical expression in
primary and metastatic renal neoplasms.

Gonzalez-Roibon N(1), Faraj SF(1), Munari E(1), Bezerra SM(1), Albadine R(1),
Sharma R(1), Argani P(1), Allaf ME(2), Netto GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231. (2)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231. (3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231; Department of Urology, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231; Department of
Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231.
Electronic address: gnetto1@jhmi.edu.

Transcription factor GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) has been suggested as a
marker of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and upper urinary tract. Its
expression in primary and metastatic renal tumors has not been fully determined. 
We evaluated GATA3 expression in 47 oncocytomas, 196 primary renal cell
carcinomas (RCCs) (71 clear cell, 53 papillary, 21 Xp11.2, 33 chromophobe RCCs,
and 18 collecting duct carcinomas [CDC]), and 43 unrelated metastatic RCCs (41
clear cell and 2 Xp11.2 RCC). GATA3 nuclear expression was evaluated in tissue
microarrays built from archival tissues using immunohistochemistry. Intensity (0 
to 3+) and extent (percentage) of expression were assessed. Several cutoff values
(>0%, >5%, and >10%) were evaluated to indicate GATA3 positivity. Among
oncocytomas, 9 (19%) of 47 had some degree of nuclear GATA3 expression with
median extent of 0% (0%-100%). When using either 5% or 10% cutoff values, 5 (11%)
of 47 oncocytomas were positive. In primary RCCs, 6 (3%) of 196 had some degree
of nuclear expression with a median extent of 0% (0%-100%). When using either 5% 
or 10% cutoff values, 2 cases remained positive (1%) (Xp11.2 and CDC). All
metastatic RCCs were negative. We found an overall lack of GATA3 expression in
primary and metastatic RCCs. GATA3 is expressed in a minority of oncocytomas,
Xp11.2-RCC, and CDC. Given GATA3 positivity in upper urinary tract urothelial
carcinoma, our findings support a role for GATA3 in the differential diagnosis of
primary renal masses and a utility in the interrogation of metastatic tumors of
unknown primary in the presence of a renal mass.

© 2014.

PMID: 24315206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. BMC Cancer. 2013 Dec 5;13:573. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-573.

Association of cellular and molecular responses in the rat mammary gland to
17ß-estradiol with susceptibility to mammary cancer.

Ding L, Zhao Y, Warren CL, Sullivan R, Eliceiri KW, Shull JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin Madison, 1400 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA. shull@oncology.wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: We are using ACI and BN rats, which differ markedly in their
susceptibility to 17ß-estradiol (E2)-induced mammary cancer, to identify genetic 
variants and environmental factors that determine mammary cancer susceptibility. 
The objective of this study was to characterize the cellular and molecular
responses to E2 in the mammary glands of ACI and BN rats to identify qualitative 
and quantitative phenotypes that associate with and/or may confer differences in 
susceptibility to mammary cancer.
METHODS: Female ACI and BN rats were treated with E2 for 1, 3 or 12 weeks.
Mammary gland morphology and histology were examined by whole mount and
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Cell proliferation and epithelial density
were evaluated by quantitative immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
quantitative western blotting and flow cytometry. Mammary gland differentiation
was examined by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression was evaluated by
microarray, qRT-PCR and quantitative western blotting assays. Extracellular
matrix (ECM) associated collagen was evaluated by Picrosirius Red staining and
Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) microscopy.
RESULTS: The luminal epithelium of ACI rats exhibited a rapid and sustained
proliferative response to E2. By contrast, the proliferative response exhibited
by the mammary epithelium of BN rats was restrained and transitory. Moreover, the
epithelium of BN rats appeared to undergo differentiation in response to E2, as
evidenced by production of milk proteins as well as luminal ectasia and
associated changes in the ECM. Marked differences in expression of genes that
encode proteins with well-defined roles in mammary gland development (Pgr, Wnt4, 
Tnfsf11, Prlr, Stat5a, Areg, Gata3), differentiation and milk production (Lcn2,
Spp1), regulation of extracellular environment (Mmp7, Mmp9), and cell-cell or
cell-ECM interactions (Cd44, Cd24, Cd52) were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that these cellular and molecular phenotypes are
heritable and may underlie, at least in part, the differences in mammary cancer
susceptibility exhibited by ACI and BN rats.

PMCID: PMC3924185
PMID: 24304664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Leukemia. 2014 Jun;28(6):1216-26. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.366. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Proteasome inhibitors exert cytotoxicity and increase chemosensitivity via
transcriptional repression of Notch1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Koyama D(1), Kikuchi J(1), Hiraoka N(1), Wada T(1), Kurosawa H(2), Chiba S(3),
Furukawa Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical
University, School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. (3)Department of Hematology and
Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The Notch signaling pathway has been recognized as a key factor for the
pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), because of the high 
incidence of activating mutations of Notch1. Notch inhibition could serve as a
new treatment strategy for T-ALL; however, the attempts to perturb Notch
signaling pathways have been unsuccessful so far. In this study, we found that
proteasome inhibitors exert cytotoxic effects on T-ALL cells with constitutive
activation of Notch1 to a similar extent as myeloma cells. The proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib repressed the transcription of Notch1 and downstream
effectors including Hes1, GATA3, RUNX3 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) (p65 and
p50), coincided with downregulation of the major transactivator Sp1 and its
dissociation from Notch1 promoter. Overexpression of the Notch1 intracellular
domain (NICD) significantly ameliorated bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity against
T-ALL cells. Drug combination studies revealed that bortezomib showed synergistic
or additive effects with key drugs for the treatment of T-ALL such as
dexamethasone (DEX), doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, which were readily
abolished by NICD overexpression. The synergy of bortezomib and DEX was confirmed
in vivo using a murine xenograft model. Our findings provide a molecular basis
and rationale for the inclusion of proteasome inhibitors in treatment strategies 
for T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC4051216
PMID: 24301524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Curr Mol Med. 2014 Jan;14(1):151-62.

Id-1B, an alternatively spliced isoform of the inhibitor of differentiation-1,
impairs cancer cell malignancy through inhibition of proliferation and
angiogenesis.

Nguewa P, Manrique I, Díaz R, Redrado M, Parrondo R, Perez-Stable C, Calvo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University
of Navarra, Avda. Pio XII, 55, 31008 Pamplona, Spain. acalvo@unav.es.

Id-1 is a member of the helix-loop-helix family of proteins that regulates the
activity of transcription factors to suppress cellular differentiation and to
promote cell growth. Overexpression of Id-1 in tumor cells correlates with
increased malignancy and resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Id-1B is an
isoform generated by alternative splicing that differs from the classical Id-1 in
the 13-C-terminal amino acids, whose function is at present unknown. We have
studied the role of Id-1B in cancer and its expression in healthy/malignant lung 
tissues. Overexpression of Id-1B in A549 lung and PC3 prostate cancer cells
reduced anchorage-dependent and independent proliferation and clonogenic
potential. Moreover, it increased the proportion of cells in the G0/G1 phase of
the cell cycle and p27 levels, while reduced phospho-Erk and cyclin A levels.
Through microarray analysis, we identified genes involved in cell growth and
proliferation that are specifically deregulated as a consequence of Id-1B
overexpression, including IGF2, BMP4, Id2, GATA3, EREG and AREG. Id-1B
overexpressing cells that were treated with 4Gy irradiation dose were
significantly less resistant to cell death. In vivo assays demonstrated that
tumors with high Id-1B levels exhibited less growth (p<0.01), metabolic activity 
(glucose uptake) and angiogenesis (p<0.05) compared to tumors with low Id-1B
expression; mice survival was significantly extended (p<0.05). Quantification by 
qRT-PCR revealed that expression of Id-1B was significantly lower (p<0.01) in
human lung tumors compared to their matched nonmalignant counterparts. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that Id-1B decreases the malignancy of lung
and prostate cancer cells, sensitizes them to radiotherapy-induced cell death,
and counteracts the protumorigenic role of the classical form of Id-1.

PMID: 24295493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Nov;34(11):967-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2013.11.013.

[Expression of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
of patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen L(1), Yin QS, Wei XD, Li QY, Mi RH, Li YF, Song YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450008, China.

PMID: 24294855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 May;134(5):1323-31. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.504. Epub 2013 
Nov 26.

CtBP1 overexpression in keratinocytes perturbs skin homeostasis.

Deng H(1), Li F(2), Li H(3), Deng Y(3), Liu J(3), Wang D(4), Han G(4), Wang
XJ(5), Zhang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado,
USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado,
USA [3] Department of Dermatology, The Sixth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)1] Department of Pathology,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of
Dermatology, Yueyang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of TCM, Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado, USA. (5)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado, USA. (6)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [3] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Carboxyl-terminal-binding protein-1 (CtBP1) is a transcriptional corepressor with
multiple in vitro targets, but its in vivo functions are largely unknown. We
generated keratinocyte-specific CtBP1 transgenic mice with a keratin-5 promoter
(K5.CtBP1) to probe the pathological roles of CtBP1. At transgene expression
levels comparable to endogenous CtBP1 in acute skin wounds, the K5.CtBP1
epidermis displayed hyperproliferation, loss of E-cadherin, and failed terminal
differentiation. Known CtBP1 target genes associated with these processes, e.g., 
p21, Brca1, and E-cadherin, were downregulated in K5.CtBP1 skin. Surprisingly,
K5.CtBP1 pups also exhibited a hair loss phenotype. We found that expression of
the Distal-less 3 (Dlx3), a critical regulator of hair follicle differentiation
and cycling, was decreased in K5.CtBP1 mice. Molecular studies revealed that
CtBP1 directly suppressed Dlx3 transcription. Consistently, K5.CtBP1 mice
displayed abnormal hair follicles with decreased expression of Dlx3 downstream
targets Gata3, Hoxc13, and hair keratins. In summary, this CtBP1 transgenic model
provides in vivo evidence for certain CtBP1 functions predicted from in vitro
studies, reveals--to our knowledge--previously unreported functions and
transcriptional activities of CtBP1 in the context of epithelial-mesenchymal
interplay, and suggests that CtBP1 has a pathogenic role in hair follicle
morphogenesis and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4537778
PMID: 24280726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Nov;33(11):1565-70.

[Differential gene expression profiling for identification of protective
transcription factors in different subtypes of nasopharyngeal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang C(1), Lin P, Wang J, Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Direct MD Class (8-year Program), Grade 2007, First Clinical Medical College, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.E-mail: 837949436@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the dysregulated genes among the differentially expressed
genes in 41 nasopharyngeal biopsy samples and identify their protective
transcriptional factors.
METHODS: The differentially expressed gene profiles were obtained by analyzing
both types I and II nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC_I and NPC_II, respectively)
using EXCEL and Bioinformatics tools. The transcriptional factors were further
studied only when (1) the difference in the binding sites of the differentially
expressed genes between NPC_I and NPC_II groups was statistically significant,
(2) the expressions of the transcription factors were correlated with the gene
expressions in the samples, and (3) the transcription factors affected at least
40% of the expression of the related genes.
RESULTS: In NPC_I samples, 80 transcription factors were found to be
up-regulated, in which RUNX3, GATA3, NR3C1, NRF1, RXRA, SMAD7, TBP, and ZBTB6
were positive factors and HLF and MTF1 were negative factors, involved in the
regulation of the genes in T cell receptor signaling pathway. No eligible
transcription factors were found in association with down-regulated genes in
NPC_I compared to NPC_II gene expression profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: The over-expressed genes in NPC_I are mainly related to immune
responses, and we found 8 positive factors and 2 negative factors that regulate
the genes in T cell receptor signaling pathway. The 10 transcription factors may 
serve as potential therapeutic targets for NPC_I. We failed to identify any
transcription factors associated with down-regulated genes in NPC_I relative to
NPC_II possibly as a result of multiple factors that affect the differential gene
expressions in NPC_II including the transcription factors, DNA phosphorylation
and modification, chromosome variation and environmental factors.

PMID: 24273254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 4;105(23):1782-8. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt321. Epub
2013 Nov 21.

Predicting degree of benefit from adjuvant trastuzumab in NSABP trial B-31.

Pogue-Geile KL(1), Kim C, Jeong JH, Tanaka N, Bandos H, Gavin PG, Fumagalli D,
Goldstein LC, Sneige N, Burandt E, Taniyama Y, Bohn OL, Lee A, Kim SI, Reilly ML,
Remillard MY, Blackmon NL, Kim SR, Horne ZD, Rastogi P, Fehrenbacher L, Romond
EH, Swain SM, Mamounas EP, Wickerham DL, Geyer CE Jr, Costantino JP, Wolmark N,
Paik S.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
Operations and Biostatistical Centers, Pittsburgh, PA (J-HJ, HB, PR, LF, EHR,
SMS, EPM, DLW, CEG,Jr, JPC, NW, SP); Division of Pathology, NSABP (KLP-G, CK, NT,
PGG, DF, YT, OLB, AL, S-IK, MLR, MYR, NLB, S-RK, ZDH); Department of
Biostatistics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA (J-HJ, HB, JPC); PhenoPath Laboratories, PLLC, Seattle, WA (LCG); 
Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX (NS); Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
University Cancer Center, Hamburg, Germany (EB); Department of Pathology,
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of South Korea (AL); University of 
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA (PR); Department of Oncology, Kaiser 
Permanente, Northern California, Vallejo, CA (LF); Department of Internal
Medicine, Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY (EHR);
Department of Medicine, Washington Cancer Institute, MedStar Washington Hospital 
Center, Washington, DC (SMS); Department of Surgery, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Orlando, Orlando, FL (EPM); Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA (CEG, Jr); Department of Surgery, Allegheny Cancer
Center at Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA (DLW, NW); Department of
Biomedical Science, Severance Biomedical Science Institute, and Department of
Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea (SP).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Dec 4;105(23):1772-5.

BACKGROUND: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) trial
B-31 suggested the efficacy of adjuvant trastuzumab, even in HER2-negative breast
cancer. This finding prompted us to develop a predictive model for degree of
benefit from trastuzumab using archived tumor blocks from B-31.
METHODS: Case subjects with tumor blocks were randomly divided into discovery (n 
= 588) and confirmation cohorts (n = 991). A predictive model was built from the 
discovery cohort through gene expression profiling of 462 genes with nCounter
assay. A predefined cut point for the predictive model was tested in the
confirmation cohort. Gene-by-treatment interaction was tested with Cox models,
and correlations between variables were assessed with Spearman correlation.
Principal component analysis was performed on the final set of selected genes.
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Eight predictive genes associated with HER2 (ERBB2, c17orf37, GRB7) or
ER (ESR1, NAT1, GATA3, CA12, IGF1R) were selected for model building.
Three-dimensional subset treatment effect pattern plot using two principal
components of these genes was used to identify a subset with no benefit from
trastuzumab, characterized by intermediate-level ERBB2 and high-level ESR1 mRNA
expression. In the confirmation set, the predefined cut points for this model
classified patients into three subsets with differential benefit from trastuzumab
with hazard ratios of 1.58 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.67 to 3.69; P = .29;
n = 100), 0.60 (95% CI = 0.41 to 0.89; P = .01; n = 449), and 0.28 (95% CI = 0.20
to 0.41; P < .001; n = 442; P(interaction) between the model and trastuzumab <
.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a gene expression-based predictive model for degree of 
benefit from trastuzumab and demonstrated that HER2-negative tumors belong to the
moderate benefit group, thus providing justification for testing trastuzumab in
HER2-negative patients (NSABP B-47).

PMCID: PMC3848987
PMID: 24262440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Iran J Pharm Res. 2013 Summer;12(3):445-55.

Development and Use a Novel combined in-vivo and in-vitro Assay for
Anti-inflammatory and Immunosuppressive Agents.

Li T(1), Chen H, Mei X, Wei N, Cao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical College of the Chinese People's Armed Police
Force, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. ; Tianjin Key Laboratory for
Biomarkers of Occupational and Environmental Hazard, Medical College of the
Chinese People's Armed Police Force, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

Contact hypersensitivity (CHS) mouse model induced by 2, 4-dinitrofluorobenzene
(DNFB) is thought to be a T helper 1 (Th1)-dominant response and used for
investigating anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents. However, it is
hardly used for screening large-scale drugs because of the large number of
animals and complex mechanisms involved in-vivo. In this study, we focused on
whether T lymphocytes from CHS mouse model could maintain the state of immune
response in-vitro and explored a suitable time for drugs screening. The results
showed that CD4(+) T cells of CHS mice were higher compared with those in normal 
group. The expression of T-bet and GATA3 showed a Th1 shift and the levels of
interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-4 also showed similar trend. Furthermore, IL-6 produced
by T lymphocytes from CHS mice had a high level too. Then, we detected the
effects of dexamethasone (DEX), cyclosporine A (CsA) and mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF) on T lymphocytes in-vitro, and the data displayed that these
immunosuppressive drugs could all inhibit the proliferation of T lymphocytes
significantly. These findings suggested that T lymphocytes from CHS mice could
mimic a similar immune response in-vitro, and it's also a suitable method for
screening anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents.

PMCID: PMC3813265
PMID: 24250651  [PubMed]



1. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):819-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.09.012.

The polycomb protein Ezh2 regulates differentiation and plasticity of CD4(+) T
helper type 1 and type 2 cells.

Tumes DJ(1), Onodera A, Suzuki A, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Iwamura C, Hosokawa H,
Koseki H, Tokoyoda K, Suzuki Y, Motohashi S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

After antigen encounter by CD4(+) T cells, polarizing cytokines induce the
expression of master regulators that control differentiation. Inactivation of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2 was found to specifically enhance T helper 1 (Th1)
and Th2 cell differentiation and plasticity. Ezh2 directly bound and facilitated 
correct expression of Tbx21 and Gata3 in differentiating Th1 and Th2 cells,
accompanied by substantial trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3).
In addition, Ezh2 deficiency resulted in spontaneous generation of discrete IFN-<U+03B3>
and Th2 cytokine-producing populations in nonpolarizing cultures, and under these
conditions IFN-<U+03B3> expression was largely dependent on enhanced expression of the
transcription factor Eomesodermin. In vivo, loss of Ezh2 caused increased
pathology in a model of allergic asthma and resulted in progressive accumulation 
of memory phenotype Th2 cells. This study establishes a functional link between
Ezh2 and transcriptional regulation of lineage-specifying genes in terminally
differentiated CD4(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24238339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:460316. doi: 10.1155/2013/460316. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

The diagnostic value of transcription factors T-bet/GATA3 ratio in predicting
antibody-mediated rejection.

Li X(1), Sun Q, Zhang M, Chen J, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
Clinical School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous data showed that the predominance of intraglomerular T-bet
or GATA3 is correlated with different mechanisms of rejection, suggesting that
the ratio of T-bet/GATA3 might be used to distinguish antibody-mediated rejection
(ABMR) and T-cell-mediated rejection (TCMR).
METHODS: We compared the intraglomerular T-bet/GATA3 ratio in ABMR and TCMR. The 
intragraft expression of T-bet and GATA3 was studied via immunohistochemistry.
The correlation of the diagnosis of AMR with the ratio of T-bet/GATA3 was
examined.
RESULTS: Both intraglomerular T-bet- and GATA3-expressing cells were increased
during acute rejection. T-bet/GATA3>1 was strongly correlated with ABMR (93.3%
versus 18.2%). The incidence of positive HLA-I/II antibodies and glomerulitis is 
significantly higher in T-bet/GATA3>1 group (P < 0.001, 0.013, resp.). The scores
of peritubular capillary inflammation and glomerulitis were also higher in
T-bet/GATA3>1 group (P = 0.052, P < 0.001, resp.). Nevertheless, T-bet/GATA3>1 is
also correlated with C4d-negative ABMR and resistance to steroid treatment.
Compared with C4d deposition, T-bet/GATA3>1 had a slight lower (90% versus 100%) 
specificity but a much higher (87.5% versus 68.8%) sensitivity.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested that intraglomerular predominance of T-bet over
GATA3 might be used as diagnosis maker of ABMR in addition to C4d, especially in 
C4d-negative cases.

PMCID: PMC3819890
PMID: 24235972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 27;288(52):36971-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506535. Epub
2013 Nov 14.

GATA3 transcription factor abrogates Smad4 transcription factor-mediated fascin
overexpression, invadopodium formation, and breast cancer cell invasion.

Sun J(1), He H, Pillai S, Xiong Y, Challa S, Xu L, Chellappan S, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Tumor Biology.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) is a potent and context-dependent regulator
of tumor progression. TGFß promotes the lung metastasis of basal-like (but not
the luminal-like) breast cancer. Here, we demonstrated that fascin, a
pro-metastasis actin bundling protein, was a direct target of the canonical
TGFß-Smad4 signaling pathway in basal-like breast cancer cells. TGFß and Smad4
induced fascin overexpression by directly binding to a Smad binding element on
the fascin promoter. We identified GATA3, a transcription factor crucial for
mammary gland morphogenesis and luminal differentiation, as a negative regulator 
of TGFß- and Smad4-induced fascin overexpression. When ectopically expressed in
basal-like breast cancer cells, GATA-3 abrogated TGFß- and Smad4-mediated
overexpression of fascin and other TGFß response genes, invadopodium formation,
cell migration, and invasion, suggesting suppression of the canonical TGFß-Smad
signaling axis. Mechanistically, GATA3 abrogated the canonical TGFß-Smad
signaling by abolishing interactions between Smad4 and its DNA binding elements, 
potentially through physical interactions between the N-terminal of GATA3 and
Smad3/4 proteins. Our findings provide mechanistic insight into how TGFß-mediated
cell motility and invasiveness are differentially regulated in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3873555
PMID: 24235142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int Immunol. 2014 Mar;26(3):159-72. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxt053. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Zinc oxide nanoparticles provide an adjuvant effect to ovalbumin via a Th2
response in Balb/c mice.

Roy R(1), Kumar S, Verma AK, Sharma A, Chaudhari BP, Tripathi A, Das M, Dwivedi
PD.

Author information: 
(1)Food, Drug and Chemical Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research, M.G. Marg, PO Box 80, Lucknow 226001, India.

Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZNPs) have been used in dietary supplements and may
cause an immunomodulatory effect. The present study investigated the effect of
ZNPs on antigen-specific immune responses in mice sensitized with the
T-cell-dependent antigen ovalbumin (OVA). BALB/c mice were intraperitoneally
administered ZNPs (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 3mg) once, in combination with OVA, and the
serum antibodies, splenocyte reactivity and activation of antigen-presenting
cells were examined. The serum levels of OVA-specific IgG1 and IgE were found
significantly enhanced by treatment with ZNPs over control. An increased level of
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-17 and decreased level of IL-10 and TNF-a in splenocytes
administered with ZNPs were observed in comparison with control. The ZNPs and
OVA-stimulated T lymphocytes showed enhanced proliferation compared with control.
Macrophages and B cells showed high expression of MHC class II, whereas higher
expression of CD11b in macrophages of the ZNPs and ZNPs/OVA treated groups was
observed. The lungs and spleen had increased eosinophils and mast cell numbers.
Also, myeloperoxidase activity in lungs was found to be increased by 2.5-fold in 
the case of ZNPs and 3.75-fold increase in ZNPs/OVA, whereas in intestine, there 
was significant increase in both the groups. Increased expression of the genes
for GATA-3, SOCS-3, TLR-4, IL-13 and IL-5 in the intestine was observed.
Collectively, these data indicate that systemic exposure to a single
administration of ZNPs could enhance subsequent antigen-specific immune
reactions, including the serum production of antigen-specific antibodies, and the
functionality of T cells.

PMID: 24225181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Dis Markers. 2013;35(5):419-29. doi: 10.1155/2013/139895. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Early time-dependent dynamic changes of TBET and GATA3 mRNA expressions in
patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Rainer TH(1), Graham CA, Chan RW, Chan CP, Tan PC, Yip GW, Yu CM.

Author information: 
(1)Accident and Emergency Medicine Academic Unit, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: T-box expressed in T cells (TBET) and guanine adenine thymine adenine
sequence-binding protein 3 (GATA3) play important roles in the differentiation of
Th1 and Th2 subsets, which contributes to the progression of acute coronary
syndrome (ACS).
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the temporal change of TBET/GATA3 mRNA
ratio in ACS.
METHODS: Thirty-three patients suspected of ACS with symptom onset within 24
hours were recruited. Blood samples were taken after arrival at the emergency
department and at hourly intervals until the 6th hour. The mRNA expressions of
TBET and GATA3 were quantified by a real-time RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: The TBET/GATA3 mRNA ratio was elevated dramatically in patients with
acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and exhibited biphasic M-shaped release
kinetics with two distinct peaks. The ratio was elevated 2 hours after symptom
onset, dropped to the lowest level at 10 hours, and rose to the second peak at 14
hours. A similar biphasic M-shaped curve was observed in AMI patients with blood 
samples taken prior to any intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: The TBET/GATA3 mRNA ratio was elevated in AMI patients throughout
most of the first 20 hours after symptom onset. The biphasic M-shaped release
kinetics was more likely to reflect pathophysiological changes rather than
treatment effects.

PMCID: PMC3810123
PMID: 24223457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e78097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078097.
eCollection 2013.

Infrequent loss of luminal differentiation in ductal breast cancer metastasis.

Calvo J(1), Sánchez-Cid L, Muñoz M, Lozano JJ, Thomson TM, Fernández PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

Lymph node involvement is a major prognostic variable in breast cancer. Whether
the molecular mechanisms that drive breast cancer cells to colonize lymph nodes
are shared with their capacity to form distant metastases is yet to be
established. In a transcriptomic survey aimed at identifying molecular factors
associated with lymph node involvement of ductal breast cancer, we found that
luminal differentiation, assessed by the expression of estrogen receptor (ER)
and/or progesterone receptor (PR) and GATA3, was only infrequently lost in
node-positive primary tumors and in matched lymph node metastases. The
transcription factor GATA3 critically determines luminal lineage specification of
mammary epithelium and is widely considered a tumor and metastasis suppressor in 
breast cancer. Strong expression of GATA3 and ER in a majority of primary
node-positive ductal breast cancer was corroborated by quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry in the initial sample set, and by immunohistochemistry in an
additional set from 167 patients diagnosed of node-negative and -positive primary
infiltrating ductal breast cancer, including 102 samples from loco-regional lymph
node metastases matched to their primary tumors, as well as 37 distant
metastases. These observations suggest that loss of luminal differentiation is
not a major factor driving the ability of breast cancer cells to colonize
regional lymph nodes.

PMCID: PMC3804564
PMID: 24205108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Blood. 2013 Nov 7;122(19):3385-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-524124.

GATA3 risk alleles are associated with ancestral components in Hispanic children 
with ALL.

Walsh KM(1), de Smith AJ, Chokkalingam AP, Metayer C, Roberts W, Barcellos LF,
Wiemels JL, Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery and Program 
in Cancer Genetics, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Nov 7;122(19):3298-307.

PMCID: PMC3821727
PMID: 24203929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2014 Jan;21(1):74-84. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00452-13. Epub 2013 
Nov 6.

Identification and characterization of intestinal antigen-presenting cells
involved in uptake and processing of a nontoxic recombinant chimeric mucosal
immunogen based on cholera toxin using imaging flow cytometry.

Zhao W(1), Minderman H, Russell MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Witebsky Center for Microbial
Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.

Intragastric immunization with recombinant chimeric immunogen, SBR-CTA2/B,
constructed from the saliva-binding region (SBR) of Streptococcus mutans antigen 
AgI/II and the A2/B subunits of cholera toxin (CT) induces salivary and
circulating antibodies against S. mutans that protect against dental caries. We
previously found that SBR-CTA2/B activated dendritic cells (DC) in the Peyer's
patches (PP) and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN). To identify the cells involved in 
the intestinal uptake of SBR-CTA2/B and the initiation of immune responses, mice 
were immunized intragastrically with fluorescein-labeled SBR-CTA2/B or SBR, and
intestinal cells were examined by imaging flow cytometry after fluorescent
staining for cell surface markers. SBR-CTA2/B was preferentially taken up by
CD103(+) DC in the PP and by both CD103(+) and CD11c(+) DC in intestinal lamina
propria (LP), whereas SBR was taken up to a lesser extent by PP CD11c(+) DC,
within 2 to 16 h. By 16 h, CD103(+) and CD11c(+) DC containing
fluorescein-labeled SBR-CTA2/B were found in MLN and showed upregulation of the
chemokine receptor CCR7. Large numbers of SBR-CTA2/B-containing DC were found
interacting with CD4(+) (T helper) cells, which costained for nuclear
transcription factors T-bet or ROR<U+03B3>t, identifying them as Th1 or Th17 cells. In
contrast, SBR-containing CD11c(+) DC interacted preferentially with GATA3(+)
(Th2) cells. No SBR- or SBR-CTA2/B-containing DC were found interacting with
Foxp3(+) (T regulatory) cells. We conclude that the coupling of SBR to CTA2/B
enhances its immunogenicity by promoting uptake by DC in both PP and LP and that 
these antigen-containing DC migrated to MLN and interacted preferentially with
Th1 and Th17 cells to induce active immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3910925
PMID: 24197893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078299.
eCollection 2013.

The landscape of candidate driver genes differs between male and female breast
cancer.

Johansson I(1), Ringnér M, Hedenfalk I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund and CREATE Health 
Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

The rapidly growing collection of diverse genome-scale data from multiple tumor
types sheds light on various aspects of the underlying tumor biology. With the
objective to identify genes of importance for breast tumorigenesis in men and to 
enable comparisons with genes important for breast cancer development in women,
we applied the computational framework COpy Number and EXpression In Cancer
(CONEXIC) to detect candidate driver genes among all altered passenger genes.
Unique to this approach is that each driver gene is associated with several gene 
modules that are believed to be altered by the driver. Thirty candidate drivers
were found in the male breast cancers and 67 in the female breast cancers. We
identified many known drivers of breast cancer and other types of cancer, in the 
female dataset (e.g. GATA3, CCNE1, GRB7, CDK4). In contrast, only three known
cancer genes were found among male breast cancers; MAP2K4, LHP, and ZNF217. Many 
of the candidate drivers identified are known to be involved in processes
associated with tumorigenesis, including proliferation, invasion and
differentiation. One of the modules identified in male breast cancer was
regulated by THY1, a gene involved in invasion and related to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, men with THY1 positive breast
cancers had significantly inferior survival. THY1 may thus be a promising novel
prognostic marker for male breast cancer. Another module identified among male
breast cancers, regulated by SPAG5, was closely associated with proliferation.
Our data indicate that male and female breast cancers display highly different
landscapes of candidate driver genes, as only a few genes were found in common
between the two. Consequently, the pathobiology of male breast cancer may differ 
from that of female breast cancer and can be associated with differences in
prognosis; men diagnosed with breast cancer may consequently require different
management and treatment strategies than women.

PMCID: PMC3806766
PMID: 24194916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Nov 5;14:116. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-116.

Genetic mapping of high caries experience on human chromosome 13.

Küchler EC, Deeley K, Ho B, Linkowski S, Meyer C, Noel J, Kouzbari MZ, Bezamat M,
Granjeiro JM, Antunes LS, Antunes LA, de Abreu FV, Costa MC, Tannure PN, Seymen
F, Koruyucu M, Patir A, Mereb JC, Poletta FA, Castilla EE, Orioli IM, Marazita
ML, Vieira AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Pittsburgh, 614 Salk Hall,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. arv11@pitt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Our previous genome-wide linkage scan mapped five loci for caries
experience. The purpose of this study was to fine map one of these loci, the
locus 13q31.1, in order to identify genetic contributors to caries.
METHODS: Seventy-two pedigrees from the Philippines were studied. Caries
experience was recorded and DNA was extracted from blood samples obtained from
all subjects. Sixty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 13q31.1 were
genotyped. Association between caries experience and alleles was tested. We also 
studied 1,481 DNA samples obtained from saliva of subjects from the USA, 918
children from Brazil, and 275 children from Turkey, in order to follow up the
results found in the Filipino families. We used the AliBaba2.1 software to
determine if the nucleotide changes of the associated SNPs changed the prediction
of the presence of transcription-binding site sequences and we also analyzed the 
gene expression of the genes selected based on binding predictions. Mutation
analysis was also performed in 33 Filipino individuals of a segment of 13q31.1
that is highly conserved in mammals.
RESULTS: Statistically significant association with high caries experience was
found for 11 markers in 13q31.1 in the Filipino families. Haplotype analysis also
confirmed these results. In the populations used for follow-up purposes,
associations were found between high caries experience and a subset of these
markers. Regarding the prediction of the transcription-binding site, the base
change of the SNP rs17074565 was found to change the predicted-binding of genes
that could be involved in the pathogenesis of caries. When the sequence has the
allele C of rs17074565, the potential transcription factors binding the sequence 
are GR and GATA1. When the subject carries the G allele of rs17074565, the
potential transcription factor predicted to bind to the sequence is GATA3. The
expression of GR in whole saliva was higher in individuals with low caries
experience when compared to individuals with high caries experience (p =<U+2009>0.046). 
No mutations were found in the highly conserved sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic factors contributing to caries experience may exist in
13q31.1. The rs17074565 is located in an intergenic region and is predicted to
disrupt the binding sites of two different transcription factors that might be
involved with caries experience. GR expression in saliva may be a biomarker for
caries risk and should be further explored.

PMCID: PMC3907033
PMID: 24192446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jan;44(1):150-61. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343746. Epub 2013 Nov
4.

IL-6 controls susceptibility to helminth infection by impeding Th2 responsiveness
and altering the Treg phenotype in vivo.

Smith KA(1), Maizels RM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.

IL-6 plays a pivotal role in favoring T-cell commitment toward a Th17 cell rather
than Treg-cell phenotype, as established through in vitro model systems. We
predicted that in the absence of IL-6, mice infected with the gastrointestinal
helminth Heligmosomoides polygyrus would show reduced Th17-cell responses, but
also enhanced Treg-cell activity and consequently greater susceptibility.
Surprisingly, worm expulsion was markedly potentiated in IL-6-deficient mice,
with significantly stronger adaptive Th2 responses in both IL-6(-/-) mice and
BALB/c recipients of neutralizing anti-IL-6 monoclonal Ab. Although
IL-6-deficient mice showed lower steady-state Th17-cell levels, IL-6-independent 
Th17-cell responses occurred during in vivo infection. We excluded the Th17
response as a factor in protection, as Ab neutralization did not modify immunity 
to H. polygyrus infection in BALB/c mice. Resistance did correlate with
significant changes to the associated Treg-cell phenotype however, as
IL-6-deficient mice displayed reduced expression of Foxp3, Helios, and GATA-3,
and enhanced production of cytokines within the Treg-cell population.
Administration of an anti-IL-2:IL-2 complex boosted Treg-cell proportions in
vivo, reduced adaptive Th2 responses to WT levels, and fully restored
susceptibility to H. polygyrus in IL-6-deficient mice. Thus, in vivo, IL-6 limits
the Th2 response, modifies the Treg-cell phenotype, and promotes host
susceptibility following helminth infection.

© 2013 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3992848
PMID: 24185641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Genet. 2014 May;133(5):509-21. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1387-z. Epub 2013 Nov 
2.

A genome-wide association study of prostate cancer in West African men.

Cook MB(1), Wang Z, Yeboah ED, Tettey Y, Biritwum RB, Adjei AA, Tay E, Truelove
A, Niwa S, Chung CC, Chokkalingam AP, Chu LW, Yeager M, Hutchinson A, Yu K, Rand 
KA, Haiman CA; African Ancestry Prostate Cancer GWAS Consortium, Hoover RN, Hsing
AW, Chanock SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
DHHS, 9609 Medical Center Drive, Rm 7-E106, MSC 9774, Bethesda, MD, 20892-9774,
USA, cookmich@mail.nih.gov.

Erratum in
    Hum Genet. 2014 May;133(5):523.

Age-adjusted mortality rates for prostate cancer are higher for African-American 
men compared with those of European ancestry. Recent data suggest that West
African men also have elevated risk for prostate cancer relative to European men.
Genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer could account for part of this
difference. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of prostate
cancer in West African men in the Ghana Prostate Study. Association testing was
performed using multivariable logistic regression adjusted for age and genetic
ancestry for 474 prostate cancer cases and 458 population-based controls on the
Illumina HumanOmni-5 Quad BeadChip. The most promising association was at 10p14
within an intron of a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA RP11-543F8.2) 360 kb
centromeric of GATA3 (p = 1.29E-7). In sub-analyses, SNPs at 5q31.3 were
associated with high Gleason score (=7) cancers, the strongest of which was a
missense SNP in PCDHA1 (rs34575154, p = 3.66E-8), and SNPs at Xq28 (rs985081,
p = 8.66E-9) and 6q21 (rs2185710, p = 5.95E-8) were associated with low Gleason
score (<7) cancers. We sought to validate our findings in silico in the African
Ancestry Prostate Cancer GWAS Consortium, but only one SNP, at 10p14, replicated 
at p < 0.05. Of the 90 prostate cancer loci reported from studies of men of
European, Asian or African-American ancestry, we were able to test 81 in the
Ghana Prostate Study, and 10 of these replicated at p < 0.05. Further genetic
studies of prostate cancer in West African men are needed to confirm our
promising susceptibility loci.

PMCID: PMC3988225
PMID: 24185611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 12;110(46):18626-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1311100110. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Gata3/Ruvbl2 complex regulates T helper 2 cell proliferation via repression of
Cdkn2c expression.

Hosokawa H(1), Tanaka T, Kato M, Shinoda K, Tohyama H, Hanazawa A, Tamaki Y,
Hirahara K, Yagi R, Sakikawa I, Morita A, Nagira M, Poyurovsky MV, Suzuki Y,
Motohashi S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Department of Clinical Cell Biology, and Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Advanced Allegology of the Airway,
and Department of Medical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

GATA-binding protein 3 (Gata3) controls the differentiation of naive CD4 T cells 
into T helper 2 (Th2) cells by induction of chromatin remodeling of the Th2
cytokine gene loci, direct transactivation of Il5 and Il13 genes, and inhibition 
of Ifng. Gata3 also facilitates Th2 cell proliferation via additional mechanisms 
that are far less well understood. We herein found that Gata3 associates with
RuvB-like protein 2 (Ruvbl2) and represses the expression of a CDK inhibitor,
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2c (Cdkn2c) to facilitate the proliferation of 
Th2 cells. Gata3 directly bound to the Cdkn2c locus in an Ruvbl2-dependent
manner. The defect in the proliferation of Gata3-deficient Th2 cells is rescued
by the knockdown of Cdkn2c, indicating that Cdkn2c is a key molecule involved in 
the Gata3-mediated induction of Th2 cell proliferation. Ruvbl2-knockdown Th2
cells showed decreased antigen-induced expansion and caused less airway
inflammation in vivo. We therefore have identified a functional Gata3/Ruvbl2
complex that regulates the proliferation of differentiating Th2 cells through the
repression of a CDK inhibitor, Cdkn2c.

PMCID: PMC3832009
PMID: 24167278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):495-502. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.13-OA-0572. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Increased CXCL10 expression in nasal fibroblasts from patients with refractory
chronic rhinosinusitis and asthma.

Yoshikawa M(1), Wada K, Yoshimura T, Asaka D, Okada N, Matsumoto K, Moriyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is characterized by local inflammation
of the sinonasal tissues. CRS patients with nasal polyps and asthma often develop
acute exacerbation of sinonasal symptoms after upper respiratory tract
infections. However, the influence of concomitant asthma on the nasal immune
response to viral infection remains unclear.
METHODS: Specimens of nasal polyp and mucosal tissues were obtained from 3 groups
of CRS patients (n = 14 per group): 1) patients without asthma (CRS group), 2)
patients with aspirin-tolerant asthma (ATA group), and 3) patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA group). Nasal fibroblasts isolated from the
specimens were stimulated with poly I:C. CXCL10 expression was analyzed by the
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay. Biopsy specimens from CRS patients without asthma were
subjected to immunohistochemistry for detection of T-bet and GATA-3 expression in
CD3+ T cells by double labeling.
RESULTS: Nasal fibroblasts from the ATA and AIA groups showed significantly
enhanced expression of CXCL10 mRNA and protein after poly I:C stimulation
compared with cells from the CRS group and the control group (normal nasal
mucosa). In addition to T helper (Th)2 cells, there was more abundant
infiltration of Th1 cells into tissues from the AIA and ATA groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CRS associated with asthma may become
intractable through the over-production of CXCL10 in response to viral infection.

PMID: 24153332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Immunology. 2014 Mar;141(3):362-76. doi: 10.1111/imm.12198.

Histone methylation mediates plasticity of human FOXP3(+) regulatory T cells by
modulating signature gene expressions.

He H(1), Ni B, Tian Y, Tian Z, Chen Y, Liu Z, Yang X, Lv Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China; Institute of Advanced 
Surgical Technology and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
China.

CD4(+) FOXP3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells constitute a heterogeneous and plastic 
T-cell lineage that plays a pivotal role in maintaining immune homeostasis and
immune tolerance. However, the fate of human Treg cells after loss of FOXP3
expression and the epigenetic mechanisms contributing to such a phenotype switch 
remain to be fully elucidated. In the current study, we demonstrate that human
CD4(+) CD25(high) CD127(low/-) Treg cells convert to two subpopulations with
distinctive FOXP3(+) and FOXP3(-) phenotypes following in vitro culture with
anti-CD3/CD28 and interleukin-2. Digital gene expression analysis showed that
upon in vitro expansion, human Treg cells down-regulated Treg cell signature
genes, such as FOXP3, CTLA4, ICOS, IKZF2 and LRRC32, but up-regulated a set of T 
helper lineage-associated genes, especially T helper type 2 (Th2)-associated,
such as GATA3, GFI1 and IL13. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
of these subpopulations yielded genome-wide maps of their H3K4me3 and H3K27me3
profiles. Surprisingly, reprogramming of Treg cells was associated with
differential histone modifications, as evidenced by decreased abundance of
permissive H3K4me3 within the down-regulated Treg cell signature genes, such as
FOXP3, CTLA4 and LRRC32 loci, and increased abundance of H3K4me3 within the
Th2-associated genes, such as IL4 and IL5; however, the H3K27me3 modification
profile was not significantly different between the two subpopulations. In
conclusion, this study revealed that loss of FOXP3 expression from human Treg
cells during in vitro expansion can induce reprogramming to a T helper cell
phenotype with a gene expression signature dominated by Th2 lineage-associated
genes, and that this cell type conversion may be mediated by histone methylation 
events.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3930375
PMID: 24152290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jan;38(1):13-22. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182a0218f.

GATA3: a multispecific but potentially useful marker in surgical pathology: a
systematic analysis of 2500 epithelial and nonepithelial tumors.

Miettinen M(1), McCue PA, Sarlomo-Rikala M, Rys J, Czapiewski P, Wazny K,
Langfort R, Waloszczyk P, Biernat W, Lasota J, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
Department of Pathology, Cell Biology and Anatomy, Jefferson Medical College of 
Thomas Jefferson University and University Hospital, Philadelphia, PA Department
of Pathology/Haartman Institute and HusLab, Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland §Department of Tumor Pathology, Centre of Oncology, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute, Krakow Branch <U+2225>Department of
Pathomorphology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk ¶Department of Pathology,
National Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases Research Institute, Warsaw #Independent
Laboratory of Pathology, Zdunomed, Szczecin, Poland.

GATA3 is a transcription factor important in the differentiation of breast
epithelia, urothelia, and subsets of T lymphocytes. It has been suggested to be
useful in the evaluation of carcinomas of mammary or urothelial origin or
metastatic carcinomas, but its distribution in normal and neoplastic tissues is
incompletely mapped. In this study, we examined normal developing and adult
tissues and 2040 epithelial and 460 mesenchymal or neuroectodermal neoplasms for 
GATA3 expression to explore its diagnostic value in surgical pathology, using
monoclonal antibody (clone L50-823) and Leica Bond automated
immunohistochemistry. GATA3 was expressed in trophoblast, fetal and adult
epidermis, adult mammary and some salivary gland and sweat gland ductal
epithelia, urothelia, distal nephron in developing and adult tissues, some
prostatic basal cells, and subsets of T lymphocytes. It was expressed stronger in
fetal than in adult mesothelia and was absent in respiratory and gastrointestinal
epithelia. In epithelial neoplasms, GATA3 was expressed in >90% of primary and
metastatic ductal and lobular carcinomas of the breast, urothelial, and cutaneous
basal cell carcinomas and trophoblastic and endodermal sinus tumors. In
metastatic breast carcinomas, it was more sensitive than GCDFP. Among squamous
cell carcinomas, the expression was highest in the skin (81%) and lower in
cervical (33%), laryngeal (16%), and pulmonary tumors (12%). Common positivity
was found in skin adnexal tumors (100%), mesothelioma (58%), salivary gland
(43%), and pancreatic (37%) ductal carcinomas, whereas frequency of expression in
adenocarcinomas of lung, stomach, colon, endometrium, ovary, and prostate was
<10%. Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma was a unique renal tumor with frequent
positivity (51%), whereas oncocytomas were positive in 17% of cases but other
types only rarely. Among mesenchymal and neuroectodermal tumors, paragangliomas
were usually positive, which sets these tumors apart from epithelial
neuroendocrine tumors. Mesenchymal tumors were only sporadically positive, except
epithelia of biphasic synovial sarcomas. GATA3 is a useful marker in the
characterization of not only mammary and urothelial but also renal and germ cell 
tumors, mesotheliomas, and paragangliomas. The multiple specificities of GATA3
should be taken into account when using this marker to detect metastatic mammary 
or urothelial carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3991431
PMID: 24145643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(5):845-64. doi: 10.3727/096368913X674639. Epub 2013 Oct 
18.

Characteristic expression of major histocompatibility complex and immune
privilege genes in human pluripotent stem cells and their derivatives.

Chen HF(1), Yu CY, Chen MJ, Chou SH, Chiang MS, Chou WH, Ko BS, Huang HP, Kuo HC,
Ho HN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine and the Hospital, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Pluripotent stem cells, including human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced 
pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), have been regarded as useful sources for
cell-based transplantation therapy. However, immunogenicity of the cells remains 
the major determinant for successful clinical application. We report the
examination of several hESC lines (NTU1 and H9), hiPSC lines, and their
derivatives (including stem cell-derived hepatocytes) for the expression of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), natural killer (NK) cell receptor (NKp30,
NKp44, NKp46) ligand, immune-related genes, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
haplotyping, and the effects in functional mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). Flow 
cytometry showed lower levels (percentages and fluorescence intensities) of MHC
class I (MHC-I) molecules, ß2-microglobulin, and HLA-E in undifferentiated stem
cells. The levels were increased after cotreatment with interferon-<U+03B3> and/or in
vitro differentiation. Antigen-presenting cell markers (CD11c, CD80, and CD86)
and MHC-II (HLA-DP, -DQ, and -DR) remained low throughout the treatments.
Recognition of stem cells/derivatives by NK lysis receptors were lower or absent.
Activation of responder lymphocytes was significantly lower by undifferentiated
stem cells than by allogeneic lymphocytes in MLR, but differentiated NTU1 hESCs
induced a cell number-dependent lymphocyte proliferation comparable with that by 
allogeneic lymphocytes. Interestingly, activation of lymphocytes by
differentiated hiPSCs or H9 cells became blunted at higher cell numbers.
Real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) showed significant differential
expression of immune privilege genes (TGF-ß2, Arginase 2, Indole 1, GATA3, POMC, 
VIP, CALCA, CALCB, IL-1RN, CD95L, CR1L, Serpine 1, HMOX1, IL6, LGALS3, HEBP1,
THBS1, CD59, and LGALS1) in pluripotent stem cells/derivatives when compared to
somatic cells. It was concluded that pluripotent stem cells/derivatives are
predicted to be immunogenic, though evidence suggests some level of potential
immune privilege. In addition, differential immunogenicity may exist between
different pluripotent stem cell lines and their derivatives.

PMID: 24144439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1229-36. doi: 10.1038/ni.2743. Epub 2013 Oct 20.

Specification of type 2 innate lymphocytes by the transcriptional determinant
Gfi1.

Spooner CJ(1), Lesch J, Yan D, Khan AA, Abbas A, Ramirez-Carrozzi V, Zhou M,
Soriano R, Eastham-Anderson J, Diehl L, Lee WP, Modrusan Z, Pappu R, Xu M, DeVoss
J, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Immunology, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California, USA.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2 cells) participate in host defense against
helminth parasites and in allergic inflammation. Given their functional
relatedness to type 2 helper T cells (T(H)2 cells), we explored whether Gfi1 acts
as a shared transcriptional determinant in ILC2 cells. Gfi1 promoted the
development of ILC2 cells and controlled their responsiveness during infection
with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and protease allergen-induced lung
inflammation. Gfi1 'preferentially' regulated the responsiveness of ILC2 cells to
interleukin 33 (IL-33) by directly activating Il1rl1, which encodes the IL-33
receptor (ST2). Loss of Gfi1 in activated ILC2 cells resulted in impaired
expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 and a dysregulated genome-wide
effector state characterized by coexpression of IL-13 and IL-17. Our findings
establish Gfi1 as a shared determinant that reciprocally regulates the type 2 and
IL-17 effector states in cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems.

PMID: 24141388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45(12):1494-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2803. Epub 2013 Oct 20.

Inherited GATA3 variants are associated with Ph-like childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and risk of relapse.

Perez-Andreu V(1), Roberts KG, Harvey RC, Yang W, Cheng C, Pei D, Xu H,
Gastier-Foster J, E S, Lim JY, Chen IM, Fan Y, Devidas M, Borowitz MJ, Smith C,
Neale G, Burchard EG, Torgerson DG, Klussmann FA, Villagran CR, Winick NJ,
Camitta BM, Raetz E, Wood B, Yue F, Carroll WL, Larsen E, Bowman WP, Loh ML, Dean
M, Bhojwani D, Pui CH, Evans WE, Relling MV, Hunger SP, Willman CL, Mullighan CG,
Yang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Recent genomic profiling of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
identified a high-risk subtype with an expression signature resembling that of
Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL and poor prognosis (Ph-like ALL). However,
the role of inherited genetic variation in Ph-like ALL pathogenesis remains
unknown. In a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 511 ALL cases and 6,661
non-ALL controls, we identified a susceptibility locus for Ph-like ALL (GATA3,
rs3824662; P = 2.17 × 10(-14), odds ratio (OR) = 3.85 for Ph-like ALL versus
non-ALL; P = 1.05 × 10(-8), OR = 3.25 for Ph-like ALL versus non-Ph-like ALL),
with independent validation. The rs3824662 risk allele was associated with
somatic lesions underlying Ph-like ALL (CRLF2 rearrangement, JAK gene mutation
and IKZF1 deletion) and with variation in GATA3 expression. Finally, genotype at 
the GATA3 SNP was also associated with early treatment response and risk of ALL
relapse. Our results provide insights into interactions between inherited and
somatic variants and their role in ALL pathogenesis and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4039076
PMID: 24141364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Dec 12;150(3):907-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.09.033. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

Shenghua Decoction reduces uterine bleeding and regulates T-cell paradigm in
human deciduas of RU486 medical abortion.

Li X(1), Zhang M, Wang B, Li Y, Wang L, Zhao X, Zhou X, Guo Y, Jiang G, Yao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional Chinese Medicine
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
18877 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Key Laboratory for Rare & Uncommon
Disease, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 18877
Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Drugs of the
Ministry of Public Health, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, 18877 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Laboratory for
Immunopharmacology of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 18877 Jingshi 
Road, Jinan 250062, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Excessive uterine bleeding is the most common and
problematic side effect of RU486 medical abortion. Shenghua Decoction (SHD) is a 
well-known traditional Chinese herbal prescription for reducing uterine bleeding 
induced by RU486 medical abortion. However, its therapeutic mechanism still
remains unclear. The Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm plays an important role in
achieving maternal-fetal immunotolerance and its bias participates in
RU486-induced abortion. Our previous research on mice demonstrated that the
uterine bleeding volume is negatively related to the proportions of Th1 and Th17 
cells whereas positively related to the proportions of Th2 and Treg cells.
Additionally, Th1-type cytokine inducing effect was identified in our previous
study. Therefore, it was hypothesized that SHD reduced the uterine bleeding in
RU486 medical abortion by inducing Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm bias. The purpose
of this study was to determine the regulatory effect and the mechanism of SHD on 
human decidual Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm for alleviating uterine bleeding in
RU486 medical abortion.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 90 women within seven weeks of a normal intrauterine
pregnancy, who elected for termination of pregnancy, were divided into three
groups; vacuum aspiration group, RU486 group, and SHD-RU486 group. Duration of
uterine bleeding was recorded and volume of uterine bleeding was measured by the 
method of alkaline hematin photometric. To determine the regulatory effect of SHD
on Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm, the proportions of Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg cells in the 
decidua of different groups were analyzed using a FACS calibur. Correlation was
analyzed in order to demonstrate the relationship between the Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg
paradigm and the uterine bleeding in RU486 medical abortion. Moreover, to
elucidate the mechanism underlying the T-cell paradigm regulating of SHD, the
mRNA and protein expressions of subset-specific transcription factors (T-bet,
GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and Foxp3) for the differentiation of Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm
in human decidual CD4(+) T cells were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay and western blot analysis 
respectively. Moreover, the mRNA expression of the characteristic cytokines of
Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm (IFN<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-17A, TGF-ß) were analyzed by RT-PCR
assay.
RESULT: Compared with RU486 group, both the uterine bleeding volume and duration 
reduced significantly in SHD-RU486 group. Both the duration and the volume of the
uterine bleeding demonstrated negative correlation with the proportions of Th1
and Th17 cells, whereas showed positive correlation with Th2 and Treg cells. SHD 
increased the proportions of Th1 and Th17 cells whereas decreased those of Th2
and Treg cells. Thus, the ratios of Th1/Th2 and Th17/Treg cells elevated markedly
after SHD treatment. SHD promoted the mRNA as well as the protein expressions of 
subset-specific transcription factors for the differentiation of Th1 and Th17
subsets (T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t) while inhibited those of Th2 and Treg cells (GATA-3 and
Foxp3). Moreover, the mRNA expression of Th1- and Th17- type cytokines (IFN<U+03B3> and 
IL-17A) was up-regulated while that of Th2-type and Treg-produced cytokines (IL-4
and TGF-ß) was down-regulated significantly after SHD administration.
CONCLUSION: Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm bias was involved in RU486 medical
abortion. SHD reduced the uterine bleeding efficiently by inducing Th1 and Th17
skews in the maternal-fetal of RU486 medical abortion patients. The regulatory
effect of SHD on Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm in RU486 medical abortion is
attributed to the modulation of transcription and protein expression of
subset-specific transcription factors for T-cell subsets differentiation and
their characteristic cytokines.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Pathol. 2013 Dec;44(12):2760-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.07.023. Epub 2013
Oct 14.

Immunohistochemical profile of the penile urethra and differential expression of 
GATA3 in urothelial versus squamous cell carcinomas of the penile urethra.

Chaux A(1), Han JS, Lee S, Gonzalez-Roibon N, Sharma R, Burnett AL, Cubilla AL,
Netto GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
31231, USA; Office of Scientific Research, Norte University, 1614 Asunción,
Paraguay. Electronic address: alcideschaux@uninorte.edu.py.

The penile urethra has a distinctive morphology not yet fully characterized by
immunohistochemistry. In addition, both urothelial and squamous cell carcinomas
have been reported in the penile urethra, and the distinction between these 2
tumors might be difficult. The purposes of this study are to assess the histology
and immunohistochemical profile (CK20, CK7, p63, and GATA3) of the penile urethra
and to assess the usefulness of Trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor
(GATA3) and human papillomavirus detection in distinguishing urothelial versus
squamous cell carcinomas. Normal penile urethra was evaluated in 11 total
penectomies. The penile urethra was lined by 2 cell layers: a superficial single 
layer of CK7+, CK20-, and p63- columnar cells and a deep stratified layer of
CK7-, CK20-, and p63+ cubical cells. Both layers were GATA3+, supporting
urothelial differentiation. In addition, 2 tissue microarrays and 6 surgical
specimens of primary tumors of the penile urethra (3 urothelial and 3 squamous
cell carcinomas) were evaluated for GATA3 expression. In the tissue microarrays, 
22 of 25 upper tract urothelial carcinomas and 0 of 38 penile squamous cell
carcinomas were GATA3+. In the surgical specimens, GATA3 was positive in all
urothelial carcinomas and negative in all squamous cell carcinomas. Human
papillomavirus was detected in 2 of 3 squamous cell carcinomas and in 0 of 3 of
the urothelial carcinomas. In conclusion, the penile urethra is covered by
epithelial cells that are unique in morphology and immunohistochemical profile.
In addition, our study suggests that GATA3 and human papillomavirus detection are
useful markers for distinguishing urothelial carcinomas from squamous cell
carcinomas of the penile urethra.

© 2013.

PMID: 24134931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Adv Healthc Mater. 2014 May;3(5):703-13. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201300184. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Novel "breath figure"-based synthetic PLGA matrices for in vitro modeling of
mammary morphogenesis and assessing chemotherapeutic response.

Ponnusamy T(1), Chakravarty G, Mondal D, John VT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA, 70118, USA.

Biodegradable poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) porous films are developed to 
support mammary cell growth and function. Such porous polymer matrices of PLGA
are generated using the easily implemented water-templating "breath-figure"
technique that allows water droplets to penetrate the nascent polymer films to
create a rough porous polymer film. Such breath figure-based micropatterned
porous films show higher epithelial differentiation and growth than the
corresponding flat 2D films, and represent the first instance of using them for
tissue culture. Specifically, the breath figure morphology supports robust acinar
growth with almost double the number of lobular-alveolar units compared to the 2D
cultures. Gene profile analysis indicates that the cells grown on porous polymer 
films show enhanced expressions of mammary differentiation genes (GATA3, EMA, and
INTEGB4) but lower the expression of mesenchymal gene (CALLA). Hormonal
stimulation of these cultures dramatically increases expression of progenitor
marker gene Notch1. Importantly, cells grown on porous PLGA films exhibit an
enhanced resistance to doxorubicin treatment in comparison to 2D cultures.
Breath-figure PLGA films show promise in mimicking in vivo mammary functions and 
can potentially be used to screen chemotherapeutic drugs. The simplicity and ease
of fabrication of these polymer films is especially appealing to the development 
of effective biomaterials to support cell culture and differentiation.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24132933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun 11;93(22):1696-9.

[Study on the dendritic cell subsets in peripheral blood and its relationship
with the expressions of Gata-3 and T-bet in lymphocytes of patients with immune
thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li R(1), Qu W, Fu R, Wang GJ, Wang XM, Wang HQ, Li LJ, Liu H, Wu YH, Xing LM,
Guan J, Liu H, Shao ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between the dendritic cell (DC) subsets
and abnormal expression of transcription factors Gata-3 and T-bet in patients
with immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
METHODS: The plasmacytoid DC (pDC) and myeloid DC (mDC) of 33 ITP (16 untreated, 
17 remitted) patients and 12 healthy controls were analyzed by flow cytometry
(FCM) . The expressions of Gata-3 mRNA and T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMNC) were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) .The levels of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interferon-gamma
(IFN-<U+03B3>) were measured by FCM in 33 ITP patients and 12 healthy controls.
RESULTS: The percentage of pDC in PBMNC was 0.49% ± 0.18% in untreated and it was
higher than that in remitted ITP patients (0.27% ± 0.17%) and in controls (0.32% 
± 0.13%) (both P < 0.05). The percentage of mDC in PBMNC was 0.23% ± 0.17% in
untreated, which was lower than that in remitted ITP patients (0.33% ± 0.18)% and
in controls (0.31% ± 0.11%), but no statistic difference in mDC expression
existed among 3 groups (P > 0.05). pDC/mDC ratios was (3.15 ± 2.01) in untreated 
ITP patients and it was higher than that in remitted ITP patients (0.81 ± 0.32)
and in controls (1.07 ± 0.44) (both P < 0.05). The relative mRNA expression
levels of Gata-3 were 2775 ± 489, 1357 ± 307 and 652 ± 165 respectively. And the 
expression of Gata-3mRNA in untreated group was higher than that in remission
group or healthy controls (both P < 0.05). The relative mRNA expression levels of
T-bet were 782 ± 394, 583 ± 176 and 576 ± 120. No statistic difference in T-bet
expression existed among 3 groups (P > 0.05). Gata-3mRNA/T-bet mRNA ratio was
(4.13 ± 1.69 ) in untreated group and it was higher than that of remission group 
(2.45 ± 0.69) or controls (1.15 ± 0.27) (both P < 0.05). The level of IL-4 in the
untreated group was 9.14% ± 4.34% and it was higher than that of remission group 
(4.78% ± 1.69%) or controls (4.86% ± 1.41%). The level of IFN-<U+03B3> in the untreated 
group was lower than that of controls (P < 0.05). Significant positive
correlations existed between Gata-3 and pDC/mDC ratio (r = 0.585, P < 0.01).
Significant positive correlations existed between Gata-3 and IL-4 ( r = 0.463, P 
< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The mechanism of ITP may be due to a disorder of DC subsets and a
high expression of Gata-3.

PMID: 24124674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e74946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074946. eCollection
2013.

Characterization of transcription factor phenotypes within antigen-specific CD4+ 
T cells using qualitative multiplex single-cell RT-PCR.

Phetsouphanh C(1), Xu Y, Amin J, Seddiki N, Procopio F, Sekaly RP, Zaunders JJ,
Kelleher AD.

Author information: 
(1)Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia ; Centre for
Applied Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Current research on antigen specific CD4+ T cells indicates that there is
functional and phenotypic heterogeneity within these populations, but the extent 
of this heterogeneity is poorly described. The CD134/CD25 assay allows live
isolation of antigen specific cells in vitro for down-stream molecular analysis. 
Antigen specific CD4+ T cells were examined at the molecular level by lineage
specific transcription factor profiling using qualitative multiplex single cell
RT-PCR and Lock Nucleic Acid (LNA) probes allowed unbiased amplification and
delineation of expression of Tbx21, Gata3, Rorc, Foxp3 and Bcl-6. It overcomes
the limitations of previous assays by allowing identification of transcription
factor mRNA in single antigen specific cells with high sensitivity (down to 10
femtograms) and specificity. Patterns of responses can be robustly characterized 
using <200 cells based on exact binomial calculations. These results are
reproducible with a CV of 6%. The patterns of heterogeneity are stable within an
individual antigen specific response but vary between responses to different
antigens. Responses to CMV have a Th1 predominant profile (35.6% of responding
cells expressing tbx21) whereas responses to Tetanus Toxoid have a Th2 biased
profile (22% of responding cells expressing gata3), with unexpectedly high levels
of Treg cells found in both populations. Here we describe a methodology that
allows live isolation of Ag specific cells and transcription factor profiling at 
a single cell level to robustly delineate the different CD4+ T cell subsets
within this population. This novel method is a powerful tool that can be used to 
study CD4+ T cell heterogeneity within extremely small populations of cells and
where cell numbers are limited.

PMCID: PMC3790772
PMID: 24124462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Nov;296(11):1717-23. doi: 10.1002/ar.22802. Epub 2013
Oct 4.

TGFBR3 co-downregulated with GATA3 is associated with methylation of the GATA3
gene in bladder urothelial carcinoma.

Liu XL(1), Xue BX, Lei Z, Yang DR, Zhang QC, Shan YX, Zhang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, 215004, China.

Bladder urothelial carcinoma (BUC) accounts for ~90% of all cases of bladder
cancer. Reduced expression of TGFBR3 has been frequently observed in several
types of human cancers. However, little is known about whether expression of
TGFBR3 reduced in BUC and the underlying mechanisms. In the present study, we
performed quantitative real-time PCR to examine the mRNA expression of TGFBR3 and
GATA3, and bisulfite genomic sequencing to evaluate the methylation status in
TGFBR3 and GATA3 promoter regions in fresh tumor and the corresponding
paracarcinoma tissues from 29 patients with BUC. As a result, the expression of
TGFBR3 and GATA3, a transcriptional factor of the TGFBR3 gene, were found to be
co-downregulated in BUC. Moreover, our findings indicated that GATA3 promoter
methylation was one of the reasons for silencing of GATA3 and TGFBR3 in BUC,
albeit TGFBR3 methylation and mutation were not associated with reduced
expression of TGFBR3 mRNA in BUC. In summary, our findings suggest that
methylation in the GATA3 promoter region may inhibit the expression of GATA3
mRNA, which leads to the reduced expression of TGFBR3 mRNA in BUC.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24124001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Dec;37(12):1876-81. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31829e2525.

Is GATA3 expression maintained in regional metastases?: a study of paired primary
and metastatic urothelial carcinomas.

Zhao L(1), Antic T, Witten D, Paner GP, Taxy JB, Husain A, Gwin K, Mirza MK,
Lingen MW, Tretiakova MS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL Departments of
Biostatistics Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

GATA3 has been recognized as a promising marker for primary urothelial carcinoma 
(UC), consistently showing higher expression levels than urothelial markers
thrombomodulin and uroplakin III. However, expression of GATA3 in comparison with
UC-associated markers CK7 and p63 has not been systematically studied. Moreover, 
no studies have been conducted to establish GATA3 sensitivity in regional
metastases. In this study, high-density tissue microarrays were constructed from 
69 matched paired primary and metastatic bladder tumors including pure urothelial
UCs with papillary (n=48) or flat phenotype (n=9), mixed tumors with
micropapillary, glandular, small cell, squamous, giant cell, and plasmacytoid
features (n=9), and 3 adenocarcinomas. GATA3 was expressed in 62/69 (90%) primary
UC and 64/69 (93%) metastases, with significantly higher staining intensity in
nodal metastases (P=0.03). In primary tumors, GATA3 was positive in 44/48 (92%)
papillary UCs, 9/9 (100%) flat UCs, 8/9 (89%) mixed UCs, and 1/3 (33%)
adenocarcinomas, whereas in metastases these numbers were 45/48 (94%), 9/9
(100%), 8/9 (89%), and 2/3 (67%), respectively. The majority of positive cases
showed strong diffuse nuclear reactivity: 75% of primary UCs and 79% of
metastases. GATA3 sensitivity in primary and metastatic UCs was comparable to
that of CK7 and superior to that of p63 (P<0.05). GATA3 specificity was computed 
in comparison with its morphologic mimics expressing CK7 and p63, including 208
primary and 24 metastatic tumors from the lung, cervix, and head and neck
regions. Strong GATA3 expression was present in 2/51 (4%) cervical carcinomas,
whereas weak GATA3 expression was present in 7/51 (14%) cervical, 6/74 (8%) head 
and neck cancers, and 2/83 (3%) lung carcinomas. Remaining 191 primary and 24
metastatic tumors were GATA3 negative. Therefore, specificity of GATA3 calculated
on the basis of morphologic and immunophenotypic UC mimics from lung, cervix,
head and neck was 92%. Our findings demonstrate high sensitivity and specificity 
of the GATA3 diagnostic marker, with not only maintained but increased expression
in regional metastases.

PMID: 24121175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;45(12):2808-20. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.016. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

CD46: the 'multitasker' of complement proteins.

Yamamoto H(1), Fara AF, Dasgupta P, Kemper C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplant Immunology and Mucosal Biology, MRC Centre for
Transplantation, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK; The
Urology Centre, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundations Trust, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Complement is undeniably quintessential for innate immunity by detecting and
eliminating infectious microorganisms. Recent work, however, highlights an
equally profound impact of complement on the induction and regulation of a wide
range of immune cells. In particular, the complement regulator CD46 emerges as a 
key sensor of immune activation and a vital modulator of adaptive immunity. In
this review, we summarize the current knowledge of CD46-mediated signalling
events and their functional consequences on immune-competent cells with a
specific focus on those in CD4(+) T cells. We will also discuss the promises and 
challenges that potential therapeutic modulation of CD46 may hold and pose.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Gastroenterology. 2014 Jan;146(1):157-65.e10. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.10.008. 
Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Proper development of the outer longitudinal smooth muscle of the mouse pylorus
requires Nkx2-5 and Gata3.

Udager AM(1), Prakash A(1), Saenz DA(1), Schinke M(2), Moriguchi T(3), Jay PY(4),
Lim KC(1), Engel JD(1), Gumucio DL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Department of
Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Miyagi,
Japan. (4)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Electronic address:
dgumucio@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is a common birth
anomaly characterized by obstruction of the pyloric lumen. A genome-wide
association study implicated NKX2-5, which encodes a transcription factor that is
expressed in embryonic heart and pylorus, in the pathogenesis of infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. However, the function of the NKX2-5 in pyloric
smooth muscle development has not been examined directly. We investigated the
pattern of Nkx2-5 during the course of murine pyloric sphincter development and
examined coexpression of Nkx2-5 with Gata3 and Sox9-other transcription factors
with pyloric-specific mesenchymal expression. We also assessed pyloric sphincter 
development in mice with disruption of Nkx2-5 or Gata3.
METHODS: We used immunofluorescence analysis to compare levels of NKX2-5, GATA3, 
and SOX9 in different regions of smooth muscle cells. Pyloric development was
assessed in mice with conditional or germline deletion of Nkx2-5 or Gata3,
respectively.
RESULTS: Gata3, Nkx2-5, and Sox9 are coexpressed in differentiating smooth muscle
cells of a distinct fascicle of the pyloric outer longitudinal muscle. Expansion 
of this fascicle coincides with development of the pyloric sphincter. Disruption 
of Nkx2-5 or Gata3 causes severe hypoplasia of this fascicle and alters pyloric
muscle shape. Although expression of Sox9 requires Nkx2-5 and Gata3, there is no 
apparent hierarchical relationship between Nkx2-5 and Gata3 during pyloric outer 
longitudinal muscle development.
CONCLUSIONS: Nkx2-5 and Gata3 are independently required for the development of a
pyloric outer longitudinal muscle fascicle, which is required for pyloric
sphincter morphogenesis in mice. These data indicate that regulatory changes that
alter Nkx2-5 or Gata3 expression could contribute to pathogenesis of infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3889663
PMID: 24120474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Clin Periodontol. 2014 Jan;41(1):19-30. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12176. Epub 2013 Nov 
5.

Distinct human T-lymphocyte responses triggered by Porphyromonas gingivalis
capsular serotypes.

Vernal R(1), Diaz-Guerra E, Silva A, Sanz M, Garcia-Sanz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain; Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Department 
of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de
Chile, Chile.

AIM: Porphyromonas gingivalis can synthesize an extracellular capsule and
different serotypes have been described based on capsular antigenicity. On
dendritic cells (DCs), the type of capsule present plays a role on the strength
of the developed immune response. This study aimed to investigate the
T-lymphocyte responses when stimulated with autologous mature DCs exposed to
different P. gingivalis K-serotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Naïve CD4(+) T-lymphocytes were obtained from healthy
subjects and stimulated with autologous DCs primed with increasing multiplicity
of infections of the different P. gingivalis K-serotypes. The Th1, Th2, Th17 and 
T-regulatory cytokines and transcription factor levels were quantified.
RESULTS: Distinct types of response were detected when T-lymphocytes were
stimulated by DCs primed with the different P. gingivalis K-serotypes.
T-lymphocytes stimulated by K1 or K2-primed DCs elicited higher levels of Th1 and
Th17-associated cytokines, T-bet and RORC2 than T-lymphocytes stimulated with DCs
primed with the other serotypes. Conversely, the serotypes K3-K5 induced higher
levels of Th2-associated cytokines and GATA-3 than the others.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that DCs primed with the different P.
gingivalis K-serotypes elicited distinct T-cell responses. Strains K1 (W83) and
K2 (HG184) induced a Th1/Th17 pattern of immune response and K3 (A7A1-28), K4
(ATCC(®49417) ), and K5 (HG1690) a Th2 response.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24117627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 8;8(10):e74821. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074821. eCollection
2013.

Dysregulation of complement system and CD4+ T cell activation pathways implicated
in allergic response.

Couto Alves A(1), Bruhn S, Ramasamy A, Wang H, Holloway JW, Hartikainen AL,
Jarvelin MR, Benson M, Balding DJ, Coin LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, MRC-HPA
Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.

Allergy is a complex disease that is likely to involve dysregulated CD4+ T cell
activation. Here we propose a novel methodology to gain insight into how
coordinated behaviour emerges between disease-dysregulated pathways in response
to pathophysiological stimuli. Using peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
allergic rhinitis patients and controls cultured with and without pollen
allergens, we integrate CD4+ T cell gene expression from microarray data and
genetic markers of allergic sensitisation from GWAS data at the pathway level
using enrichment analysis; implicating the complement system in both cellular and
systemic response to pollen allergens. We delineate a novel disease network
linking T cell activation to the complement system that is significantly enriched
for genes exhibiting correlated gene expression and protein-protein interactions,
suggesting a tight biological coordination that is dysregulated in the disease
state in response to pollen allergen but not to diluent. This novel disease
network has high predictive power for the gene and protein expression of the Th2 
cytokine profile (IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13) and of the Th2 master regulator
(GATA3), suggesting its involvement in the early stages of CD4+ T cell
differentiation. Dissection of the complement system gene expression identifies 7
genes specifically associated with atopic response to pollen, including C1QR1,
CFD, CFP, ITGB2, ITGAX and confirms the role of C3AR1 and C5AR1. Two of these
genes (ITGB2 and C3AR1) are also implicated in the network linking complement
system to T cell activation, which comprises 6 differentially expressed genes.
C3AR1 is also significantly associated with allergic sensitisation in GWAS data.

PMCID: PMC3792967
PMID: 24116013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014 Apr;29(4):637-44. doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2635-0. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Gene regulatory network of renal primordium development.

Marcotte M(1), Sharma R, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre and Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montreal, 1160 Pine Avenue W., Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 1A3.

Animal development progresses through the stepwise deployment of gene regulatory 
networks (GRN) encoded in the genome. Comparative analyses in different species
and organ systems have revealed that GRN blueprints are composed of subcircuits
with stereotypical architectures that are often reused as modular units. In this 
review, we report the evidence for the GRN underlying renal primordium
development. In vertebrates, renal development is initiated by the induction of a
field of intermediate mesoderm cells competent to undergo lineage specification
and nephric (Wolffian) duct formation. Definition of the renal field leads to the
activation of a core regulatory subcircuit composed of the transcription factors 
Pax2/8, Gata3 and Lim1. These transcription factors turn on a second layer of
transcriptional regulators while also activating effectors of tissue
morphogenesis and cellular specialization. Elongation and connection of the
nephric duct to the cloaca (bladder/urethra primordium) is followed by
metanephric kidney induction through signals emanating from the metanephric
mesenchyme. Central to this process is the activation and positioning of the
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (Gdnf)-Ret signaling pathway by
network subcircuits located in the mesenchyme and epithelial tissues of the
caudal trunk. Evidence shows that each step of the renal primordium developmental
program is regulated by structured GRN subunits organized in a hierarchical
manner. Understanding the structure and dynamics of the renal GRN will help us
understand the intrinsic phenotypical variability of congenital anomalies of the 
kidney and urinary tract and guide our approaches to regenerative medicine.

PMID: 24104595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33272-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.493171. Epub
2013 Oct 7.

The serine-threonine kinase inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) promotes IL-4
production in T helper cells.

Kemp KL(1), Lin Z, Zhao F, Gao B, Song J, Zhang K, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) is a serine-threonine kinase that plays 
crucial roles in activating the unfolded protein response. Studies suggest that
IRE1a is activated during thymic T cell development and in effector CD8(+) T
cells. However, its role in regulating T helper cell differentiation remains
unknown. We find that IRE1a is up-regulated and activated upon CD4(+) T cell
activation and plays an important role in promoting cytokine IL-4 production.
CD4(+) T cells from IRE1a KO mice have reduced IL-4 protein expression, and this 
impaired IL-4 production is not due to the altered expression of Th2
lineage-specific transcription factors, such as GATA3. Instead, IL-4 mRNA
stability is reduced in IRE1a KO T cells. Furthermore, treatment of T cells with 
an IRE1a-specific inhibitor, 4µ8C, leads to a block in IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13
production, confirming the role of IRE1a in the regulation of IL-4. This study
identifies a regulatory function for IRE1a in the promotion of IL-4 in T cells.

PMCID: PMC3829173
PMID: 24100031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biomed Environ Sci. 2013 Sep;26(9):774-7. doi: 10.3967/0895-3988.2013.09.010.

All-transretinoic acid regulates Th1/Th2 balance in CD4+ T cells when GATA-3 is
deficient.

Zhu YF(1), Hu JZ, Zhao PN, Liu LX, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, West China School of Public Health, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan, China.

The essential effect of vitamin A on immune function occurs through various
mechanisms including direct effect on Th1-Th2 balance modulation. However, it is 
unclear whether or not vitamin A can regulate Th1-Th2 balance under a strong
Th1-polarizing condition. Therefore, the purpose of our study was to examine the 
effect of vitamin A metabolite all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on Th1-Th2
differentiation in CD4+ T cells under GATA-3 deficiency, which can induce
Th1-polarizing condition. In the present study, GATA-3 deficiency T cells were
induced by siRNA and checked by real-time quantitative PCR and western blot.
GATA-3 deficiency CD4+ T cells and normal CD4+ T were treated for 48 h with or
without ATRA. The expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokines were detected by qPCR and
ELISA. The results would contribute to clarify the knowledge of the role of
vitamin A in regulating Th1-Th2 balance under some special conditions, and help
to explain the mechanism of immune regulatory function of vitamin A.

Copyright © 2013 The Editorial Board of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences.
Published by China CDC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24099613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 1;8(10):e73098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073098. eCollection
2013.

Single-cell analysis of thymocyte differentiation: identification of
transcription factor interactions and a major stochastic component in aß-lineage 
commitment.

Boudil A(1), Skhiri L, Candéias S, Pasqualetto V, Legrand A, Bedora-Faure M,
Gautreau-Rolland L, Rocha B, Ezine S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1020, and
Université Paris Descartes, Unité Mixte de Recherche, Paris, France.

T cell commitment and aß/<U+03B3>d lineage specification in the thymus involves
interactions between many different genes. Characterization of these interactions
thus requires a multiparameter analysis of individual thymocytes. We developed
two efficient single-cell methods: (i) the quantitative evaluation of the
co-expression levels of nine different genes, with a plating efficiency of
99-100% and a detection limit of 2 mRNA molecules/cell; and (ii) single-cell
differentiation cultures, in the presence of OP9 cells transfected with the
thymus Notch1 ligand DeltaL4. We show that during T cell commitment, Gata3 has a 
fundamental, dose-dependent role in maintaining Notch1 expression, with
thymocytes becoming T-cell-committed when they co-express Notch1, Gata3 and
Bc11b. Of the transcription factor expression patterns studied here, only that of
Bcl11b was suggestive of a role in Pu1 down-regulation. Individual thymocytes
became aß/<U+03B3>d lineage-committed at very different stages (from the TN2a stage
onwards). However, 20% of TN3 cells are not aß/<U+03B3>d-lineage committed and TN4 cells
comprise two main subpopulations with different degrees of maturity. The
existence of a correlation between differentiation potential and expression of
the pre-TCR showed that 83% of aß-committed cells do not express the pre-TCR and 
revealed a major stochastic component in aß-lineage specification.

PMCID: PMC3787938
PMID: 24098325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1146-54. doi: 10.1038/ni.2731. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Steady-state production of IL-4 modulates immunity in mouse strains and is
determined by lineage diversity of iNKT cells.

Lee YJ(1), Holzapfel KL, Zhu J, Jameson SC, Hogquist KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Mar;15(3):305.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1110-1.

Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT cells) can produce copious amounts of
interleukin 4 (IL-4) early during infection. However, indirect evidence suggests 
they may produce this immunomodulatory cytokine in the steady state. Through
intracellular staining for transcription factors, we have defined three subsets
of iNKT cells (NKT1, NKT2 and NKT17) that produced distinct cytokines; these
represented diverse lineages and not developmental stages, as previously thought.
These subsets exhibited substantial interstrain variation in numbers. In several 
mouse strains, including BALB/c, NKT2 cells were abundant and were stimulated by 
self ligands to produce IL-4. In those strains, steady-state IL-4 conditioned
CD8(+) T cells to become 'memory-like', increased serum concentrations of
immunoglobulin E (IgE) and caused dendritic cells to produce chemokines. Thus,
iNKT cell-derived IL-4 altered immunological properties under normal steady-state
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3824254
PMID: 24097110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Oct;141(3):409-20. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2699-3. 
Epub 2013 Oct 6.

The molecular diversity of Luminal A breast tumors.

Ciriello G(1), Sinha R, Hoadley KA, Jacobsen AS, Reva B, Perou CM, Sander C,
Schultz N.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA, ciriello@cbio.mskcc.org.

Breast cancer is a collection of diseases with distinct molecular traits,
prognosis, and therapeutic options. Luminal A breast cancer is the most
heterogeneous, both molecularly and clinically. Using genomic data from over
1,000 Luminal A tumors from multiple studies, we analyzed the copy number and
mutational landscape of this tumor subtype. This integrated analysis revealed
four major subtypes defined by distinct copy-number and mutation profiles. We
identified an atypical Luminal A subtype characterized by high genomic
instability, TP53 mutations, and increased Aurora kinase signaling; these genomic
alterations lead to a worse clinical prognosis. Aberrations of chromosomes 1, 8, 
and 16, together with PIK3CA, GATA3, AKT1, and MAP3K1 mutations drive the other
subtypes. Finally, an unbiased pathway analysis revealed multiple rare, but
mutually exclusive, alterations linked to loss of activity of co-repressor
complexes N-Cor and SMRT. These rare alterations were the most prevalent in
Luminal A tumors and may predict resistance to endocrine therapy. Our work
provides for a further molecular stratification of Luminal A breast tumors, with 
potential direct clinical implications.

PMCID: PMC3824397
PMID: 24096568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 1;191(9):4699-708. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300396. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates parasitemia and promotes pathogenesis
during Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine malaria.

Oakley MS(1), Sahu BR, Lotspeich-Cole L, Solanki NR, Majam V, Pham PT, Banerjee
R, Kozakai Y, Derrick SC, Kumar S, Morris SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Rockville, MD 20852.

The pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) is an immunologic
process, mediated in part by Th1 CD4(+) T cells. However, the role of the Th1
CD4(+) T cell differentiation program on the ability to control parasitemia and
susceptibility to ECM disease during blood stage malaria has never been assessed 
directly. Using the Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine model of ECM and mice
deficient for the transcription factor T-bet (the master regulator of Th1 cells) 
on the susceptible C57BL/6 background, we demonstrate that although T-bet plays a
role in the regulation of parasite burden, it also promotes the pathogenesis of
ECM. T-bet-deficient (Tbx21(-/-)) mice had higher parasitemia than wild type
controls did during the ECM phase of disease (17.7 ± 3.1% versus 10.9 ± 1.5%). In
addition, although 100% (10/10) of wild type mice developed ECM by day 9 after
infection, only 30% (3/10) of Tbx21(-/-) mice succumbed to disease during the
cerebral phase of infection. Resistance to ECM in Tbx21(-/-) mice was associated 
with diminished numbers of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) T cells in the spleen and a
lower accumulation of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the brain. An augmented Th2
immune response characterized by enhanced production of activated GATA-3(+)
CD4(+) T cells and elevated levels of the eotaxin, MCP-1, and G-CSF cytokines was
observed in the absence of T-bet. Our results suggest that in virulent malarias, 
immune modulation or therapy resulting in an early shift toward a Th2 response
may help to ameliorate the most severe consequences of malaria immunopathogenesis
and the prospect of host survival.

PMID: 24078698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 20;8(9):e75148. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075148. eCollection
2013.

Alterations in regulatory T cells induced by specific oligosaccharides improve
vaccine responsiveness in mice.

Schijf MA(1), Kerperien J, Bastiaans J, Szklany K, Meerding J, Hofman G, Boon L, 
van Wijk F, Garssen J, Van't Land B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Department of Immunology,
Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Prophylactic vaccinations are generally performed to protect naïve individuals
with or without suppressed immune responsiveness. In a mouse model for Influenza 
vaccinations the specific alterations of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T-cells
(Tregs) in the immune modulation induced by orally supplied oligosaccharides
containing scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS was assessed. This dietary intervention increased
vaccine specific DTH responses. In addition, a significant increased percentage
of T-bet(+) (Th1) activated CD69(+)CD4(+) T cells (p<0.001) and reduced
percentage of Gata-3(+) (Th2) activated CD69(+)CD4(+)T cells (p<0.001) was
detected in the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) of mice receiving scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS
compared to control mice. Although no difference in the number or percentage of
Tregs (CD4(+)Foxp3(+)) could be determined after scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS intervention,
the percentage of CXCR3 (+) /T-bet(+) (Th1-Tregs) was significantly reduced
(p<0.05) in mice receiving scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS as compared to mice receiving placebo
diets. Moreover, although no absolute difference in suppressive capacity could be
detected, an alteration in cytokine profile suggests a regulatory T cell shift
towards a reducing Th1 suppression profile, supporting an improved vaccination
response.IN CONCLUSION: These data are indicative for improved vaccine
responsiveness due to reduced Th1 suppressive capacity in the Treg population of 
mice fed the oligosaccharide specific diet, showing compartmentalization within
the Treg population. The modulation of Tregs to control immune responses provides
an additional arm of intervention using alternative strategies possibly leading
to the development of improved vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3779252
PMID: 24073243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hum Pathol. 2013 Dec;44(12):2651-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.07.006. Epub 2013
Sep 24.

The role of GATA binding protein 3 in the differential diagnosis of collecting
duct and upper tract urothelial carcinomas.

Gonzalez-Roibon N(1), Albadine R, Sharma R, Faraj SF, Illei PB, Argani P, Ertoy
D, Allaf ME, Netto GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Differential diagnosis of collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) from invasive upper
tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) can be challenging. PAX8 and p63 are 2 markers 
often used in this setting. GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a marker of
urothelial differentiation. We investigated GATA3 expression in CDC and UTUC and 
its use in this differential. Eighteen CDC and 25 UTUC cases were used to build 2
tissue microarrays. GATA3, p63, and PAX8 nuclear expression was evaluated using
standard immunohistochemistry. Staining intensity and percentage of positive
cells were assessed. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative
predictive values of the markers and their combination were also evaluated. We
found GATA3 positivity in 22 (88%) of 25 UTUCs and 1 (6%) of 18 CDCs. The median 
GATA3 extent of expression was higher in UTUC than in CDC (74% versus 0%, P =
.00). We found p63 positivity in 23 (92%) of 25 UTUCs and 2 (11%) of 18 CDCs.
PAX8 was positive in 3 (12%) of 25 UTUCs and all (100%) CDCs. GATA3 sensitivity
and specificity for UTUC were 88% and 94%, respectively. p63 sensitivity and
specificity for UTUC were 92% and 89%, respectively. The p63+/PAX8- profile
showed higher sensitivity for UTUC than did the GATA3+/PAX8- profile (80% versus 
76%). Both showed a specificity of 100% for UTUC. GATA3+ or p63+/PAX8-
sensitivity and specificity for UTUC were 84% and 100%, respectively.
Immunohistochemical expression of GATA3 was higher in UTUC, suggesting a
potential role for distinguishing UTUC from CDC. Adding this marker to the
combination panel of p63 and PAX8 might improve its performance in the diagnosis 
of epithelial neoplasms involving the renal sinus.

© 2013.

PMID: 24071011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003796. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies six new Loci for
serum calcium concentrations.

O'Seaghdha CM, Wu H, Yang Q, Kapur K, Guessous I, Zuber AM, Köttgen A, Stoudmann 
C, Teumer A, Kutalik Z, Mangino M, Dehghan A, Zhang W, Eiriksdottir G, Li G,
Tanaka T, Portas L, Lopez LM, Hayward C, Lohman K, Matsuda K, Padmanabhan S,
Firsov D, Sorice R, Ulivi S, Brockhaus AC, Kleber ME, Mahajan A, Ernst FD,
Gudnason V, Launer LJ, Mace A, Boerwinckle E, Arking DE, Tanikawa C, Nakamura Y, 
Brown MJ, Gaspoz JM, Theler JM, Siscovick DS, Psaty BM, Bergmann S, Vollenweider 
P, Vitart V, Wright AF, Zemunik T, Boban M, Kolcic I, Navarro P, Brown EM,
Estrada K, Ding J, Harris TB, Bandinelli S, Hernandez D, Singleton AB, Girotto G,
Ruggiero D, d'Adamo AP, Robino A, Meitinger T, Meisinger C, Davies G, Starr JM,
Chambers JC, Boehm BO, Winkelmann BR, Huang J, Murgia F, Wild SH, Campbell H,
Morris AP, Franco OH, Hofman A, Uitterlinden AG, Rivadeneira F, Völker U,
Hannemann A, Biffar R, Hoffmann W, Shin SY, Lescuyer P, Henry H, Schurmann C;
SUNLIGHT Consortium; GEFOS Consortium, Munroe PB, Gasparini P, Pirastu N, Ciullo 
M, Gieger C, März W, Lind L, Spector TD, Smith AV, Rudan I, Wilson JF, Polasek O,
Deary IJ, Pirastu M, Ferrucci L, Liu Y, Kestenbaum B, Kooner JS, Witteman JC,
Nauck M, Kao WH, Wallaschofski H, Bonny O, Fox CS, Bochud M.

Calcium is vital to the normal functioning of multiple organ systems and its
serum concentration is tightly regulated. Apart from CASR, the genes associated
with serum calcium are largely unknown. We conducted a genome-wide association
meta-analysis of 39,400 individuals from 17 population-based cohorts and
investigated the 14 most strongly associated loci in = 21,679 additional
individuals. Seven loci (six new regions) in association with serum calcium were 
identified and replicated. Rs1570669 near CYP24A1 (P = 9.1E-12), rs10491003
upstream of GATA3 (P = 4.8E-09) and rs7481584 in CARS (P = 1.2E-10) implicate
regions involved in Mendelian calcemic disorders: Rs1550532 in DGKD (P =
8.2E-11), also associated with bone density, and rs7336933 near DGKH/KIAA0564 (P 
= 9.1E-10) are near genes that encode distinct isoforms of diacylglycerol kinase.
Rs780094 is in GCKR. We characterized the expression of these genes in gut,
kidney, and bone, and demonstrate modulation of gene expression in bone in
response to dietary calcium in mice. Our results shed new light on the genetics
of calcium homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3778004
PMID: 24068962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 1;191(9):4573-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200708. Epub 2013
Sep 25.

Interruption of the OX40-OX40 ligand pathway in LDL receptor-deficient mice
causes regression of atherosclerosis.

Foks AC(1), van Puijvelde GH, Bot I, ter Borg MN, Habets KL, Johnson JL, Yagita
H, van Berkel TJ, Kuiper J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biopharmaceutics, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden
University, Leiden 2300 RA, The Netherlands;

Patients suffering from cardiovascular disease have well-established
atherosclerotic lesions, rendering lesion regression of therapeutic interest. The
OX40 (TNFRSF4)-OX40 ligand (OX40L; TNFSF4) pathway is important for the
proliferation and survival of T cells, stimulates B cells, and is associated with
cardiovascular disease. We hypothesized that interference with the OX40-OX40L
pathway, in combination with decreases in cholesterol, may induce regression of
atherosclerosis. LDLr(-/-) mice were fed a Western-type diet for 10 wk, after
which they received chow diet and were treated with anti-OX40L or PBS for 10 wk. 
A significant regression of lesions was observed in the aorta and aortic arch of 
anti-OX40L-treated mice compared with control mice. Interference of the
OX40-OX40L pathway reduced Th2 responses, as shown by decreases in GATA-3 and
IL-4 levels. Also, IgE levels were decreased, as demonstrated by reduced mast
cell presence and activation. Notably, IL-5 production by T and B1 cells was
increased, thus enhancing atheroprotective oxidized low-density
lipoprotein-specific IgM production. The increase in IL-5 production and IgM was 
mediated by IL-33 production by APCs upon OX40L blockade. We conclude that
interruption of the OX40-OX40L signaling pathway, combined with decreases in
dietary cholesterol, induces the regression of atherosclerosis through induction 
of IL-5-producing T cells and oxidized low-density lipoprotein-specific IgM and
reductions in Th2 and mast cells.

PMID: 24068673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Nov;37(11):1756-60. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31829cdba7.

GATA-3 immunohistochemistry in the differential diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of
the urinary bladder.

Ellis CL(1), Chang AG, Cimino-Mathews A, Argani P, Youssef RF, Kapur P,
Montgomery EA, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital and School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX.

GATA-3 is a newly described marker that labels urothelial and breast carcinoma.
However, no prior study has evaluated the expression of GATA-3 in primary bladder
adenocarcinoma. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) containing 46 primary bladder
adenocarcinomas were constructed. They contained 19 signet ring cell (SRC) and 27
conventional adenocarcinomas. Three additional cases of SRC using routine
sections were included resulting in a total of 22 SRCs. In addition, TMAs
containing 32 primary gastric signet ring adenocarcinomas and 36 primary lobular 
breast carcinomas were evaluated. The TMAs were subjected to immunohistochemical 
analysis for GATA-3, with nuclear labeling scored by intensity and percentage
labeling. Breast and urothelial TMAs were also labeled for estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and gross cystic duct fluid protein. Diffuse nuclear
GATA-3 labeling was seen in 9/22 (41.0%) SRCs and in 2/27 (7.0%) conventional
adenocarcinomas (P=0.01). Extracellular mucin production was seen in 12 SRCs. One
of 12 (8.0%) SRCs with extracellular mucin was GATA-3 positive, and 8/10 SRCs
without extracellular mucin was GATA-3 positive (P=0.005). No nuclear GATA-3
labeling was seen in any gastric signet ring carcinoma. Diffuse, moderate to
strong nuclear GATA-3 labeling was seen in 36/36 (100%) primary lobular breast
carcinomas. Nuclear GATA-3 labeling is a useful marker for primary
adenocarcinomas of the urinary bladder with signet ring features and can be
helpful in distinguishing primary signet ring carcinomas of the urinary bladder
from gastric signet ring carcinomas. GATA-3 is rarely positive in bladder
adenocarcinomas that lack signet ring features and in SRCs displaying
extracellular mucin production.

PMID: 24061521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4440-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301741. Epub 2013
Sep 20.

Double deficiency for ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet drives Th2-mediated allograft rejection in 
mice.

Sabet-Baktach M(1), Eggenhofer E, Rovira J, Renner P, Lantow M, Farkas SA,
Malaisé M, Edtinger K, Shaotang Z, Koehl GE, Dahlke MH, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, 
Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Although Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells are thought to be major effector cells in
adaptive alloimmune responses, their respective contribution to allograft
rejection remains unclear. To precisely address this, we used mice genetically
modified for the Th1 and Th17 hallmark transcription factors T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t,
respectively, which allowed us to study the alloreactive role of each subset in
an experimental transplant setting. We found that in a fully mismatched
heterotopic mouse heart transplantation model, T cells deficient for T-bet (prone
to Th17 differentiation) versus ROR<U+03B3>t (prone to Th1 differentiation) rejected
allografts at a more accelerated rate, indicating a predominance of Th17- over
Th1-driven alloimmunity. Importantly, T cells doubly deficient for both T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t differentiated into alloreactive GATA-3-expressing Th2 cells, which
promptly induced allograft rejection characterized by a Th2-type intragraft
expression profile and eosinophilic infiltration. Mechanistically, Th2-mediated
allograft rejection was contingent on IL-4, as its neutralization significantly
prolonged allograft survival by reducing intragraft expression of Th2 effector
molecules and eosinophilic allograft infiltration. Moreover, under IL-4
neutralizing conditions, alloreactive double-deficient T cells upregulated
Eomesodermin (Eomes) and IFN-<U+03B3>, but not GATA-3. Thus, in the absence of T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t, Eomes may salvage Th1-mediated alloimmunity that underlies IL-4
neutralization-resistant allograft rejection. We summarize that, whereas Th17
cells predictably promote allograft rejection, IL-4-producing GATA-3(+) Th2
cells, which are generally thought to protect allogeneic transplants, may
actually be potent facilitators of organ transplant rejection in the absence of
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t. Moreover, Eomes may rescue Th1-mediated allograft rejection in
the absence of IL-4, T-bet, and ROR<U+03B3>t.

PMID: 24058178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1190-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.2712. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

Expression and regulation of intergenic long noncoding RNAs during T cell
development and differentiation.

Hu G(1), Tang Q, Sharma S, Yu F, Escobar TM, Muljo SA, Zhu J, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)1] Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2].

Although intergenic long noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been linked to gene
regulation in various tissues, little is known about lincRNA transcriptomes in
the T cell lineages. Here we identified 1,524 lincRNA clusters in 42 T cell
samples, from early T cell progenitors to terminally differentiated helper T cell
subsets. Our analysis revealed highly dynamic and cell-specific expression
patterns for lincRNAs during T cell differentiation. These lincRNAs were located 
in genomic regions enriched for genes that encode proteins with immunoregulatory 
functions. Many were bound and regulated by the key transcription factors T-bet, 
GATA-3, STAT4 and STAT6. We found that the lincRNA LincR-Ccr2-5'AS, together with
GATA-3, was an essential component of a regulatory circuit in gene expression
specific to the TH2 subset of helper T cells and was important for the migration 
of TH2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3805781
PMID: 24056746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Urol Oncol. 2014 Jan;32(1):45.e23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2013.06.008. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Predicting response to bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) in patients with carcinoma 
in situ of the bladder.

Nunez-Nateras R(1), Castle EP(2), Protheroe CA(3), Stanton ML(4), Ocal TI(4),
Ferrigni EN(2), Ochkur SI(3), Jacobsen EA(3), Hou YX(2), Andrews PE(2), Colby
TV(4), Lee NA(3), Lee JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, AZ. Electronic address:
nunez.rafael@mayo.edu. (2)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix,
AZ. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic Arizona,
Scottsdale, AZ. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine/Pathology, Mayo Clinic
Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ.

PURPOSE: Currently, there is no reliable tool to predict response to intravesical
bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). Based on the fact that BCG is a Th1-polarizing
immunotherapy, we attempt to correlate the pretreatment immunologic tumor
microenvironment (Th1 or Th2) with response to therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bladder cancer patients with initial diagnosis of
carcinoma in situ (Tis) were stratified based on their response to BCG treatment.
A total of 38 patients met inclusion criteria (20 patients who responded and 18
patients who did not respond). Immunohistochemical (IHC) methods known to assess 
the type of immunologic microenvironment (Th1 vs. Th2) were performed on tumor
tissue obtained at initial biopsy/resection: the level of tumor eosinophil
infiltration and degranulation (Th2 response); the number of tumor-infiltrating
GATA-3(+) (Th2-polarized) lymphocytes; and the number of tumor-infiltrating
T-bet(+) (Th1-polarized) lymphocytes. Results obtained from these metrics were
correlated with response to treatment with BCG immunotherapy.
RESULTS: The IHC metrics of the tumor immune microenvironment prior to BCG
treatment were each statistically significant predictors of responders (R) vs.
nonresponders (NR). Eosinophil infiltration and degranulation was higher for R
vs. NR: 1.02 ± 0.17 vs. 0.5 ± 0.12 (P = 0.01) and 1.1 ± 0.15 vs. 0.56 ± 0.15 (P =
0.04), respectively. Ratio of GATA-3(+) (Th2-polarized) lymphocytes to T-bet(+)
(Th1-polarized) lymphocytes was higher for R vs. NR: 4.85 ± 0.94 vs. 0.98 ± 0.19 
(P<0.001). The 3 markers were combined to create a Th2 signature biomarker, which
was a statistically significant (P<0.0001) predictor of R vs. NR. All IHC markers
demonstrated that a preexisting Th1 immunologic environment within the tumor was 
predictive of BCG failure.
CONCLUSION: The Th1 vs. Th2 polarization of bladder tumor immune microenvironment
prior to treatment with BCG represents a prognostic metric of response to
therapy. If a patient has a preexisting Th1 immunologic response within the
tumor, there is no value in using a therapy intended to create a Th1 immunologic 
response. An algorithm integrating 3 IHC methods provided a sensitive and
specific technique that may become a useful tool for pathologists and urologists 
to predict response to BCG in patients with carcinoma in situ of the bladder.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3953142
PMID: 24055426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nat Immunol. 2013 Oct;14(10):1032-3. doi: 10.1038/ni.2715.

GATA-3 controls self-renewal in stressed HSCs.

Yoshida T(1), Georgopoulos K.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Oct;14(10):1037-44.

PMID: 24048133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2464. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3464.

Master regulators of FGFR2 signalling and breast cancer risk.

Fletcher MN(1), Castro MA, Wang X, de Santiago I, O'Reilly M, Chin SF, Rueda OM, 
Caldas C, Ponder BA, Markowetz F, Meyer KB.

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB2 0RE, UK [2] Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing
Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK [3] [4].

The fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) locus has been consistently
identified as a breast cancer risk locus in independent genome-wide association
studies. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying FGFR2-mediated risk are
still unknown. Using model systems we show that FGFR2-regulated genes are
preferentially linked to breast cancer risk loci in expression quantitative trait
loci analysis, supporting the concept that risk genes cluster in pathways. Using 
a network derived from 2,000 transcriptional profiles we identify SPDEF, ERa,
FOXA1, GATA3 and PTTG1 as master regulators of fibroblast growth factor receptor 
2 signalling, and show that ERa occupancy responds to fibroblast growth factor
receptor 2 signalling. Our results indicate that ERa, FOXA1 and GATA3 contribute 
to the regulation of breast cancer susceptibility genes, which is consistent with
the effects of anti-oestrogen treatment in breast cancer prevention, and suggest 
that fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 signalling has an important role in
mediating breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3778544
PMID: 24043118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4383-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301228. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

TCF-1 controls ILC2 and NKp46+ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate lymphocyte differentiation and
protection in intestinal inflammation.

Mielke LA(1), Groom JR, Rankin LC, Seillet C, Masson F, Putoczki T, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia;

Innate lymphocyte populations play a central role in conferring protective
immunity at the mucosal frontier. In this study, we demonstrate that T cell
factor 1 (TCF-1; encoded by Tcf7), a transcription factor also important for NK
and T cell differentiation, is expressed by multiple innate lymphoid cell (ILC)
subsets, including GATA3(+) nuocytes (ILC2) and NKp46(+) ILCs (ILC3), which
confer protection against lung and intestinal inflammation. TCF-1 was
intrinsically required for the differentiation of both ILC2 and NKp46(+) ILC3.
Loss of TCF-1 expression impaired the capacity of these ILC subsets to produce
IL-5, IL-13, and IL-22 and resulted in crippled responses to intestinal infection
with Citrobacter rodentium. Furthermore, a reduction in T-bet expression required
for Notch-2-dependent development of NKp46(+) ILC3 showed a dose-dependent
reduction in TCF-1 expression. Collectively, our findings demonstrate an
essential requirement for TCF-1 in ILC2 differentiation and reveal a link among
Tcf7, Notch, and Tbx21 in NKp46(+) ILC3 development.

PMID: 24038093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4447-55. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300992. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

Interruption of dendritic cell-mediated TIM-4 signaling induces regulatory T
cells and promotes skin allograft survival.

Yeung MY(1), McGrath MM, Nakayama M, Shimizu T, Boenisch O, Magee CN, Abdoli R,
Akiba H, Ueno T, Turka LA, Najafian N.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Center, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02445;

Dendritic cells (DCs) are the central architects of the immune response, inducing
inflammatory or tolerogenic immunity, dependent on their activation status. As
such, DCs are highly attractive therapeutic targets and may hold the potential to
control detrimental immune responses. TIM-4, expressed on APCs, has complex
functions in vivo, acting both as a costimulatory molecule and a
phosphatidylserine receptor. The effect of TIM-4 costimulation on T cell
activation remains unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that Ab blockade of
DC-expressed TIM-4 leads to increased induction of induced regulatory T cells
(iTregs) from naive CD4(+) T cells, both in vitro and in vivo. iTreg induction
occurs through suppression of IL-4/STAT6/Gata3-induced Th2 differentiation. In
addition, blockade of TIM-4 on previously activated DCs still leads to increased 
iTreg induction. iTregs induced under TIM-4 blockade have equivalent potency to
control and, upon adoptive transfer, significantly prolong skin allograft
survival in vivo. In RAG(-/-) recipients of skin allografts adoptively
transferred with CD4(+) T cells, we show that TIM-4 blockade in vivo is
associated with a 3-fold prolongation in allograft survival. Furthermore, in this
mouse model of skin transplantation, increased induction of allospecific iTregs
and a reduction in T effector responses were observed, with decreased Th1 and Th2
responses. This enhanced allograft survival and protolerogenic skewing of the
alloresponse is critically dependent on conversion of naive CD4(+) to Tregs in
vivo. Collectively, these studies identify blockade of DC-expressed TIM-4 as a
novel strategy that holds the capacity to induce regulatory immunity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3804420
PMID: 24038092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biofactors. 2013 Nov-Dec;39(6):633-43. doi: 10.1002/biof.1128. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

Lactobacillus acidophilus La5, Bifidobacterium BB12, and Lactobacillus casei
DN001 modulate gene expression of subset specific transcription factors and
cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of obese and overweight people.

Zarrati M(1), Shidfar F, Nourijelyani K, Mofid V, Hossein zadeh-Attar MJ, Bidad
K, Najafi F, Gheflati Z, Chamari M, Salehi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Probiotics are believed to have interaction with immune cells through sustained
effects on gene expression of different cytokines and transcription factors. The 
present randomized doubled-blind controlled clinical trial was performed
recruiting 75 individuals with BMI 25-35, who were randomly assigned to the
following three groups: Group 1 (n = 25) who consumed regular yogurt as part of a
low calorie diet [RLCD], group 2 (n = 25) who received probiotic yogurt with a
LCD [PLCD] and group 3 (n = 25) who consumed probiotic yogurt without LCD [PWLCD]
for 8 week. Participants in PLCD and PWLCD groups received 200 g/day yogurt
containing Lactobacillus acidophilus La5, Bifidobacterium Bb12, and lactobacillus
casei DN001 10(8) cfu/gr. The expression of the FOXP3, T-bet, GATA3, TNF-a,
IFN-<U+03B3>, TGF-ß, and ROR-<U+03B3>t in PBMCs genes were assessed, before and after
intervention. In three groups, ROR-<U+03B3>t expression was reduced (P = 0.007) and
FOXP3 was increased (P < 0.001). The expression of TNFa, TGFß, and GATA3 genes
did not change among all groups after intervention. Interestingly, the expression
of T-bet gene, which was significantly decreased in PLCD and PWLCD groups (P <
0.001), whereas gene expression of IFN-<U+03B3> decreased in all three groups. Our
results suggest that weight loss diet and probiotic yogurt had synergistic
effects on T-cell subset specific gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells among overweight and obese individuals.

Copyright © 2013 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 24019207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Mol Immunol. 2013 Nov;10(6):497-505. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.27. Epub 2013 Sep
9.

Treatment of allergic inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by a simple compound, 
Bavachinin, isolated from Chinese herbs.

Chen X(1), Wen T, Wei J, Wu Z, Wang P, Hong Z, Zhao L, Wang B, Flavell R, Gao S, 
Wang M, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology (Tianjin University of 
Science and Technology), Ministry of Education, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin
University of Science and Technology, Tianjin, China.

Asthmatic inflammation is mediated by a type 2 helper T cell (Th2) cytokine
response, and blocking Th2 cytokine production is proven to have a potent
therapeutic effect against asthmatic inflammation. Using IL-4-green fluorescent
protein (GFP) reporter mice, we demonstrated that Bavachinin, a single compound
isolated from a Chinese herb, significantly inhibited Th2 cytokine production,
including IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13. Notably, this compound almost completely blocked 
inflammation in the ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized animal asthma model. Furthermore, 
we demonstrated that this chemical selectively affects the level of GATA-3, most 
likely by affecting the stability of GATA-3 mRNA. Our results demonstrate, for
the first time, the potential therapeutic value of this single compound derived
from Chinese herbs.

PMCID: PMC4002389
PMID: 24013845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):261-2. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.08.004.

And then there were none: no need for pluripotency factors to induce
reprogramming.

Chou BK(1), Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program in the Institute for Cell Engineering and Department of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Aug 9;341(6146):651-4.
    Cell. 2013 May 23;153(5):963-75.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):341-50.

While most factors used as reprogramming transgenes can be replaced by other
means, Oct4 has remained essential until now. Three recent papers have now broken
this barrier through the use of opposing lineage specifying transgenes and
chemical modulation, thus signifying a milestone in advancing our understanding
of pluripotency induction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4659384
PMID: 24012365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 15;168(6):5396-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.050.
Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Endothelial microparticles exert differential effects on functions of Th1 in
patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Lu Y(1), Li L, Yan H, Su Q, Huang J, Fu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second People's Hospital of Qinzhou, Qinzhou
535099, Guangxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial microparticles (EMPs) can be involved in inflammatory
process, blood coagulation, and regulation of vascular function. However, it
remains unclear whether EMPs participate in the pathogenesis of ACS. The purpose 
of this study is to investigate the impact of EMPs on Th1/Th2 development and
functions in vitro.
METHODS: Eight-five patients were allocated into SAP group (n=27), UAP group
(n=28), and AMI group (n=30). Twenty hospitalized patients with normal coronary
angiography were recruited as controls. The frequency of EMPs, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4
levels were measured, and the correlation between EMPs and Th1/Th2 cytokine was
analyzed. PBMCs isolated from patients with ACS were treated in vitro with EMPs. 
This was followed by flow cytometry for Th1/Th2 counts, real-time PCR and western
blotting for T-bet and GATA mRNA and protein expression, and ELISA for IFN-<U+03B3>,
TNF-a, IL-4, and IL-10.
RESULTS: This study proved that the frequency of EMPs was significantly increased
in ACS patients. There was a significant positive correlation between EMPs and
IFN-<U+03B3>. EMPs could significantly upregulate the differentiation and function of
Th1 through increasing the expression of T-bet mRNA and protein. Furthermore,
this study also indicated that EMP treatment in vitro could promote the
expression of TNF-a, which exerts adverse effects on the pathogenesis and
progression of atherosclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: EMPs may be involved in the immune and inflammatory processes that
take part in artery atherosclerosis and that they do so by regulating Th1/Th2
differentiation and function. They may play an important role in the pathogenesis
of coronary atherosclerosis and plaque instability.

© 2013.

PMID: 24012161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;29(9):919-22, 926.

[Expressions and implications of Th1/Th2 cytokines in injured rat brain and
spinal cord].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu Y(1), Li Y, Zhang Z, Sun X, Gong A, Ding H, Lu J, Yuan Q, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. yanxu63@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression levels of Th1/Th2 cytokines in the acute
injury of brain and spinal cord in rats, and explore their possible roles in
sustained secondary injury.
METHODS: The acute brain and spinal cord injury models in SD rats were
established and randomly divided into injury group and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
treatment group, and each group was experimentally intervened in the brain and
spinal cord, respectively. The mRNA of Th1/Th2 cytokines were determined by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and analyzed in correlation.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, in injury and LPS treatment groups, the
level of IFN-<U+03B3> (as a Th1 associated cytokine) in brain tissue significantly
increased (P<0.05), while the expression of T-bet did not significantly change;
in spinal cord, the levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and transcription factors T-bet, HLX rose
significantly (P<0.05). The cytokine IL-4 and transcription factor GATA3 in both 
injury and LPS treatment groups were as low as those in the control group.
CONCLUSION: The expressions of Th1 associated cytokines, especially soluble
cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>, increased in brain and spinal cord injury. The up-regulated T-bet
and HLX expressions were only observed in spinal injury.

PMID: 24011151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Breast Cancer Res. 2013;15(5):R75.

Mammary carcinoma cell derived cyclooxygenase 2 suppresses tumor immune
surveillance by enhancing intratumoral immune checkpoint activity.

Markosyan N, Chen EP, Evans RA, Ndong V, Vonderheide RH, Smyth EM.

INTRODUCTION: Systemic inhibition of the inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX)
2 decreases the risk of breast cancer and its recurrence. However, the biology of
COX-2 in the multicellular tumor microenvironment is poorly defined.
METHODS: Mammary tumor onset and multiplicity were examined in ErbB2 transgenic
mice that were deficient in mammary epithelial cell COX-2 (COX-2(MEC)KO) compared
to wild type (WT) mice. Tumors were analyzed, by real time PCR, immune-staining
and flow cytometry, for proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and immune
microenvironment. Lentiviral shRNA delivery was used to knock down (KD) COX-2 in 
ErbB2-transformed mouse breast cancer cells (COX-2KD), and growth as orthotopic
tumors was examined in syngenic recipient mice, with or without depletion of CD8+
immune cells.
RESULTS: Mammary tumor onset was delayed, and multiplicity halved, in
COX-2(MEC)KO mice compared to WT. COX-2(MEC)KO tumors showed decreased expression
of Ki67, a proliferation marker, as well as reduced VEGFA, its receptor VEGFR2,
endothelial NOS and the vascular endothelial marker CD31, indicating reduced
tumor vascularization. COX-2(MEC)KO tumors contained more CD4+ T helper (Th)
cells and CD8+ cytotoxic immune cells (CTL) consistent with increased immune
surveillance. The ratio of Th markers Tbet (Th1) to GATA3 (Th2) was higher, and
levels of Retnla, a M2 macrophage marker, lower, in COX-2(MEC)KO tumor
infiltrating leukocytes compared to WT, suggesting a prevalence of pro-immune Th1
over immune suppressive Th2 lymphocytes, and reduced macrophage polarization to
the immune suppressive M2 phenotype. Enhanced immune surveillance in COX-2(MEC)KO
tumors was coincident with increased intratumoral CXCL9, a T cell
chemoattractant, and decreased expression of T lymphocyte co-inhibitory receptors
CTLA4 and PD-1, as well as PD-L1, the ligand for PD-1. PD-L1 was also decreased
in IFN<U+03B3>-treated COX-2KD mouse mammary cancer cells in vitro and, compared to
control cells, growth of COX-2KD cells as orthotopic tumors in immune competent
mice was markedly suppressed. However, robust growth of COX-2KD tumor cells was
evident when recipients were depleted of CD8+ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The data strongly support that, in addition to its angiogenic
function, tumor cell COX-2 suppresses intratumoral cytotoxic CD8+ immune cell
function, possibly through upregulation of immune checkpoints, thereby
contributing to tumor immune escape. COX-2 inhibition may be clinically useful to
augment breast cancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3979159
PMID: 24004819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2856-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-508044. Epub 2013 
Sep 4.

Defining characteristics of classical Hodgkin lymphoma microenvironment T-helper 
cells.

Greaves P(1), Clear A, Owen A, Iqbal S, Lee A, Matthews J, Wilson A, Calaminici
M, Gribben JG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-oncology, Bart's Cancer Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse
Square, London, United Kingdom.

CD4(+) T-helper cells (THs) dominate the classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL)
microenvironment, but their role is poorly understood. Advances in flow cytometry
and immunohistochemistry permit more detailed investigation of this aspect of CHL
pathophysiology. To address the hypothesis that the TH-infiltrate, rather than
being TH2-enriched, senescent and hypofunctional, is TH1 and activation
marker-rich, cytokine-secretory and proliferative, we applied comprehensive flow 
cytometric immunophenotyping and functional assays of cytokine
secretion/proliferation to TH cells from 18 CHL-derived single-cell suspensions
(SCSs) compared to reactive lymph nodes (RLNs). CHL-derived TH cells express
TH1-associated CXCR3/CCR5 and TNFa/IFN<U+03B3>/interleukin-2 (IL-2) and less
TH2-associated CCR3/CCR4, with no IL-4/IL-13. They lack
exhaustion-/suppression-associated PD1, CD57 and terminally differentiated
effector memory cells, with more central memory cells, activation-associated
partners of Hodgkin Reed Sternberg (HRS) cell-expressed CD30/OX40-L/ICOS-L, and
other activation markers. TH cell lines established from CHL and RLN-derived SCSs
remain cytokine-secretory. We confirmed and extended these studies using tissue
microarray immunohistochemistry (TMA-IHC) from a large CHL tissue bank (n = 122) 
and demonstrate TH1-associated TBET is abundant in CHL, and TH2-associated
CMAF/GATA3 and exhaustion-associated PD1 expressed at significantly lower levels.
These molecular insights into the CHL-associated TH offer potential diagnostic,
prognostic and pharmacologically modifiable therapeutic targets and do not
support the established view of a TH2-enriched, senescent/exhausted,
hypofunctional, hypoproliferative infiltrate.

PMID: 24004665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013 Dec;25(6):738-44. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.07.013. Epub
2013 Aug 31.

Innate lymphoid cells and allergic inflammation.

Kim BS(1), Wojno ED, Artis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Institute for Immunology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA;
Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) play critical roles in anti-helminth
immunity and airway epithelial repair. Recently, these cells have also emerged as
key players in the development of allergic inflammation at multiple barrier
surfaces. ILC2s arise from common lymphoid progenitors in the bone marrow, are
dependent on the transcription factors RORa, GATA3, and TCF-1 and produce the
type 2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, and/or IL-13. The epithelial cell-derived
cytokines IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP regulate the activation and effector functions
of ILC2s, and recent studies suggest that their responsiveness to these cytokines
and other factors may depend on their tissue environment. In this review, we
focus on recent advances in our understanding of how ILC2s are differentially
regulated in the context of allergic inflammation and discuss the therapeutic
potential of targeting ILC2s in the treatment of allergic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3989991
PMID: 24001372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Oct;209(10):654-61. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.07.007. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Primary carcinoma of renal calyx.

Williams PA(1), Mai KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, The Ottawa Hospital and Ottawa University,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Renal calyx carcinoma (RCXC) may mimic collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) or
urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the renal pelvis. RCXC is distinguished from CDC and
UC of the renal pelvis as having the tumor epicenter in the renal calyx, with
limited involvement of the surrounding renal pelvis surface urothelium. In this
study, we summarize our experience with this entity. Ten cases of RCXC, including
9 cases with urothelial differentiation (RCXC-UC) and 1 case with salivary
gland-type differentiation (RCXC-SC), were identified. Ten consecutive cases of
UC were selected for comparison, with extensive renal pelvis involvement and with
secondary renal parenchymal invasion. Two cases of collecting duct carcinoma
(CDC) were also examined. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on
representative tissue blocks for PAX8, PAX2, CK5, CK7, CK20, p63, GATA3, AMACR,
RCC, CD10, vimentin, S100, and MSA. The 10 cases of RCXC (M:F=4:6, ages: 62-91
years, mean: 76) presented with renal masses of 3-6cm. Ureteroscopic studies and 
renal pelvic washings showed atypical/malignant cells in three cases. Seven
patients were treated with nephrectomy followed by radiation±chemotherapy, and
all cases developed metastases to lymph nodes or liver/lung/bone. In all 7 cases 
with nephrectomy, there was extensive renal parenchymal involvement with
infiltrating borders and diffuse spread along collecting ducts. Six RCXC-UC
contained focal squamous differentiation. The RCXC-SC displayed features of
adenoid cystic and basaloid features. In situ UC, with or without papillary
components, was identified in the calyces in all 7 nephrectomy cases with
remaining renal pelvis harboring small tumor burden in 5 cases, and no tumor in
another 2 cases. Of the three cases without nephrectomy, no tumor in the renal
pelvis could be visualized with endoscopy, however one case was associated with
UC of the urinary bladder. Of 10 control UC cases, tumor was limited to the tip
of renal papilla in 7 cases, extensive in 3 cases, and with no extension into the
collecting ducts. RCXC-UC were all positive for p63, CK5, CK7, and PAX2, with all
negative for RCC. PAX8 (70% positive) and GATA3 (50% positive) reactivity was
variable. The 10 UC cases shared IHC properties with RCXC-UC but frequent
negativity for PAX8 and positivity for GATA3. RCXC is an aggressive neoplasm with
high risk of metastases. Similar to CDC, it is located in the renal papilla and
rarely with clinically visible renal pelvis tumor or ureteral urine positive for 
tumor cells. Unlike CDC and non-calyceal UC, RCXC shows predominantly urothelial 
and squamous differentiation and is associated with an in situ component of
adjacent renal calyces. By IHC, RCXC exhibited features intermediate between UC
and CDC with decreased or negative immunoreactivity for PAX8 and GATA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23999038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Pathol. 2013 Nov;44(11):2427-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.05.022. Epub
2013 Aug 30.

Significance of GATA-3 expression in outcomes of patients with breast cancer who 
received systemic chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy and clinicopathologic
features of GATA-3-positive tumors.

Gulbahce HE(1), Sweeney C, Surowiecka M, Knapp D, Varghese L, Blair CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT. Electronic
address: h.evingulbahce@gmail.com.

GATA-3 and estrogen receptor (ER) are involved in a positive cross-regulatory
loop and are frequently coexpressed in breast cancers. GATA-3 expression was
shown to be an independent predictor of overall and disease-free survival in some
studies, whereas others showed no difference. However, the studies used different
cutoff values for determining GATA-3 positivity and analyzed outcomes in patients
who received systemic therapy together with those who did not. We investigated
GATA-3 expression and correlated clinicopathologic findings and outcomes in 516
women who received systemic chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy. Nuclear
staining of 1% or greater was considered positive for GATA-3, ER and progesterone
receptor (PR). Of 516 cases, 436 (84.5%) were GATA-3+. GATA-3+ tumors were more
likely to be grade 1 or 2, ER+, PR+, non-triple-negative phenotypes (all P <
.0001), and higher stage (P = .01). ER-/GATA-3+ tumors, compared with ER-/GATA-3-
tumors, had worse breast cancer survival (BCS) (P = .02) and a trend for worse
overall survival (OS) (P = .05) in univariate analysis. However, there was no
difference in OS and BCS between patients who received chemotherapy and/or
hormonal therapy among GATA-3-positive and GATA-3-negative groups. GATA-3+ tumors
are correlated with lower grade, ER+, PR+, and non-triple-negative phenotypes.
Although there was no difference in OS and BCS between GATA-3-positive and
GATA-3-negative groups, there was an adverse effect of GATA-3 expression in the
ER-negative subgroup of patients who received systemic therapy.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23998430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Blood. 2013 Nov 7;122(19):3298-307. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-491316. Epub 2013 
Aug 30.

Variation at 10p12.2 and 10p14 influences risk of childhood B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and phenotype.

Migliorini G(1), Fiege B, Hosking FJ, Ma Y, Kumar R, Sherborne AL, da Silva Filho
MI, Vijayakrishnan J, Koehler R, Thomsen H, Irving JA, Allan JM, Lightfoot T,
Roman E, Kinsey SE, Sheridan E, Thompson P, Hoffmann P, Nöthen MM, Mühleisen TW, 
Eisele L, Zimmermann M, Bartram CR, Schrappe M, Greaves M, Stanulla M, Hemminki
K, Houlston RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, United Kingdom;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Nov 7;122(19):3385-7.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the major pediatric cancer diagnosed in
economically developed countries with B-cell precursor (BCP)-ALL, accounting for 
approximately 70% of ALL. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
provided the first unambiguous evidence for common inherited susceptibility to
BCP-ALL, identifying susceptibility loci at 7p12.2, 9p21.3, 10q21.2, and 14q11.2.
To identify additional BCP-ALL susceptibility loci, we conducted a GWAS and
performed a meta-analysis with a published GWAS totaling 1658 cases and 4723
controls, with validation in 1449 cases and 1488 controls. Combined analysis
identified novel loci mapping to 10p12.2 (rs10828317, odds ratio [OR] = 1.23; P =
2.30 × 10(-9)) and 10p14 marked by rs3824662 (OR = 1.31; P = 8.62 × 10(-12)). The
single nucleotide polymorphism rs10828317 is responsible for the N215S
polymorphism in exon 7 of PIP4K2A, and rs3824662 localizes to intron 3 of the
transcription factor and putative tumor suppressor gene GATA3. The rs10828317
association was shown to be specifically associated with hyperdiploid ALL,
whereas the rs3824662-associated risk was confined to nonhyperdiploid
non-TEL-AML1 + ALL. The risk allele of rs3824662 was correlated with older age at
diagnosis (P < .001) and significantly worse event-free survivorship (P < .0001).
These findings provide further insights into the genetic and biological basis of 
inherited genetic susceptibility to BCP-ALL and the influence of constitutional
genotype on disease development.

PMID: 23996088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Immunol Lett. 2013 Jul-Aug;154(1-2):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.08.006. Epub 
2013 Aug 28.

Correction of abnormal T cell subsets by high-dose dexamethasone in patients with
chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Li J(1), Wang Z, Hu S, Zhao X, Cao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Soochow University Affiliated Children's Hospital,
China.

Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an acquired autoimmune disorder.
Both impaired platelet production and T cell-mediated effects play a role in ITP 
thrombocytopenia. A Th1 polarization of the immune response, up-regulation of
Th17 cells and decreased number of Treg cells have been demonstrated in ITP
patients. High-dose dexamethasone was administered as first-line therapy in adult
patients with ITP. However, the mechanism of effects of dexamethasone on ITP is
still unclear. In this study, we tested the effectiveness of high-dose
dexamethasone as initial treatment in adults with immune thrombocytopenic
purpura. PBMCs were isolated from Donors, ITP and Treatment groups. T cell
subsets were analyzed by FCM and transcriptional factors were checked by
Real-time PCR. We found that dexamethasone returned the ratio of Th1/Th2 and the 
number of Th17 and Treg cells to the normal levels. Furthermore, we identified
that dexamethasone corrected the T cell subset levels through inhibiting GATA3
and FOXp3 expression and promoting ROR<U+03B3>t expression. Taken together, we reported 
a previously unrecognized mechanism on dexamethasone in the ITP treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23994430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3673-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300945. Epub 2013
Aug 26.

The CD226/CD155 interaction regulates the proinflammatory
(Th1/Th17)/anti-inflammatory (Th2) balance in humans.

Lozano E(1), Joller N, Cao Y, Kuchroo VK, Hafler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520.

CD226 costimulatory signals strongly promote Th1 differentiation, enhancing IFN-<U+03B3>
production by naive T cells. We recently reported that knockdown of CD226 on
human T cells resulted in a decrease in T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> expression. However, the 
role of CD226 on Th2 and Th17 cells remains unknown. In this study, we found that
CD226 and its ligand CD155 were decreased on Th2-polarized naive T cells, whereas
both were highly expressed under Th17 conditions. Most IFN-<U+03B3>- and IL-17-producing
cells expressed high levels of CD226, but production of IL-13 did not correlate
with CD226 expression. CD226 knockdown by lentiviral transduction resulted in
increased STAT-6 phosphorylation, enhanced GATA3 expression, and consequently
higher production of IL-4 and IL-13. Under Th17 conditions, CD226-depleted cells 
showed slightly impaired IL-17 secretion, suggesting that CD226 contributes, in
part, to IL-17 production but is dispensable for Th17 cell generation. In line
with these results, CD226 blockade with neutralizing Abs efficiently inhibited T 
cell activation and proliferation and production of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, whereas
IL-13 secretion remained functional. Taken together, our results establish an
important role for CD226 in differentially regulating the proinflammatory
(Th1/Th17)/anti-inflammatory (Th2) balance, suggesting that the CD226/CD155
interaction could potentially be targeted in therapeutic approaches to human
autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3819731
PMID: 23980210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(8):e1001633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001633. Epub 2013 Aug 
20.

Stable T-bet(+)GATA-3(+) Th1/Th2 hybrid cells arise in vivo, can develop directly
from naive precursors, and limit immunopathologic inflammation.

Peine M(1), Rausch S, Helmstetter C, Fröhlich A, Hegazy AN, Kühl AA, Grevelding
CG, Höfer T, Hartmann S, Löhning M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Differentiated T helper (Th) cell lineages are thought to emerge from alternative
cell fate decisions. However, recent studies indicated that differentiated Th
cells can adopt mixed phenotypes during secondary immunological challenges. Here 
we show that natural primary immune responses against parasites generate
bifunctional Th1 and Th2 hybrid cells that co-express the lineage-specifying
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 and co-produce Th1 and Th2 cytokines. The 
integration of Th1-promoting interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-12 signals
together with Th2-favoring IL-4 signals commits naive Th cells directly and
homogeneously to the hybrid Th1/2 phenotype. Specifically, IFN-<U+03B3> signals are
essential for T-bet(+)GATA-3(+) cells to develop in vitro and in vivo by breaking
the dominance of IL-4 over IL-12 signals. The hybrid Th1/2 phenotype is stably
maintained in memory cells in vivo for months. It resists reprogramming into
classic Th1 or Th2 cells by Th1- or Th2-promoting stimuli, which rather induce
quantitative modulations of the combined Th1 and Th2 programs without abolishing 
either. The hybrid phenotype is associated with intermediate manifestations of
both Th1 and Th2 cell properties. Consistently, hybrid Th1/2 cells support
inflammatory type-1 and type-2 immune responses but cause less immunopathology
than Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. Thus, we propose the self-limitation of
effector T cells based on the stable cell-intrinsic balance of two opposing
differentiation programs as a novel concept of how the immune system can prevent 
excessive inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3747991
PMID: 23976880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(8):e1001632. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001632. Epub 2013 Aug 
20.

Hybrid T-helper cells: stabilizing the moderate center in a polarized system.

Huang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.
shuang@systemsbiology.org

Polarization of cell phenotypes, a common strategy to achieve cell type diversity
in metazoa, results from binary cell-fate decisions in the branching pedigree of 
development. Such "either-or" fate decisions are controlled by two opposing cell 
fate-determining transcription factors. Each of the two distinct "master
regulators" promotes differentiation of its respective sister lineage. But they
also suppress one other, leading to their mutually exclusive expression in the
two ensuing lineages. Thus, promiscuous coexistence of the antagonist regulators 
in the same cell, the hallmark of the common "undecided" progenitor of two sister
lineages, is considered unstable. This antagonism ensures robust polarization
into two discretely distinct cell types. But now the immune system's T-helper
(Th) cells and their two canonical subtypes, Th1 and Th2 cells, tell a different 
story, as revealed in three papers recently published in PLOS Biology. The
intermediate state that co-expresses the two opposing master regulators of the
Th1 and Th2 subtypes, T-bet and Gata3, is highly stable and is not necessarily an
undecided precursor. Instead, the Th1/Th2 hybrid cell is a robust new type with
properties of both Th1 and Th2 cells. These hybrid cells are functionally active 
and possess the benefit of moderation: self-limitation of effector T cell
function to prevent excessive inflammation, a permanent risk in host defense that
can cause tissue damage or autoimmunity. Gene regulatory network analysis
suggests that stabilization of the intermediate center in a polarizing system can
be achieved by minor tweaking of the architecture of the mutual suppression gene 
circuit, and thus is a design option readily available to evolution.

PMCID: PMC3747982
PMID: 23976879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nat Immunol. 2013 Oct;14(10):1037-44. doi: 10.1038/ni.2692. Epub 2013 Aug 25.

GATA-3 regulates the self-renewal of long-term hematopoietic stem cells.

Frelin C(1), Herrington R, Janmohamed S, Barbara M, Tran G, Paige CJ, Benveniste 
P, Zuñiga-Pflücker JC, Souabni A, Busslinger M, Iscove NN.

Author information: 
(1)1] Ontario Cancer Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada. [2]
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Oct;14(10):1032-3.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is expressed and required for differentiation and
function throughout the T lymphocyte lineage. Despite evidence it may also be
expressed in multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), any role for GATA-3 in 
these cells has remained unclear. Here we found GATA-3 was in the cytoplasm in
quiescent long-term stem cells from steady-state bone marrow but relocated to the
nucleus when HSCs cycled. Relocation depended on signaling via the
mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 and was associated with a diminished
capacity for long-term reconstitution after transfer into irradiated mice.
Deletion of Gata3 enhanced the repopulating capacity and augmented the
self-renewal of long-term HSCs in cell-autonomous fashion without affecting the
cell cycle. Our observations position GATA-3 as a regulator of the balance
between self-renewal and differentiation in HSCs that acts downstream of the p38 
signaling pathway.

PMID: 23974957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Apr;22(4):266-74. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318297cc0b.

In search of the ideal immunopanel to distinguish metastatic mammary carcinoma
from primary lung carcinoma: a tissue microarray study of 207 cases.

Kawaguchi KR(1), Lu FI, Kaplan R, Liu YF, Chadwick P, Chen Z, Brogi E, Shin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Public Health, Division of 
Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Weill Cornell Medical College Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

BACKGROUND: Distinguishing metastatic carcinoma of breast origin (MCBO) to lung
from primary lung carcinomas (PLC) is a diagnostic quandary with clinical
ramifications. Immunostains CK7, CK20, ER, PR, and Mammaglobin as well as
pertinent negative stains are utilized but prove insufficient. We set out to
identify stains either alone or as a group that would better discern between
these 2 entities.
DESIGN: Tissue microarrays of 109 MCBO to lung and 102 PLC were stained with CK7,
CK20, ER, PR, AR, Mammaglobin, Napsin A, GATA-3, and TTF-1. An H-score was
calculated for each case and stain.
RESULTS: The highest area under the receiver-operating characteristic curves for 
each stain was seen with GATA-3 (0.817), Napsin A (0.817), and TTF-1 (0.854).
When all possible combinations were analyzed, GATA-3 and TTF-1 proved to
correctly classify with the highest accuracy (0.934). Combinations of GATA-3 and 
Napsin A (0.920) and GATA-3, Napsin A, and TTF-1 (0.933) were not significantly
different from GATA-3 and TTF-1. The odds ratios for each stain and combination
of stains showed that those for GATA-3 and TTF-1 were divergent, signifying that 
cases with higher H-scores for GATA-3 and TTF-1 were more likely to be classified
as MCBO and PLC, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA-3 and TTF-1 can correctly classify a case as either MCBO or PLC
in 93.4% of cases. Although highly specific and sensitive for PLC, Napsin A in
lieu of TTF-1 or as an additional stain did not improve classification accuracy.

PMID: 23958551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Asia Pac Allergy. 2013 Jul;3(3):186-93. doi: 10.5415/apallergy.2013.3.3.186. Epub
2013 Jul 30.

T cell transcriptional factors in allergic rhinitis and its association with
clinical features.

Mo JH(1), Chung YJ, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Dankook University College of Medicine,
Cheonan 330-715, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Th2 cells are crucially important in allergic disease and the
possible involvement of Treg and Th17 cells has not been clearly identified.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the mRNA expression of T cell transcription factors in
nasal mucosa in patients with allergic rhinitis (AR) and to reveal their
correlations with clinical features.
METHODS: Eighteen patients with AR and 12 controls with turbinate hypertrophy
were included. mRNA expression of the following transcriptional factors in nasal 
mucosa were measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction; T-bet (Th1),
GATA3 (Th2), retinoic acid-related orphan receptor C (RORC; Th17), and forkhead
box P3 (Foxp3; Treg). mRNA expression was compared among groups and correlation
between mRNA expression level and clinical features (rhinitis symptoms,
eosinophil count, and IgE) were also investigated.
RESULTS: GATA3 and RORC were significantly increased and Foxp3 was significantly 
decreased in the AR group. Moderate-to-severe AR group also had increased
expression of GATA3 and RORC than mild AR group, suggesting severity of AR
influence expression of transcription factors. Correlation analysis showed that
none of these transcription factors were associated with severity of clinical
symptoms, eosinophil counts and skin prick test severity and that IgE level was
significantly correlated with expression level of GATA3 and RORC, suggesting an
association of IgE production with Th2 and Th17 cells.
CONCLUSION: Increased mRNA expression of GATA3 (Th2), increased expression of
RORC and decreased expression of Foxp3 may be important in pathogenesis of AR.
GATA3 and RORC may be closed related with IgE level.

PMCID: PMC3736365
PMID: 23956965  [PubMed]


69. J Fish Dis. 2014 Sep;37(9):771-83. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12169. Epub 2013 Aug 17.

Epidermal response of rainbow trout to Ichthyobodo necator: immunohistochemical
and gene expression studies indicate a Th1-/Th2-like switch.

Chettri JK(1), Kuhn JA, Jaafar RM, Kania PW, Møller OS, Buchmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg
C, Denmark.

Infections with the parasitic flagellate Ichthyobodo necator (Henneguy, 1883)
cause severe skin and gill disease in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum,
1792) juveniles. The epidermal disturbances including hyperplasia and mucous cell
exhaustion caused by parasitization are known, but no details on specific
cellular and humoral reactions have been presented. By applying gene expression
methods and immunohistochemical techniques, further details of immune processes
in the affected skin can be presented. A population of I. necator was established
in the laboratory and used to induce an experimental infection of juvenile
rainbow trout. The course of infection was followed by sampling for parasite
enumeration, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) on days 0, 5,
9 and 14 post-infection. IHC showed a significant increase in the occurrence of
IgM-positive cells in the skin of the infected fish, whereas IgT-positive cells
were eliminated and the number of CD8-positive cells declined. qPCR studies
supported the IHC findings showing a significant increase in IgM and a decrease
in the CD8 gene expression. In addition, genes encoding innate immune genes such 
as lysozyme, SAA and cathelicidin 2 were up-regulated. Expression of cytokines
(IL-1ß, IL-4/13A, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10), the cell marker CD4 and the transcription
factor GATA3 showed a significant increase after infection. Cytokine profiling
including up-regulation of IL-4/13A and IL-10 genes and transcription factor
GATA3 connected to the proliferation of IgM producing lymphocytes suggests a
partial shift towards a Th2 response associated with the I. necator infection.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23952070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Oct;33(10):2316-24. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301521. Epub 2013 Aug 15.

Attenuation of experimental atherosclerosis by interleukin-19.

Ellison S(1), Gabunia K, Kelemen SE, England RN, Scalia R, Richards JM, Orr AW,
Traylor JG Jr, Rogers T, Cornwell W, Berglund LM, Goncalves I, Gomez MF, Autieri 
MV.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology, Independence Blue Cross Cardiovascular
Research Center (S.E., K.G., S.E.K., R.N.E., R.S., J.M.R., M.V.A.) and Center for
Inflammation, Translational and Clinical Lung Research (T.R., W.C.), Temple
University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pathology, LSU
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Shreveport, LA (W.O., J.G.T.); Department of 
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden (L.M.B., M.F.G.); and
Cardiology Department, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden (I.G.).

Erratum in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jan;34(1):e1. Orr, Wayne [corrected to Orr, A
Wayne].

OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-19 (IL-19) is a putative Th2, anti-inflammatory
interleukin. Its expression and potential role in atherogenesis are unknown.
IL-19 is not detected in normal artery and is expressed to a greater degree in
plaque from symptomatic versus asymptomatic patients, suggesting a compensatory
counter-regulatory function. We tested whether IL-19 could reduce atherosclerosis
in susceptible mice and identified plausible mechanisms.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: LDLR(-/-) mice fed an atherogenic diet and injected with
either 1.0 or 10.0 ng/g per day recombinant mouse IL-19 had significantly less
plaque area in the aortic arch compared with controls (P<0.0001). Weight gain,
cholesterol, and triglyceride levels were not significantly different. Gene
expression in splenocytes from IL-19-treated mice demonstrated immune cell Th2
polarization, with decreased expression of T-bet, interferon-<U+03B3>, interleukin-1ß,
and interleukin-12ß and increased expression of GATA3 and FoxP3 mRNA. A greater
percentage of lymphocytes were Th2 polarized in IL-19-treated mice. Cellular
characterization of plaque by immunohistochemistry demonstrated that
IL-19-treated mice have significantly less macrophage infiltrate compared with
controls (P<0.001). Intravital microscopy revealed significantly less leukocyte
adhesion in wild-type mice injected with IL-19 and fed an atherogenic diet
compared with controls. Treatment of cultured endothelial cells, vascular smooth 
muscle cells, and bone marrow-derived macrophages with IL-19 resulted in a
significant decrease in chemokine mRNA and mRNA stability protein human antigen
R.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that IL-19 is a potent inhibitor of experimental 
atherosclerosis, with diverse mechanisms including immune cell polarization,
decrease in macrophage adhesion, and decrease in gene expression. This may
identify IL-19 as a novel therapeutic to limit vascular inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3950941
PMID: 23950143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Genes Cancer. 2013 Jan;4(1-2):54-60. doi: 10.1177/1947601913481354.

Distinct cancer-specific survival in metastatic prostate cancer patients
classified by a panel of single nucleotide polymorphisms of cancer-associated
genes.

Tsuchiya N(1), Matsui S, Narita S, Kamba T, Mitsuzuka K, Hatakeyama S, Horikawa
Y, Inoue T, Saito S, Ohyama C, Arai Y, Ogawa O, Habuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita,
Japan.

Individual genetic variations may have a significant influence on the survival of
metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) patients. We aimed to identify target genes and 
their variations involved in the survival of PCa patients using a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) panel. A total of 185 PCa patients with bone
metastasis at the initial diagnosis were analyzed. Germline DNA in each patient
was genotyped using a cancer SNP panel that contained 1,421 SNPs in 408
cancer-related genes. SNPs associated with survival were screened by a log-rank
test. Fourteen SNPs in 6 genes, XRCC4, PMS1, GATA3, IL13, CASP8, and IGF1, were
identified to have a statistically significant association with cancer-specific
survival. The cancer-specific survival times of patients grouped according to the
number of risk genotypes of 6 SNPs selected from the 14 SNPs differed
significantly (0-1 v. 2-3 v. 4-6 risk genotypes; P = 7.20 × 10(-8)). The
high-risk group was independently associated with survival in a multivariate
analysis that included conventional clinicopathological variables (P = 0.0060).
We identified 14 candidate SNPs in 6 cancer-related genes, which were associated 
with poor survival in patients with metastatic PCa. A panel of SNPs may help
predict the survival of those patients.

PMCID: PMC3743152
PMID: 23946871  [PubMed]


72. Adv Anat Pathol. 2013 Sep;20(5):352-60. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3182a28a68.

Value of GATA3 immunostaining in tumor diagnosis: a review.

Ordóñez NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. nordonez@mdanderson.org

GATA3 is a member of a group of zinc-finger transcription factors that is
involved in cell development and differentiation. Recent studies have shown that,
among tumors, GATA3 is commonly expressed in both urothelial tumors and breast
epithelial neoplasms. With the exception of salivary gland and parathyroid
tumors, GATA3 has been reported to be either absent or only rarely expressed in
other epithelial tumors. Owing to its restricted expression in urothelial and
breast carcinomas, GATA3 has proved to be a useful immunohistochemical marker for
assisting in distinguishing these 2 groups of neoplasms from other malignancies
with which they may be confused.

PMID: 23939152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS Biol. 2013 Jul;11(7):e1001616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001616. Epub 2013 
Jul 30.

Mapping differentiation under mixed culture conditions reveals a tunable
continuum of T cell fates.

Antebi YE(1), Reich-Zeliger S, Hart Y, Mayo A, Eizenberg I, Rimer J, Putheti P,
Pe'er D, Friedman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Cell differentiation is typically directed by external signals that drive
opposing regulatory pathways. Studying differentiation under polarizing
conditions, with only one input signal provided, is limited in its ability to
resolve the logic of interactions between opposing pathways. Dissection of this
logic can be facilitated by mapping the system's response to mixtures of input
signals, which are expected to occur in vivo, where cells are simultaneously
exposed to various signals with potentially opposing effects. Here, we
systematically map the response of naïve T cells to mixtures of signals driving
differentiation into the Th1 and Th2 lineages. We characterize cell state at the 
single cell level by measuring levels of the two lineage-specific transcription
factors (T-bet and GATA3) and two lineage characteristic cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3> and
IL-4) that are driven by these transcription regulators. We find a continuum of
mixed phenotypes in which individual cells co-express the two lineage-specific
master regulators at levels that gradually depend on levels of the two input
signals. Using mathematical modeling we show that such tunable mixed phenotype
arises if autoregulatory positive feedback loops in the gene network regulating
this process are gradual and dominant over cross-pathway inhibition. We also find
that expression of the lineage-specific cytokines follows two independent
stochastic processes that are biased by expression levels of the master
regulators. Thus, cytokine expression is highly heterogeneous under mixed
conditions, with subpopulations of cells expressing only IFN-<U+03B3>, only IL-4, both
cytokines, or neither. The fraction of cells in each of these subpopulations
changes gradually with input conditions, reproducing the continuous internal
state at the cell population level. These results suggest a differentiation
scheme in which cells reflect uncertainty through a continuously tuneable mixed
phenotype combined with a biased stochastic decision rather than a binary
phenotype with a deterministic decision.

PMCID: PMC3728017
PMID: 23935451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Virol. 2013 Oct;87(20):10946-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01295-13. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Regulatory T cells prevent Th2 immune responses and pulmonary eosinophilia during
respiratory syncytial virus infection in mice.

Durant LR(1), Makris S, Voorburg CM, Loebbermann J, Johansson C, Openshaw PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Infections Section, Department of Respiratory Medicine, National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

During viral infection, inflammation and recovery are tightly controlled by
competing proinflammatory and regulatory immune pathways. Respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) is the leading global cause of infantile bronchiolitis, which is
associated with recurrent wheeze and asthma diagnosis in later life. Th2-driven
disease has been well described under some conditions for RSV-infected mice. In
the present studies, we used the Foxp3(DTR) mice (which allow specific
conditional depletion of Foxp3(+) T cells) to investigate the functional effects 
of regulatory T cells (Tregs) during A2-strain RSV infection. Infected
Treg-depleted mice lost significantly more weight than wild-type mice, indicating
enhanced disease. This enhancement was characterized by increased cellularity in 
the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and notable lung eosinophilia not seen in 
control mice. This was accompanied by abundant CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
exhibiting an activated phenotype and induction of interleukin 13 (IL-13)- and
GATA3-expressing Th2-type CD4(+) T cells that remained present in the airways
even 14 days after infection. Therefore, Treg cells perform vital
anti-inflammatory functions during RSV infection, suppressing pathogenic T cell
responses and inhibiting lung eosinophilia. These findings provide additional
evidence that dysregulation of normal immune responses to viral infection may
contribute to severe RSV disease.

PMCID: PMC3807299
PMID: 23926350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Jul 15;6(8):1458-66. Print 2013.

Urothelial eddies in papillary urothelial neoplasms: a distinct morphologic
pattern with low risk for progression.

Kim M(1), Ro JY, Amin MB, de Peralta-Venturina M, Kwon GY, Park YW, Cho YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

We encountered an undescribed histologic feature of papillary urothelial
neoplasms: "urothelial eddy", which was histologically reminiscent of squamous
eddy of irritated follicular keratosis of the skin. A review of 756 patients with
transurethral resection of bladder tumor revealed 10 patients (1.3%) of papillary
urothelial neoplasms with urothelial eddies. All cases were male with a median
age of 65 years. Urothelial eddies were characterized by small ovoid nests of
ovoid to spindle cells arranged in an onion-skin pattern with fine cytoplasmic
processes within wide intercellular space. The cytoplasmic processes mimicked
intercellular bridges but ultrastructurally were cytoplasmic microvillous
projections. They were of papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant
potential in seven patients and low-grade urothelial carcinoma in three patients.
Nine patients presented as non-invasive tumor and one patient showed
microinvasion within papillary stalks. Six patients showed an inverted growth
pattern. Their immunoprofile was more similar to that of conventional urothelial 
carcinoma rather than squamous cell carcinoma: high expressions of GATA3, S100P, 
uroplakin III, and cytokeratin 7; and low expressions of high molecular weight
cytokeratin and p53. The Ki-67 labeling index was low (mean and median values, 2%
each). During the follow-up period (mean, 88.7 months), four patients, including 
the microinvasive patient, showed recurrence with the same grade and stage but
neither progressed into muscle-invasive tumor nor caused death. Our results
suggest that urothelial eddy is a rare aberrant histology of papillary urothelial
neoplasms with indolent behavior and should be discriminated from squamous
differentiation of urothelial carcinoma, which has a poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3726961
PMID: 23923064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Aug 7;19(29):4702-17. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i29.4702.

Mesenchymal stem cells alleviate TNBS-induced colitis by modulating inflammatory 
and autoimmune responses.

Chen QQ(1), Yan L, Wang CZ, Wang WH, Shi H, Su BB, Zeng QH, Du HT, Wan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Medical College 
of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

AIM: To investigate the potential therapeutic effects of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), we transplanted MSCs into an
experimental model of IBD.
METHODS: A rectal enema of trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) (100 mg/kg body
weight) was administered to female BALB/c mice. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells (BMSCs) were derived from male green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic
mice and were transplanted intravenously into the experimental animals after
disease onset. Clinical activity scores and histological changes were evaluated. 
GFP and Sex determining region Y gene (SRY) expression were used for cell
tracking. Ki67 positive cells and Lgr5-expressing cells were determined to
measure proliferative activity. Inflammatory response was determined by measuring
the levels of different inflammatory mediators in the colon and serum. The
inflammatory cytokines included tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interferon-<U+03B3>
(IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-6, IL-17, IL-4, IL-10, and transforming growth 
factor (TGF-ß). Master regulators of Th1 cells (T-box expressed in T cells,
T-bet), Th17 cells (retinoid related orphan receptor gamma(t), ROR<U+03B3>t), Th2 cells 
(GATA family of transcription factors 3, GATA3) and regulatory T cells (forkhead 
box P3, Foxp3) were also determined.
RESULTS: Systemic infusion of GFP-BMSCs ameliorated the clinical and
histopathologic severity of colitis, including body weight loss, diarrhea and
inflammation, and increased survival (P < 0.05). The cell tracking study showed
that MSCs homed to the injured colon. MSCs promoted proliferation of intestinal
epithelial cells and differentiation of intestinal stem cells (P < 0.01). This
therapeutic effect was mainly mediated by down-regulation of both Th1-Th17-driven
autoimmune and inflammatory responses (IL-2, TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet; IL-6, IL-17,
ROR<U+03B3>t), and by up-regulation of Th2 activities (IL-4, IL-10, GATA-3) (P < 0.05). 
MSCs also induced activated CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (TGF-ß,
IL-10, Foxp3) with a suppressive capacity on Th1-Th17 effecter responses and
promoted Th2 differentiation in vivo (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: MSCs are key regulators of immune and inflammatory responses and may 
be an attractive candidate for cell-based therapy of IBD.

PMCID: PMC3732842
PMID: 23922467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cells. 2013 Dec;31(12):2680-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.1500.

Molecular functions of the LIM-homeobox transcription factor Lhx2 in
hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kitajima K(1), Kawaguchi M, Iacovino M, Kyba M, Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Project Group, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Tokyo, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)-like cells are
robustly expanded from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) by enforced expression
of Lhx2, a LIM-homeobox domain (LIM-HD) transcription factor. In this study, we
analyzed the functions of Lhx2 in that process using an ESC line harboring an
inducible Lhx2 gene cassette. When ESCs are cultured on OP9 stromal cells,
hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) are differentiated and these HPCs are prone
to undergo rapid differentiation into mature hematopoietic cells. Lhx2 inhibited 
differentiation of HPCs into mature hematopoietic cells and this effect would
lead to accumulation of HSC-like cells. LIM-HD factors interact with LIM domain
binding (Ldb) protein and this interaction abrogates binding of LIM-only (Lmo)
protein to Ldb. We found that one of Lmo protein, Lmo2, was unstable due to
dissociation of Lmo2 from Ldb1 in the presence of Lhx2. This effect of Lhx2 on
the amount of Lmo2 contributed into accumulation of HSC-like cells, since
enforced expression of Lmo2 into HSC-like cells inhibited their self-renewal.
Expression of Gata3 and Tal1/Scl was increased in HSC-like cells and enforced
expression of Lmo2 reduced expression of Gata3 but not Tal1/Scl. Enforced
expression of Gata3 into HPCs inhibited mature hematopoietic cell
differentiation, whereas Gata3-knockdown abrogated the Lhx2-mediated expansion of
HPCs. We propose that multiple transcription factors/cofactors are involved in
the Lhx2-mediated expansion of HSC-like cells from ESCs. Lhx2 appears to
fine-tune the balance between self-renewal and differentiation of HSC-like cells.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23922318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 15;382(2):555-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.028. Epub 2013 
Aug 3.

A core transcriptional network composed of Pax2/8, Gata3 and Lim1 regulates key
players of pro/mesonephros morphogenesis.

Boualia SK(1), Gaitan Y, Tremblay M, Sharma R, Cardin J, Kania A, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre and Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, 1160 Pine Ave. W., Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A3.

Translating the developmental program encoded in the genome into cellular and
morphogenetic functions requires the deployment of elaborate gene regulatory
networks (GRNs). GRNs are especially crucial at the onset of organ development
where a few regulatory signals establish the different programs required for
tissue organization. In the renal system primordium (the pro/mesonephros),
important regulators have been identified but their hierarchical and regulatory
organization is still elusive. Here, we have performed a detailed analysis of the
GRN underlying mouse pro/mesonephros development. We find that a core regulatory 
subcircuit composed of Pax2/8, Gata3 and Lim1 turns on a deeper layer of
transcriptional regulators while activating effector genes responsible for cell
signaling and tissue organization. Among the genes directly affected by the core 
components are the key developmental molecules Nephronectin (Npnt) and Plac8.
Hence, the pro/mesonephros GRN links together several essential genes regulating 
tissue morphogenesis. This renal GRN sheds new light on the disease group
Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) in that gene
mutations are expected to generate different phenotypic outcomes as a consequence
of regulatory network deficiencies rather than threshold effects from single
genes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23920117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Oct;161A(10):2576-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36083. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

Co-occurrence of 22q11 deletion syndrome and HDR syndrome.

Fukai R(1), Ochi N, Murakami A, Nakashima M, Tsurusaki Y, Saitsu H, Matsumoto N, 
Miyake N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama 
City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

22q11 deletion syndrome is one of the most common chromosomal deletion syndromes 
and is usually caused by a 1.5-3.0<U+2009>Mb deletion at chromosome 22q11.2. It is
characterized by hypocalcemia resulting from hypoplasia of the parathyroid
glands, hypoplasia of the thymus, and defects of the cardiac outflow tract. We
encountered a Japanese boy presenting with an unusually severe phenotype of 22q11
deletion syndrome, including progressive renal failure and severe intellectual
disabilities. Diagnostic testing using fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed
deletion of the 22q11 region, but this did not explain the additional
complications. Copy number analysis was therefore performed using whole genome
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) assay, which identified an additional de
novo deletion at 10p14. This region is the locus for hypoparathyroidism,
deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of
GATA3. Together, these two syndromes sufficiently explain the patient's
phenotype. This is the first known case report of the co-occurrence of 22q11
deletion syndrome and HDR syndrome. As the two syndromes overlap clinically, this
study indicates the importance of carrying out careful clinical and genetic
assessment of patients with atypical clinical phenotypes or unique complications.
Unbiased genetic analysis using whole genome copy number SNP arrays is especially
useful for detecting such rare double mutations.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23918631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Immunol. 2013 Jul-Aug;284(1-2):37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2013.07.001.
Epub 2013 Jul 12.

Allergenicity potential of red kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) proteins in
orally treated BALB/c mice and passively sensitized RBL-2H3 cells.

Kumar S(1), Sharma A, Verma AK, Chaudhari BP, Das M, Jain SK, Dwivedi PD.

Author information: 
(1)Food Toxicology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research
(Formerly - Industrial Toxicology Research Centre), Mahatma Gandhi Marg, P.O. Box
No. 80, Lucknow 226 001, India; Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, 
Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi 110 062, India. Electronic address:
sandeep_sant@yahoo.co.in.

Red kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is one the most commonly consumed legumes
that requires an in depth understanding of its allergenicity. Therefore, the aim 
of this study was to explore the allergenicity of red kidney bean proteins
following oral exposure in BALB/c mice and elucidate the levels of Th1/Th2
transcription factors induced by red kidney bean proteins in rat basophilic
leukemia cells (RBL-2H3 cells) passively sensitized with the sera of red kidney
bean sensitized mice. Red kidney bean proteins showed enhanced levels of total
and specific IgE, anaphylactic symptoms, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and 
peritoneal albumin over control. Enhanced release of ß-hexosaminidase along with 
up regulated expressions of GATA-3, STAT-6, T-bet, c-MAF and NFAT were observed
in the RBL-2H3 cells exposed with red kidney bean proteins when compared to that 
of the controls. Taken together, exposure of red kidney bean proteins may cause
allergic symptoms in mice and the ambivalent effect on Th2/Th1 transcription
factors in RBL-2H3 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Actas Urol Esp. 2013 Sep;37(8):489-97. doi: 10.1016/j.acuro.2012.11.016. Epub
2013 Jul 30.

GATA-3 is down-regulated in patients with clear cell renal carcinoma.

Yang FQ(1), Liu M, Xu YF, Che JP, Wang GC, Zheng JH, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University,
Shanghai, 200072, China.

BACKGROUND: GATA-3 is a transcription factor involved in human growth and
development. Recent studies found its association with breast cancer, however,
its expression profile in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has not been investigated.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The study included 35 patients submitted to radical
nephrectomy with confirmed pathological diagnosis of RCC. Normal control kidney
tissues were obtained from 25 living kidney donors and tissues were biopsied
before implantation. The majority of RCC samples were diagnosed as clear cell
renal cell carcinoma (94.3%) except for 1 case of papillary RCC and 1 case of
collecting duct carcinoma. GATA-3 expression was evaluated by quantitative PCR
and Western blotting (WB) in RCC samples and normal kidneys respectively,
immunohistochemical staining was performed as well. Meanwhile, the GATA-3
expression in two cancer cell lines (786-O, ACHN) and normal kidney epithelial
cells (HK-2) was detected by PCR and WB. In addition, renal cancer cells and HK-2
cells were cultivated and detected by confocal microscopy for the exact
intra-cellular localization of GATA-3.
RESULTS: Data showed a significant down-regulation of GATA-3 expression present
in neoplastic tissues compared with normal tissues; similarly, GATA-3 was
significantly attenuated in all renal cancer cell lines compared with normal HK-2
cells. Confocal displayed a strong cytoplasmic immno-fluorescence activity of
GATA-3 with peri-nuclear zone in HK-2, whereas the intensity in cancer cells was 
markedly weaker than that of HK-2.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our present study clarifies that the aberrant expression
profile of GATA-3 in human RCC is possibly involved with tumorigenesis, and the
complicated mechanism is worthy of further investigation.

Copyright © 2012 AEU. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23906664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;34(7):614-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2013.07.012.

[Expression of TIM-1 and TIM-3 in spleen mononuclear cells and their role in Th1 
polarization in primary immune thrombocytopenia patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XM(1), Shan NN, Hu Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan 250021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression and clinical significance of T cell
immunoglobulin mucin (TIM)-1, TIM-3 and T cell-specific transcription factors
T-bet and GATA-3 in spleen mononuclear cells in patients with primary immune
thrombocytopenia (ITP).
METHODS: The spleen samples were obtained from 17 active ITP patients and 10
controls with spleen traumatic rupture. By using real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, the mRNA expressions of TIM-3, TIM1, T-bet and GATA-3 
were studied in all subjects.
RESULTS: TIM-3 mRNA levels of active ITP patients were significantly decreased to
(29 ± 16)% of that of control, TIM-1 mRNA levels of active ITP patients increased
to (3.20 ± 2.18) folds of that of control, but the difference was not
significant. The ratio of TIM-1/ TIM-3 was elevated in active ITP patients. T-bet
mRNA levels were up-regulated in ITP patients by (2.82 ± 1.57) folds (P<0.05) and
the expression of GATA3 was decreased by 14% folds (P<0.05) compared to controls.
The ratio of T-bet/GATA3 were significantly elevated in ITP patients.
CONCLUSION: The imbalance between TIM-3 and TIM-1 expression might play an
important role in pathogenesis of ITP.

PMID: 23906457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Dec;132(6):1440-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.06.028.
Epub 2013 Jul 27.

Der p 1-induced CD4<U+207A>FOXP3<U+207A>GATA3<U+207A> T cells have suppressive properties and
contribute to the polarization of the TH2-associated response.

Reubsaet L(1), Meerding J, Giezeman R, de Kleer I, Arets B, Prakken B, Beekman J,
van Wijk F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Cellular Intervention, Department of Pediatric
Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: l.l.reubsaet@umcutrecht.nl.

PMID: 23900057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jul 30;8:112. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-112.

Comprehensive characterization of malignant phyllodes tumor by whole genomic and 
proteomic analysis: biological implications for targeted therapy opportunities.

Jardim DL(1), Conley A, Subbiah V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, FC8.3038, Box 0455, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Phyllodes tumors are uncommon breast tumors that account for less
than 0.5% of all breast malignancies. After metastases develop, the prognosis is 
poor, with very few patients living more than 1 year. The biology of this unusual
cancer is not understood and, consequently, no potential targets for treatments
are currently available. There has been an exponential increase in the number of 
commercially available tumor profiling services. Herein, we report a case of
metastatic malignant phyllodes tumor for which a comprehensive molecular analysis
was performed by using Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
(CLIA)-certified labs, providing new insights into the potential opportunities
for molecularly targeted therapies for this extremely rare disease.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing was performed by using the FoundationOne
platform (Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA). Whole-genome array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) was performed by using the
DNAarray (CombiMatrix Diagnostics, Irvine, CA). Immunohistochemical and
morphoproteomics analysis were performed at Consultative proteomics®, The
University of Texas, UT Health Medical School, Houston,TX (Robert E Brown Lab);
Clarient Diagnostics, Aliso Viejo, CA; and Caris Life Sciences Target one,
Irving, TX, USA.
RESULTS: Next-generation sequencing showed 3 aberrant genes: activating mutation 
Q61L on NRAS; inactivating mutations Q504* and K740* on RB1; and TP53 loss.
Whole-genome array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) revealed
amplifications of chromosome (chr.) 1 (CKS1B gene), chr. 8 (MYC gene), and chr. 9
(CDKN2A gene) Deletions of chr. 17 (TP53), chr. 10 (GATA3), chr. 11 (FGF4 and
CCND1 genes), and chr.22 (PDGFß). Immunohistochemical analysis for relevant
markers showed a positive staining for transducing-like enhancer of split (TLE)
3; secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was expressed at 2-3+ in 
the cytoplasm of the tumors cells, whereas mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
was expressed up to 2+ in the nuclei of the tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe for the first time an NRAS mutation with concomitant
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR in phyllodes tumor. We also found markers for
sensitivity to taxane-based therapies, especially albumin-bound paclitaxel.
Exploring the biology of rare malignancies by CLIA certified labs may be
reasonable strategy for the development of targeted treatments.

PMCID: PMC3751902
PMID: 23895135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Brief Funct Genomics. 2013 Nov;12(6):499-511. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elt025. Epub 2013
Jul 22.

Transcription factor interplay in T helper cell differentiation.

Evans CM(1), Jenner RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity and UCL Cancer Institute, University
College London, Paul O'Gorman Building, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
r.jenner@ucl.ac.uk.

The differentiation of CD4 helper T cells into specialized effector lineages has 
provided a powerful model for understanding immune cell differentiation. Distinct
lineages have been defined by differential expression of signature cytokines and 
the lineage-specifying transcription factors necessary and sufficient for their
production. The traditional paradigm of differentiation towards Th1 and Th2
subtypes driven by T-bet and GATA3, respectively, has been extended to
incorporate additional T cell lineages and transcriptional regulators.
Technological advances have expanded our view of these lineage-specifying
transcription factors to the whole genome and revealed unexpected interplay
between them. From these data, it is becoming clear that lineage specification is
more complex and plastic than previous models might have suggested. Here, we
present an overview of the different forms of transcription factor interplay that
have been identified and how T cell phenotypes arise as a product of this
interplay within complex regulatory networks. We also suggest experimental
strategies that will provide further insight into the mechanisms that underlie T 
cell lineage specification and plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3838196
PMID: 23878131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e66518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066518. Print 2013.

Indoxyl sulfate down-regulates SLCO4C1 transporter through up-regulation of
GATA3.

Akiyama Y(1), Kikuchi K, Saigusa D, Suzuki T, Takeuchi Y, Mishima E, Yamamoto Y, 
Ishida A, Sugawara D, Jinno D, Shima H, Toyohara T, Suzuki C, Souma T, Moriguchi 
T, Tomioka Y, Ito S, Abe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Promotion, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

The accumulated uremic toxins inhibit the expression of various renal
transporters and this inhibition may further reduce renal function and
subsequently cause the accumulation of uremic toxins. However, the precise
mechanism of the nephrotoxicity of uremic toxins on renal transport has been
poorly understood. Here we report that indoxyl sulfate, one of the potent uremic 
toxins, directly suppresses the renal-specific organic anion transporter SLCO4C1 
expression through a transcription factor GATA3. The promoter region of SLCO4C1
gene has several GATA motifs, and indoxyl sulfate up-regulated GATA3 mRNA and
subsequently down-regulated SLCO4C1 mRNA. Overexpression of GATA3 significantly
reduced SLCO4C1 expression, and silencing of GATA3 increased SLCO4C1 expression
vice versa. Administration of indoxyl sulfate in rats reduced renal expression of
slco4c1 and under this condition, plasma level of guanidinosuccinate, one of the 
preferable substrates of slco4c1, was significantly increased without changing
plasma creatinine. Furthermore, in 5/6 nephrectomized rats, treatment with oral
adsorbent AST-120 significantly decreased plasma indoxyl sulfate level and
conversely increased the expression of slco4c1, following the reduction of plasma
level of guanidinosuccinate. These data suggest that the removal of indoxyl
sulfate and blocking its signal pathway may help to restore the SLCO4C1-mediated 
renal excretion of uremic toxins in CKD.

PMCID: PMC3706553
PMID: 23874392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):341-50. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.06.019. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Reprogramming of human fibroblasts to pluripotency with lineage specifiers.

Montserrat N(1), Nivet E, Sancho-Martinez I, Hishida T, Kumar S, Miquel L,
Cortina C, Hishida Y, Xia Y, Esteban CR, Izpisua Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, Dr. Aiguader, 88, 08003
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):261-2.

Since the initial discovery that OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC overexpression
sufficed for the induction of pluripotency in somatic cells, methodologies
replacing the original factors have enhanced our understanding of the
reprogramming process. However, unlike in mouse, OCT4 has not been replaced
successfully during reprogramming of human cells. Here we report on a strategy to
accomplish this replacement. Through a combination of transcriptome and
bioinformatic analysis we have identified factors previously characterized as
being lineage specifiers that are able to replace OCT4 and SOX2 in the
reprogramming of human fibroblasts. Our results show that it is possible to
replace OCT4 and SOX2 simultaneously with alternative lineage specifiers in the
reprogramming of human cells. At a broader level, they also support a model in
which counteracting lineage specification networks underlies the induction of
pluripotency.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23871606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Nov;132(5):1174-1183.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.05.027. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

The steroidogenic enzyme Cyp11a1 is essential for development of peanut-induced
intestinal anaphylaxis.

Wang M(1), Ramirez J, Han J, Jia Y, Domenico J, Seibold MA, Hagman JR, Gelfand
EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health,
Denver, Colo.

BACKGROUND: Cytochrome P450, family 11, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (Cyp11a1), a
cytochrome P450 enzyme, is the first and rate-limiting enzyme in the
steroidogenic pathway, converting cholesterol to pregnenolone. Cyp11a1 expression
is increased in activated T cells.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine the role of Cyp11a1 activation in the
development of peanut allergy and TH cell functional differentiation.
METHODS: A Cyp11a1 inhibitor, aminoglutethimide (AMG), was administered to
peanut-sensitized and challenged mice. Clinical symptoms, intestinal
inflammation, and Cyp11a1 levels were assessed. The effects of Cyp11a1 inhibition
on T(H)1, T(H)2, and T(H)17 differentiation were determined. Cyp11a1 gene
silencing was performed with Cyp11a1-targeted short hairpin RNA.
RESULTS: Peanut sensitization and challenge resulted in diarrhea, inflammation,
and increased levels of Cyp11a1, IL13, and IL17A mRNA in the small intestine.
Inhibition of Cyp11a1 with AMG prevented allergic diarrhea and inflammation.
Levels of pregnenolone in serum were reduced in parallel. AMG treatment decreased
IL13 and IL17A mRNA expression in the small intestine without affecting Cyp11a1
mRNA or protein levels. In vitro the inhibitor decreased IL13 and IL17A mRNA and 
protein levels in differentiated T(H)2 and T(H)17 CD4 T cells, respectively,
without affecting GATA3, retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t (ROR<U+03B3>t), or
T(H)1 cells and IFNG and T-bet expression. Short hairpin RNA-mediated silencing
of Cyp11a1 in polarized T(H)2 CD4 T cells significantly decreased pregnenolone
and IL13 mRNA and protein levels.
CONCLUSION: Cyp11a1 plays an important role in the development of peanut allergy,
regulating peanut-induced allergic responses through effects on steroidogenesis, 
an essential pathway in T(H)2 differentiation. Cyp11a1 thus serves as a novel
target in the regulation and treatment of peanut allergy.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3864874
PMID: 23870673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Oct;132(4):1005-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.05.033. 
Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Profiling of human CD4+ T-cell subsets identifies the TH2-specific noncoding RNA 
GATA3-AS1.

Zhang H(1), Nestor CE, Zhao S, Lentini A, Bohle B, Benson M, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden; CIMed, Centre for Individualised
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden.

PMID: 23870669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e68952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068952. Print 2013.

Probiotics can generate FoxP3 T-cell responses in the small intestine and
simultaneously inducing CD4 and CD8 T cell activation in the large intestine.

Smelt MJ(1), de Haan BJ, Bron PA, van Swam I, Meijerink M, Wells JM, Faas MM, de 
Vos P.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Most studies on probiotics aim to restore intestinal homeostasis to reduce
immune-pathology in disease. Of equal importance are studies on how probiotics
might prevent or delay disease in healthy individuals. However, knowledge on
mechanisms of probiotic actions in healthy individuals is scarce. To gain more
insight in how different bacterial strains may modulate the healthy intestinal
immune system, we investigated the effect of the food derived bacterial strains
L. plantarum WCFS1, L. salivarius UCC118, and L. lactis MG1363, on the intestinal
regulatory immune phenotype in healthy mice. All three bacterial strains induced 
an upregulation of activity and numbers of CD11c(+) MHCII(+) DCs in the
immune-sampling Peyer's Patches. Only L. salivarius UCC118 skewed towards an
immune regulatory phenotype in the small intestinal lamina propria (SILP). The
effects were different in the large intestine lamina propria. L. salivarius
UCC118 induced activation in both CD4 and CD8 positive T-cells while L. plantarum
WCFS1 induced a more regulatory phenotype. Moreover, L. plantarum WCFS1 decreased
the Th1/Th2 ratio in the SILP. Also L. lactis MG1363 had immunomodulatory
effects. L. lactis MG1363 decreased the expression of the GATA-3 and T-bet in the
SILP. As our data show that contradictory effects may occur in different parts of
the gut, it is recommended to study effects of probiotic in different sites in
the intestine. Our strain-specific results suggest that unspecified application
of probiotics may not be very effective. Our data also indicate that selection of
specific probiotic strain activities on the basis of responses in healthy mice
may be a promising strategy to specifically stimulate or suppress immunity in
specific parts of the intestine.

PMCID: PMC3701681
PMID: 23861953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3254-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.094938.

Pdgfra protects against ethanol-induced craniofacial defects in a zebrafish model
of FASD.

McCarthy N(1), Wetherill L, Lovely CB, Swartz ME, Foroud TM, Eberhart JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology and Institute for Neuroscience, University of
Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Human birth defects are highly variable and this phenotypic variability can be
influenced by both the environment and genetics. However, the synergistic
interactions between these two variables are not well understood. Fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders (FASD) is the umbrella term used to describe the wide range of
deleterious outcomes following prenatal alcohol exposure. Although FASD are
caused by prenatal ethanol exposure, FASD are thought to be genetically
modulated, although the genes regulating sensitivity to ethanol teratogenesis are
largely unknown. To identify potential ethanol-sensitive genes, we tested five
known craniofacial mutants for ethanol sensitivity: cyp26b1, gata3, pdgfra, smad5
and smoothened. We found that only platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha 
(pdgfra) interacted with ethanol during zebrafish craniofacial development.
Analysis of the PDGF family in a human FASD genome-wide dataset links PDGFRA to
craniofacial phenotypes in FASD, prompting a mechanistic understanding of this
interaction. In zebrafish, untreated pdgfra mutants have cleft palate due to
defective neural crest cell migration, whereas pdgfra heterozygotes develop
normally. Ethanol-exposed pdgfra mutants have profound craniofacial defects that 
include the loss of the palatal skeleton and hypoplasia of the pharyngeal
skeleton. Furthermore, ethanol treatment revealed latent haploinsufficiency,
causing palatal defects in ~62% of pdgfra heterozygotes. Neural crest apoptosis
partially underlies these ethanol-induced defects in pdgfra mutants,
demonstrating a protective role for Pdgfra. This protective role is mediated by
the PI3K/mTOR pathway. Collectively, our results suggest a model where combined
genetic and environmental inhibition of PI3K/mTOR signaling leads to variability 
within FASD.

PMCID: PMC3931738
PMID: 23861062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Exp Med. 2013 Jul 29;210(8):1545-57. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122516. Epub 2013 Jul
15.

The TAL1 complex targets the FBXW7 tumor suppressor by activating miR-223 in
human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Mansour MR(1), Sanda T, Lawton LN, Li X, Kreslavsky T, Novina CD, Brand M,
Gutierrez A, Kelliher MA, Jamieson CH, von Boehmer H, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02216, USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor TAL1/SCL is aberrantly expressed in 60% of
cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and initiates T-ALL in
mouse models. By performing global microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling after
depletion of TAL1, together with genome-wide analysis of TAL1 occupancy by
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to massively parallel DNA sequencing, we
identified the miRNA genes directly controlled by TAL1 and its regulatory
partners HEB, E2A, LMO1/2, GATA3, and RUNX1. The most dynamically regulated miRNA
was miR-223, which is bound at its promoter and up-regulated by the TAL1 complex.
miR-223 expression mirrors TAL1 levels during thymic development, with high
expression in early thymocytes and marked down-regulation after the
double-negative-2 stage of maturation. We demonstrate that aberrant miR-223
up-regulation by TAL1 is important for optimal growth of TAL1-positive T-ALL
cells and that sustained expression of miR-223 partially rescues T-ALL cells
after TAL1 knockdown. Overexpression of miR-223 also leads to marked
down-regulation of FBXW7 protein expression, whereas knockdown of TAL1 leads to
up-regulation of FBXW7 protein levels, with a marked reduction of its substrates 
MYC, MYB, NOTCH1, and CYCLIN E. We conclude that TAL1-mediated up-regulation of
miR-223 promotes the malignant phenotype in T-ALL through repression of the FBXW7
tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3727321
PMID: 23857984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 15;191(4):1818-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300379. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Critical role of p38 and GATA3 in natural helper cell function.

Furusawa J(1), Moro K, Motomura Y, Okamoto K, Zhu J, Takayanagi H, Kubo M, Koyasu
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2014 Aug 1;193(3):1512.

Natural helper (NH) cells, a member of
Lin(-)IL-2R(+)IL-7R(+)IL-25R(+)IL-33R(+)GATA3(+) group 2 innate lymphoid cell
subset, are characterized by the expression of transcription factors GATA3 and
RORa and production of large amounts of Th2 cytokines such as IL-5, IL-6, and
IL-13 upon IL-33 stimulation or a combination of IL-2 and IL-25. We have studied 
the signal transduction pathways critical for the cytokine expression and
development of NH cell. Either stimulation with IL-33 or a combination of IL-2
and IL-25 induced p38 activation and phosphorylation of GATA3 in NH cells, and
the phosphorylated form of GATA3 bound to the IL-5 and IL-13 promoters. All these
events were blocked by SB203580, a p38 inhibitor. Inhibition of p38 also blocked 
IL-6 production. The mature NH cells lacking Gata3 were impaired in the
proliferation and production of IL-5 and IL-13, but not IL-6, indicating that
both p38 and GATA3 are critical for the proliferation and production of IL-5 and 
IL-13 and that the mechanisms downstream of p38 differ between IL-6 and
IL-5/IL-13. In contrast, the NH cells lacking RORa showed no impairment in the
proliferation and cytokine production, indicating that GATA3 but not RORa plays a
pivotal role in the effector functions of mature NH cell. However, deletion of
either GATA3 or RORa in hematopoietic stem cells severely blocked the development
into NH cells. Our results demonstrate the important roles of p38 and GATA3 in NH
cell functions.

PMCID: PMC3765427
PMID: 23851685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 12;33(24):3205-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.270. Epub 2013 Jul
15.

GATA3 cooperates with PARP1 to regulate CCND1 transcription through modulating
histone H1 incorporation.

Shan L(1), Li X(1), Liu L(1), Ding X(2), Wang Q(1), Zheng Y(1), Duan Y(1), Xuan
C(1), Wang Y(1), Yang F(2), Shang Y(1), Shi L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (2)Laboratory of
Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

The transcription factor GATA3 is a key regulator of mammary gland development
and a definitive marker of luminal breast cancer. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the role of GATA3 in breast carcinogenesis is still not
fully understood. We report here that GATA3 promotes cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis by facilitating the G1/S transition through its transcription
regulation of the CCND1 gene in breast cancer cells. We found that GATA3 is
physically associated with poly-ADP ribose polymerase-1 (PARP1), an enzyme
modifying nuclear proteins by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. We showed that PARP1 acts
as a transcription coactivator for GATA3 in breast cancer cells and demonstrated 
that GATA3 cooperates with PARP1 in transactivation of the CCND1 gene. We
demonstrated that PARP1 competes with linker histone H1 to maintain a
transcriptional competent chromatin environment for CCND1 gene. Our results
unveiled a molecular basis for the coordinated regulation between GATA3 and PARP1
in transcription activation, providing a mechanism for GATA3 in breast
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 23851505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 5;33(23):3033-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.263. Epub 2013 Jul 15.

The nuclear coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 maintains tumor-initiating
cells during development of ductal carcinoma in situ.

Ory V(1), Tassi E(1), Cavalli LR(1), Sharif GM(1), Saenz F(1), Baker T(1),
Schmidt MO(1), Mueller SC(1), Furth PA(1), Wellstein A(1), Riegel AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.

The key molecular events required for the formation of ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) and its progression to invasive breast carcinoma have not been defined.
Here, we show that the nuclear receptor coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 
(AIB1) is expressed at low levels in normal breast but is highly expressed in
DCIS lesions. This is of significance since reduction of AIB1 in human MCFDCIS
cells restored a more normal three-dimensional mammary acinar structure.
Reduction of AIB1 in MCFDCIS cells, both before DCIS development or in existing
MCFDCIS lesions in vivo, inhibited tumor growth and led to smaller, necrotic
lesions. AIB1 reduction in MCFDCIS cells was correlated with significant
reduction in the CD24-/CD44+ breast cancer-initiating cell (BCIC) population, and
a decrease in myoepithelial progenitor cells in the DCIS lesions in vitro and in 
vivo. The loss of AIB1 in MCFDCIS cells was also accompanied by a loss of
expression of NOTCH 2, 3 and 4, JAG2, HES1, GATA3, human epidermal growth factor 
receptor 2 (HER2) and HER3 in vivo. These signaling molecules have been
associated with differentiation of breast epithelial progenitor cells. These data
indicate that AIB1 has a central role in the initiation and maintenance of DCIS
and that reduction of AIB1 causes loss of BCIC, loss of components of the NOTCH, 
HER2 and HER3 signaling pathways and fewer DCIS myoepithelial progenitor cells in
vivo. We propose that increased expression of AIB1, through the maintenance of
BCIC, facilitates formation of DCIS, a necessary step before development of
invasive disease.

PMCID: PMC3943533
PMID: 23851504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:237096. doi: 10.1155/2013/237096.
Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Graptopetalum paraguayense Ameliorates Airway Inflammation and Allergy in
Ovalbumin- (OVA-) Sensitized BALB/C Mice by Inhibiting Th2 Signal.

Lee BH(1), Cheng YH, Wu SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, National Chiayi University, Taiwan.

Role of inflammation-induced oxidative stress in the pathogenesis and progression
of chronic inflammatory airways diseases has received increasing attention in
recent years. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 is the primary
transcription factor that regulates the expression of antioxidant and detoxifying
enzymes. Graptopetalum paraguayense E. Walther, a vegetable consumed in Taiwan,
has been used in folk medicine for protection against liver injury through
elevating antioxidation. Recently, we found that gallic acid is an active
compound of Graptopetalum paraguayense E. Walther, which has been reported to
inhibit T-helper 2 cytokines. Currently, we assumed that Graptopetalum
paraguayense E. Walther may potentially protect against ovalbumin-induced allergy
and airway inflammation. Results demonstrated that Graptopetalum paraguayense E. 
Walther ethanolic extracts (GPE) clearly inhibited airway inflammation, mucus
cell hyperplasia, and eosinophilia in OVA-challenged mice. Additionally, GPE also
prevented T-cell infiltration and Th2 cytokines, including interleukin- (IL-)4,
IL-5, and IL-13 generations in bronchial alveolar lavage fluid. The adhesion
molecules ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 were substantially reduced by GPE treatment mediated 
by Nrf2 activation. Moreover, GPE attenuated GATA3 expression and inhibited Th2
signals of the T cells. These findings suggested that GPE ameliorated the
development of airway inflammation through immune regulation.

PMCID: PMC3703387
PMID: 23843865  [PubMed]


97. Surg Oncol. 2013 Sep;22(3):e53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.suronc.2013.06.003. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Genomic and molecular aberrations in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and 
their roles in personalized target therapy.

Yang J(1), Du X.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Bone and Soft Tissue Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Hospital and Institute, Tianjin 30060, China. jilongyang@yahoo.com

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are malignant tumors with a
high rate of local recurrence and a significant tendency to metastasize. Its
dismal outcome points to the urgent need to establish better therapeutic
strategies for patients harboring MPNSTs. The investigations of genomic and
molecular aberrations in MPNSTs which detect many chromosomal aberrations,
pathway abnormalities, and specific molecular aberrant events would supply
multiple potential therapy targets and contribute to achievement of personalized 
medicine. The involved genes in the significant gains aberrations include BIRC5, 
CCNE2, DAB2, DDX15, EGFR, DAB2, MSH2, CDK6, HGF, ITGB4, KCNK12, LAMA3, LOXL2,
MET, and PDGFRA. The involved genes in the significant deletion aberrations
include CDH1, GLTSCR2, EGR1, CTSB, GATA3, SULT2A1, GLTSCR2, HMMR/RHAMM, LICAM2,
MMP13, p16/INK4a, RASSF2, NM-23H1, and TP53. These genetic aberrations involve in
several important signaling pathways such as TFF, EGFR, ARF, IGF1R signaling
pathways. The genomic and molecular aberrations of EGFR, IGF1R, SOX9, EYA4,
TOP2A, ETV4, and BIRC5 exhibit great promise as personalized therapeutic targets 
for MPNST patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2013 Jun;60(2):163-74. doi:
10.1556/AMicr.60.2013.2.7.

Expression patterns of Th1/Th2 transcription factors in patients with guttate
psoriasis.

Vanaki E(1), Ataei M, Sanati MH, Mansouri P, Mahmoudi M, Zarei F, Jadali Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Clinical Genetics
Department, Tehran, Iran.

Many lines of evidence propose that psoriasis is a T cell-mediated disease where 
T cell activation is followed by secretion of inflammatory cytokines. To
elucidate the functional state of T cells in guttate psoriasis, we analysed mRNA 
expression levels of T-bet and GATA-3 for Th1 and Th2 differentiation,
respectively together with Th1 (IFN-<U+03B3>) and Th2 (IL-4) cytokine mRNA expression.
Relative quantification of T-bet, GATA-3, IFN-<U+03B3> and Th2, and IL-4 transcripts in 
peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) was conducted by real-time reverse
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Serum levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and Th2 and IL-4 were also
determined by ELISA. GATA-3 and IL-4 mRNA expression levels were lower in
psoriatic patients as compared to normal healthy controls. The expression levels 
of T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> and Th2 genes were relatively similar in the patients and
controls. In addition, a marked decrease in plasma IL-4 levels was observed in
the psoriasis group, while no differences were observed with regard to levels of 
IFN-<U+03B3> and Th2 between patients and normal subjects. Furthermore, a clear
correlation between decreased IL-4 mRNA expression and IL-4 (P < 0.05) was
revealed. These results suggested that altered balance between Th1 and Th2 cells 
transcription factor genes and they products may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of psoriasis.

PMID: 23827748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e66468. Print 2013.

Genome-Wide Gene Expression Profiling Revealed a Critical Role for GATA3 in the
Maintenance of the Th2 Cell Identity.

Sasaki T(1), Onodera A, Hosokawa H, Watanabe Y, Horiuchi S, Yamashita J, Tanaka
H, Ogawa Y, Suzuki Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
City, Japan ; Pharmaceutical Research Laboratory, Research Division, Nihon
Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Narita City, Japan.

Functionally polarized CD4+ T helper (Th) cells such as Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells
are central to the regulation of acquired immunity. However, the molecular
mechanisms governing the maintenance of the polarized functions of Th cells
remain unclear. GATA3, a master regulator of Th2 cell differentiation, initiates 
the expressions of Th2 cytokine genes and other Th2-specific genes. GATA3 also
plays important roles in maintaining Th2 cell function and in continuous
chromatin remodeling of Th2 cytokine gene loci. However, it is unclear whether
continuous expression of GATA3 is required to maintain the expression of various 
other Th2-specific genes. In this report, genome-wide DNA gene expression
profiling revealed that GATA3 expression is critical for the expression of a
certain set of Th2-specific genes. We demonstrated that GATA3 dependency is
reduced for some Th2-specific genes in fully developed Th2 cells compared to that
observed in effector Th2 cells, whereas it is unchanged for other genes.
Moreover, effects of a loss of GATA3 expression in Th2 cells on the expression of
cytokine and cytokine receptor genes were examined in detail. A critical role of 
GATA3 in the regulation of Th2-specific gene expression is confirmed in in vivo
generated antigen-specific memory Th2 cells. Therefore, GATA3 is required for the
continuous expression of the majority of Th2-specific genes involved in
maintaining the Th2 cell identity.

PMCID: PMC3688927
PMID: 23824597  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


100. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Oct 15;272(2):365-72. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.06.020. Epub 2013 Jun 29.

Biodistribution of the GATA-3-specific DNAzyme hgd40 after inhalative exposure in
mice, rats and dogs.

Turowska A(1), Librizzi D, Baumgartl N, Kuhlmann J, Dicke T, Merkel O, Homburg U,
Höffken H, Renz H, Garn H.

Author information: 
(1)sterna biologicals GmbH & Co. KG, Marburg, Germany.

The DNAzyme hgd40 was shown to effectively reduce expression of the transcription
factor GATA-3 RNA which plays an important role in the regulation of Th2-mediated
immune mechanisms such as in allergic bronchial asthma. However, uptake,
biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of hgd40 have not been investigated yet. We 
examined local and systemic distribution of hgd40 in naive mice and mice
suffering from experimental asthma. Furthermore, we evaluated the
pharmacokinetics as a function of dose following single and repeated
administration in rats and dogs. Using intranasal administration of fluorescently
labeled hgd40 we demonstrated that the DNAzyme was evenly distributed in inflamed
asthmatic mouse lungs within minutes after single dose application. Systemic
distribution was investigated in mice using radioactive labeled hgd40. After
intratracheal application, highest amounts of hgd40 were detected in the lungs.
High amounts were also detected in the bladder indicating urinary excretion as a 
major elimination pathway. In serum, low systemic hgd40 levels were detected
already at 5 min post application (p.a.), subsequently decreasing over time to
non-detectable levels at 2h p.a. As revealed by Single Photon Emission Computed
Tomography, trace amounts of hgd40 were detectable in lungs up to 7 days p.a.
Also in the toxicologically relevant rats and dogs, hgd40 was detectable in blood
only shortly after inhalative application. The plasma pharmacokinetic profile was
dose and time dependent. Repeated administration did not lead to drug
accumulation in plasma of dogs and rats. These pharmacokinetic of hgd40 provide
guidance for clinical development, and support an infrequent and convenient dose 
administration regimen.

© 2013.

PMID: 23820074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Dec;13(8):328-34. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jun 29.

Pax6 is expressed in subsets of V0 and V2 interneurons in the ventral spinal cord
in mice.

Panayiotou E(1), Panayi E, Lapathitis G, Francius C, Clotman F, Kessaris N,
Richardson WD, Malas S.

Author information: 
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, P.O. Box 23462, 1683 Nicosia, 
Cyprus; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537, 
1678 Nicosia, Cyprus.

The embryonic spinal cord in mice is organized into eleven progenitor domains.
Cells in each domain first produce neurons and then switch to specifying glia.
Five of these domains known as p3, pMN, p2, p1 and p0 are located in the ventral 
spinal cord and each expresses a unique code of transcription factors (TFs) that 
define the molecular profile of progenitor cells. This code is largely
responsible for determining the subtype specification of neurons generated from
each domain. Pax6 codes for a homedomain-containing TF that plays a central role 
in defining the molecular boundaries between the two ventral-most domains, p3 and
pMN. Using fate mapping and gene expression studies we show that PAX6, in
addition to each patterning function, is expressed in a group of late born
interneurons that derive from the p2 and p0 domains. The p2-derived neurons
represent a subset of late born V2b interneurons and their specification depends 
on Notch signaling. The V0 neurons represent V0v ventral neurons expressing Pax2.
Our data demonstrate that interneuron diversity in the ventral spinal cord is
more complex than originally appreciated and point to the existence of additional
mechanisms that determine interneuron diversity, particularly in the p2 domain.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23816521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Hepatol. 2013 Nov;59(5):1059-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.06.016. Epub 2013 Jun
25.

Possible involvement of CCL1-CCR8 interaction in lymphocytic recruitment in
IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis.

Zen Y(1), Liberal R, Nakanuma Y, Heaton N, Portmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London at King's College Hospital, 
London, UK. Electronic address: yoh.zen@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis and type 1 autoimmune
pancreatitis (IgG4-SC/AIP) are characterized by massive lymphoplasmacytic
infiltration including Th2 and regulatory T cells (Tregs). This study was
conducted to address which chemotactic factors are involved in this condition.
METHODS: Chemokine expression profiles in tissue were examined in IgG4-SC/AIP
(n=17), classical primary sclerosing cholangitis (IgG4(low) PSC, n=17), PSC with 
elevated serum/tissue IgG4 levels (IgG4(high) PSC, n=5), and primary biliary
cirrhosis (n=7). We focused on five chemotactic factors/receptors (CCL1-CCR8,
CCL17/CCL22-CCR4), given that CCR4 and CCR8 are predominantly expressed in both
Th2 and Tregs.
RESULTS: In conjunction with higher expression levels of IL-4 and IL-10,
expression values of CCL1 and CCR8 transcripts were significantly higher in
IgG4-SC/AIP than in IgG4(low) PSC (p=0.002) and IgG4(high) PSC (p=0.023). CCL1
and CCR8 were also overexpressed in IgG4(high) PSC than in IgG4(low) PSC
(p=0.023). No difference was seen for CCL17, CCL22, and CCR4. In situ
hybridization revealed CCL1 to be predominantly expressed in the pancreatic duct 
epithelium, peribiliary glands, and vascular endothelial cells including the ones
involved in obliterative phlebitis in IgG4-SC/AIP, in contrast to IgG4(high) PSC 
where this chemotactic factor was positive in several infiltrating lymphocytes.
These CCL1-expressing sites were infiltrated by CCR8(+) lymphocytes. On
immunohistochemistry, GATA3(+) Th2 lymphocytes and FOXP3(+) Tregs were
significantly larger in number in IgG4-SC/AIP, with the GATA3(+)/T-bet(+) cell
ratio to be shifted in favour of Th2 in periductal and perivascular areas.
CONCLUSIONS: CCL1-CCR8 interaction may play a critical role in lymphocytic
recruitment in IgG4-SC/AIP, leading to duct-centred inflammation and obliterative
phlebitis.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23811304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Aug;8(2):669-75. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1542. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Immunomodulatory effects of polysaccharopeptide in immunosuppressed mice induced 
by cyclophosphamide.

Huang R(1), Zhang J, Liu Y, Hao Y, Yang C, Wu K, Cao S, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital Clinical College
of Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008, P.R. China.

Polysaccharopeptide (PSP) is well known for its immunoregulatory effects. In the 
present study, the effect of PSP on white blood cell (WBC) count, T lymphocyte
subsets, B lymphocytes, Th1/Th2 balance and negative immune regulators was
investigated using an immunosuppressed mouse model. The results demonstrated that
the WBC count and the absolute number of CD3+CD4+ T cells, CD3+CD8+ T cells and
CD3-CD19+ B cells in the peripheral blood were increased in PSP-treated groups as
compared with the cyclophosphamide (Cy) group. In addition, PSP reduced
interleukin (IL)-4 and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) mRNA relative expression
levels and elevated the ratios of IL-2/IL-4 and the transcription factors,
T-box-containing protein/GATA-3. The relative mRNA expression levels of the
forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor box protein 3 (Foxp3), programmed
death-1 (PD-1) and IL-10 were also downregulated by PSP. These observations
indicate that the immunoregulatory effects of PSP are associated with restoration
of WBC number, improving the absolute number of T lymphocyte subsets and B
lymphocytes, inducing the Th1/Th2 response and downregulating the negative immune
regulators, Foxp3, PD-1 and IL-10.

PMID: 23799548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Hematology. 2014 Apr;19(3):141-7. doi: 10.1179/1607845413Y.0000000105. Epub 2013 
Nov 25.

The roles of miR-146a in the differentiation of Jurkat T-lymphoblasts.

Saki N, Abroun S, Soleimani M, Mortazavi Y, Kaviani S, Arefian E.

INTRODUCTION: T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is caused by a defect
in T-cell maturation to the mature T cell. T-ALL is a poor prognostic
hematopoietic malignancy. In order to establish a successful therapeutic
treatment plan, it is essential to understand the biology of T-cell development
and molecules that contribute to this process. This study uses Jurkat T cells, as
a well-established model for in vitro study of T-ALL to investigate the role of
the microRNA (miRNA), miR-146a, on gene expressions involved in T-cell
differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The permanent over-expression of miR-146a was established 
using a lentivector that expressed GFP hsa-mir-146a miRNA. We used quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometry for T-cell differentiation
to monitor induction of the differentiation process by assessing changes in
expression of some distinct transcription factors and cell surface markers.
RESULTS: Ectopic expression of miR-146a resulted in significant up-regulation of 
PU.1, c-Fos, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPa) and GATA3, and slight 
up-regulation of Foxp3 and Runx1. There was a significant, moderate
down-regulation in the expressions of Notch1, LIM-domain only (Lmo2), son of
sevenless 1 (SOS1), Ikaros, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 
3 (STAT3).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that ectopic expression of miR-146a could not
independently induce differentiation in lymphoblastic cells. However, the
expression of multiple genes involved in T-cell differentiation and T-cell CD
markers were found to be affected. These results have suggested a potential tumor
suppressive, immunomodulatory and cell activator role for miR146-a.

PMID: 23796062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Respirology. 2013 Nov;18(8):1249-55. doi: 10.1111/resp.12145.

Inhibition of interleukin-13 gene expression by triptolide in activated T
lymphocytes.

Dai S(1), Yin K, Yao X, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Triptolide, a type of diterpenoid, is the active
compound of Tripterygium wilfordii; it plays roles in anti-inflammatory and
immune response regulation. Our objective was to investigate the mechanism of the
inhibitory effect of triptolide on interleukin-13 (IL-13) gene expression in
activated T lymphocytes. Understanding the molecular mechanism by which
triptolide exerts a therapeutic function may be useful in developing a
pharmaceutical treatment for asthma.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and Hut-78 cells were
stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 with or without co-incubation with triptolide. The 
alteration of IL-13 messenger RNA (mRNA), expression and protein level were
analysed using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively. The intracellular
distribution profile of transcription factor GATA3 and nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT1) were analysed by Western blotting. The binding rates of
GATA3 and NFAT1 to the promoter sequence of IL-13 were analysed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) PCR.
RESULTS: In PBMC, the release of IL-13 was dependent on anti-CD3/CD28
stimulation. Its release could be inhibited by triptolide at the concentration of
500 nmol. In Hut-78 cells, IL-13 mRNA and protein expression were increased with 
anti-CD3/CD28 stimulation and significantly inhibited by incubation with 28 nmol 
triptolide. This concentration of triptolide also significantly inhibited the
nuclear translocation of GATA3 and NFAT1 reducing the binding rate to the IL-13
gene promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Triptolide inhibits IL-13 gene transcription and protein expression 
by inhibiting GATA3 and NFAT1 nuclear translocation and their binding rates to
the IL-13 gene promoter region.

© 2013 The Authors. Respirology © 2013 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

PMID: 23796028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Food Chem. 2013 Nov 15;141(2):809-15. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.04.062. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

The in vitro and in vivo effects of yerba mate (Ilex paraguariensis) extract on
adipogenesis.

Arçari DP(1), Santos JC, Gambero A, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade Integrada de Farmacologia e Gastroenterologia, Universidade São
Francisco, Bragança Paulista, SP, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of yerba mate extract and its
principal bioactive compounds on adipogenesis. The anti-adipogenic effects of
yerba mate, chlorogenic acid, quercetin and rutin were evaluated in 3T3-L1 cells 
using a PCR array. The results obtained in vitro were validated in vivo in a
high-fat diet-induced model of obesity. The in vitro and in vivo results
demonstrated that yerba mate extract down-regulated the expression of genes that 
regulate adipogenesis, such as Creb-1and C/EBPa, and the extract up-regulated the
expression of genes related to the inhibition of adipogenesis, including Dlk1,
Gata2, Gata3, Klf2, Lrp5, Ppar<U+03B3>2, Sfrp1, Tcf7l2, Wnt10b, and Wnt3a. In summary,
it was demonstrated that yerba mate and its bioactive compounds regulate the
expression of genes related to in vitro adipogenesis. Furthermore, yerba mate
might regulate adipogenesis through the Wnt pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23790851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013 Jun;126(12):2248-53.

An increased ratio of Th2/Treg cells in patients with moderate to severe asthma.

Shi YH(1), Shi GC, Wan HY, Ai XY, Zhu HX, Tang W, Ma JY, Jin XY, Zhang BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that T helper type-2 (Th2) cells can induce
the apoptosis of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells or resist the immunosuppressive effect of
Treg cells. We hypothesize that an imbalance of Th2/Treg is present in patients
with allergic asthma.
METHODS: Twenty-two patients with mild asthma, 17 patients with moderate to
severe asthma, and 20 healthy donors were enrolled. All patients were allergic to
house dust mites. The proportion of peripheral blood CD4+CD25+ Treg cells and Th2
cells were determined by flow cytometry. The concentration of interleukin
(IL)-10, transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß and IL-4 in plasma was determined by 
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. In these subjects, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from 17 mild asthmatic patients, 13 moderate to severe
asthmatic patients and 14 healthy donors were acquired and expression of forkhead
box P3 (Foxp3) and GATA-3 mRNA was detected by reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy donors and patients with mild asthma, the percent 
of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells and plasma IL-10 levels were decreased in patients with
moderate to severe asthma. There were no significant differences in Foxp3 mRNA
expression among three groups, but a downward trend seen among patients with
asthma. However, the percent of Th2 cells, IL-4 levels and expression of GATA-3
mRNA was markedly higher in patients with mild and moderate to severe asthma than
in the control group. The ratio of Th2/Treg and their cytokines was increased in 
allergic asthma, especially for moderate to severe asthma. The ratio of
GATA-3/Foxp3 mRNA was also increased in allergic asthma. In patients with
moderate to severe asthma, the percentage of peripheral blood Treg cells was
negatively correlated to the percentage of Th2 cells and IL-4 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The decline of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells in patients with moderate to
severe asthma may play an important role in progress of the disease. Furthermore,
the deficiency of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells was associated with the over-expression of
Th2 response.

PMID: 23786933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2836-48. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0166. Epub 2013 
Aug 16.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells favor the immunosuppressive T cells
skewing in a Helicobacter pylori model of gastric cancer.

Lin R(1), Ma H, Ding Z, Shi W, Qian W, Song J, Hou X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan, China .

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) play an important role in
Helicobacter pylori-induced gastric carcinogenesis. While the mechanism is not
well understood, BM-MSCs have been shown to contribute to the immunosuppressive
response found in a number of diseases. Here, BM-MSCs were transplanted into the 
stomach of mice with a 44-week mouse-adapted H. pylori infection. At day 28
post-transplantation, BM-MSCs migrated from the subserosal to the mucosal layer
of the stomach. The grafted BM-MSCs significantly stimulated systemic and local
interleukin-10 (IL-10)-secreting T cell and regulatory T cell (Treg) functions.
This observation was correlated with an increased percentage of CD4<U+207A>IL-10<U+207A> cells 
and CD4<U+207A>CD25<U+207A>FoxP3<U+207A> cells in splenic mononuclear cells compared with H.
pylori-infected mice not receiving BM-MSCs. Moreover, inhibitory cytokines IL-10 
and transforming growth factor-ß1 increased in the gastric tissue, while there
was a decrease in inflammatory interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>). BM-MSC-transplanted mice
also developed elevated IL-10/IFN-<U+03B3> secreting and Treg/Th17 ratios. A coculture
system in the presence or absence of BM-MSCs was also established to evaluate the
immune responses in vitro. An increase in IL-10-secreting T cells and Tregs,
associated with increased expression of Gata-3 and FoxP3, generation of IL-10 in 
the supernatant, and proliferation of gastric epithelial cells (GECs) was
observed. These findings demonstrate that transplantation of BM-MSCs into a
chronic H. pylori-infected mouse model results in the generation of an
immunosuppressive environment. The local and systemic immunosuppression mediated 
by BM-MSCs likely contributed to an environment that is compatible with the
development of H. pylori-induced gastric cancer.

PMID: 23777268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):753-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.026.

PDEF promotes luminal differentiation and acts as a survival factor for
ER-positive breast cancer cells.

Buchwalter G(1), Hickey MM, Cromer A, Selfors LM, Gunawardane RN, Frishman J,
Jeselsohn R, Lim E, Chi D, Fu X, Schiff R, Brown M, Brugge JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and can be classified based on gene
expression profiles that reflect distinct epithelial subtypes. We identify
prostate-derived ETS factor (PDEF) as a mediator of mammary luminal epithelial
lineage-specific gene expression and as a factor required for tumorigenesis in a 
subset of breast cancers. PDEF levels strongly correlate with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive luminal breast cancer, and PDEF transcription is inversely
regulated by ER and GATA3. Furthermore, PDEF is essential for luminal breast
cancer cell survival and is required in models of endocrine resistance. These
results offer insights into the function of this ETS factor that are clinically
relevant and may be of therapeutic value for patients with breast cancer treated 
with endocrine therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3711136
PMID: 23764000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1105-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-449413. Epub 2013
Jun 11.

Fibrocytes represent a novel MDSC subset circulating in patients with metastatic 
cancer.

Zhang H(1), Maric I, DiPrima MJ, Khan J, Orentas RJ, Kaplan RN, Mackall CL.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1093-4.

Fibrocytes are hematopoietic stem cell-derived fibroblast precursors that are
implicated in chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and wound healing. Myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells (MDSCs) expand in cancer-bearing hosts and contribute to tumor
immune evasion. They are typically described as CD11b<U+207A>HLA-DR<U+207B> in humans. We
report abnormal expansions of CD11b<U+207A>HLA-DR<U+207A> myeloid cells in peripheral blood
mononuclear fractions of subjects with metastatic pediatric sarcomas. Like
classical fibrocytes, they display cell surface a smooth muscle actin, collagen
I/V, and mediate angiogenesis. However, classical fibrocytes serve as antigen
presenters and augment immune reactivity, whereas fibrocytes from cancer subjects
suppressed anti-CD3-mediated T-cell proliferation, primarily via indoleamine
oxidase (IDO). The degree of fibrocyte expansion observed in individual subjects 
directly correlated with the frequency of circulating GATA3<U+207A>CD4<U+207A> cells (R = 0.80)
and monocytes from healthy donors cultured with IL-4 differentiated into
fibrocytes with the same phenotypic profile and immunosuppressive properties as
those observed in patients with cancer. We thus describe a novel subset of
cancer-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells, which bear the phenotypic and
functional hallmarks of fibrocytes but mediate immune suppression. These cells
are likely expanded in response to Th2 immune deviation and may contribute to
tumor progression via both immune evasion and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3744987
PMID: 23757729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Endocr Pract. 2013 Nov-Dec;19(6):1035-42. doi: 10.4158/EP13050.RA.

The syndrome of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal anomalies.

Upadhyay J(1), Steenkamp DW, Milunsky JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, Worcester,
Massachusetts.

OBJECTIVE: We review the syndrome of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
anomalies (HDR syndrome).
METHODS: The current understanding and relevant literature pertaining to the
background, genetic considerations, clinical features, prognosis, and treatment
of HDR syndrome are reviewed.
RESULTS: The combination of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal anomalies
constitutes an unusual syndrome associated most commonly with haploinsufficiency 
in GATA3, which encodes a transcription factor that binds to the (A/T) GATA (A/G)
consensus DNA sequence. Sensorineural hearing loss is the most consistently
expressed clinical feature, being present in almost all affected individuals, and
the combination of hypoparathyroidism and hearing impairment occurs in well over 
90% of those affected, with various renal anomalies being the most heterogeneous 
feature of the classic triad. We characterize, in tabular form, the individual
cases described in the literature and propose a classification scheme based on
the presence or absence of renal anomalies. We also include the specific genetic 
abnormality and renal anomaly associated with each individual case.
CONCLUSION: HDR syndrome is a heterogeneous syndrome most commonly associated
with GATA3 haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 23757620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 18;110(25):10240-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217158110. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Essential, dose-dependent role for the transcription factor Gata3 in the
development of IL-5+ and IL-13+ type 2 innate lymphoid cells.

Klein Wolterink RG(1), Serafini N, van Nimwegen M, Vosshenrich CA, de Bruijn MJ, 
Fonseca Pereira D, Veiga Fernandes H, Hendriks RW, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Innate Immunity Unit, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris,
France.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s; also called nuocytes, innate helper cells, 
or natural helper cells) provide protective immunity during helminth infection
and play an important role in influenza-induced and allergic airway
hyperreactivity. Whereas the transcription factor GATA binding protein 3 (Gata3) 
is important for the production of IL-5 and -13 by ILC2s in response to IL-33 or 
-25 stimulation, it is not known whether Gata3 is required for ILC2 development
from hematopoietic stem cells. Here, we show that chimeric mice generated with
Gata3-deficient fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells fail to develop systemically
dispersed ILC2s. In these chimeric mice, in vivo administration of IL-33 or -25
fails to expand ILC2 numbers or to induce characteristic ILC2-dependent IL-5 or
-13 production. Moreover, cell-intrinsic Gata3 expression is required for ILC2
development in vitro and in vivo. Using mutant and transgenic mice in which Gata3
gene copy number is altered, we show that ILC2 generation from common lymphoid
progenitors, as well as ILC2 homeostasis and cytokine production, is regulated by
Gata3 expression levels in a dose-dependent fashion. Collectively, these results 
identify Gata3 as a critical early regulator of ILC2 development, thereby
extending the paradigm of Gata3-dependent control of type 2 immunity to include
both innate and adaptive lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3690884
PMID: 23733962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 Sep;353(3):425-33. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1653-3. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Expression of miR-206 during the initiation of mammary gland development.

Lee MJ(1), Yoon KS, Cho KW, Kim KS, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Brain Korea 21 Project, Oral Science Research Center, College of Dentistry,
Yonsei Center of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemoon-Gu,
Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small noncoding RNAs that control gene
expression by targeting mRNAs and triggering either translational repression or
RNA degradation. The aberrant expression of miRNAs might be involved in human
diseases, including cancer. The expression of miR-206 in estrogen receptor alpha 
(ER-a)-positive human breast cancer tissues is well known. However, the
expression and regulation of miR-206 in the developing mammary gland has not yet 
been studied. To understand the effects of miR-206 on mammary gland development, 
we have profiled gene expression in scramble-transfected and
miR-206-overexpressing developing mammary buds. The genes that are potentially
regulated by miR-206 in the mammary epithelium and/or mesenchyme, such as
Tachykinin1 and Gata3, are known to be breast cancer markers. The expression of
Wnt, which is involved in gland positioning, and of the transcription factors
Tbx3 and Lef1, which are essential for mammary gland development, changes after
miR-206 overexpression. Using a mammary bud in vitro culture system, we have
demonstrated that miR-206 acts downstream of ER-a during mammary gland growth.
Thus, miR-206 might be a novel candidate for morphogenesis during the initiation 
of mammary gland formation and the regulation of genes related to mammary gland
development and breast cancer.

PMID: 23733266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3064-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00296-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

Direct protein interactions are responsible for Ikaros-GATA and Ikaros-Cdk9
cooperativeness in hematopoietic cells.

Bottardi S(1), Mavoungou L, Bourgoin V, Mashtalir N, Affar el B, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
and Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Ikaros (Ik) is a critical regulator of hematopoietic gene expression. Here, we
established that the Ik interactions with GATA transcription factors and
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a component of the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), are required for transcriptional activation of Ik
target genes. A detailed dissection of Ik-GATA and Ik-Cdk9 protein interactions
indicated that the C-terminal zinc finger domain of Ik interacts directly with
the C-terminal zinc fingers of GATA1, GATA2, and GATA3, whereas the N-terminal
zinc finger domain of Ik is required for interaction with the kinase and T-loop
domains of Cdk9. The relevance of these interactions was demonstrated in vivo in 
COS-7 and primary hematopoietic cells, in which Ik facilitated Cdk9 and GATA
protein recruitment to gene promoters and transcriptional activation. Moreover,
the oncogenic isoform Ik6 did not efficiently interact with Cdk9 or GATA proteins
in vivo and perturbed Cdk9/P-TEFb recruitment to Ik target genes, thereby
affecting transcription elongation. Finally, characterization of a novel nuclear 
Ik isoform revealed that Ik exon 6 is dispensable for interactions with Mi2 and
GATA proteins but is essential for the Cdk9 interaction. Thus, Ik is central to
the Ik-GATA-Cdk9 regulatory network, which is broadly utilized for gene
regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC3753914
PMID: 23732910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;91(6):390-2. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.24. Epub 2013 Jun 
4.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells show up in the skin.

Spits H.

PMID: 23732616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Dent (Tehran). 2013 Jan;10(1):23-31. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Expression levels of th-2 and th-17 characteristic genes in healthy tissue versus
periodontitis.

Behfarnia P(1), Birang R, Pishva SS, Hakemi MG, Khorasani MM.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, Periodontics Department, Dental School, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: The T helper 17 (Th17) cells have been suggested to have osteoclast
activating effects while T helper 2 (Th2) cells are considered to have an
osteoprotective role in periodontitis. This study was to compare the markers of
Th17 cells (RORC2 and IL-17 genes) with that of Th2 cells (IL-4 and GATA-3 genes)
between healthy and periodontitis tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The samples were obtained from patients with periodontitis
and healthy tissues. The mRNA expression levels of IL-17, RORC2, IL-4 and GATA-3 
were measured in both groups using quantitative RT-PCR. The results were compared
using SPSS 11.0. Correlation coefficient was analyzed by Spearman's rho test.
Mann-Whitney was used to measure the difference between IL-17 and IL-4 as well as
RORC2 and GATA-3.
RESULTS: In periodontal lesions, the expression levels of all markers were
significantly higher than the healthy tissue (p= 0.001). The results showed a
significant increase in the number of markers of Th17 (RORC2 and IL-17 genes)
compared to markers of Th2 (GATA-3, IL-4) in patients with periodontitis compared
to controls (p=0.002). A positive correlation between IL-17 and RORC2 (p=0.05)
and between IL-4 and GATA-3 (p=0.001) was found.
CONCLUSION: The results show that expression levels of IL-4, GATA-3, IL-17 and
RORC2 increase significantly in periodontal lesions compared with the controls.
In periodontal lesions, IL-17 levels are significantly greater than IL-4, which
plays a protective role against alveolar bone loss.

PMCID: PMC3666062
PMID: 23724200  [PubMed]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Aug;41(14):6892-904. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt469. Epub 2013
May 30.

KDM4B is a master regulator of the estrogen receptor signalling cascade.

Gaughan L(1), Stockley J, Coffey K, O'Neill D, Jones DL, Wade M, Wright J, Moore 
M, Tse S, Rogerson L, Robson CN.

Author information: 
(1)Solid Tumour Target Discovery Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Newcastle University, Paul O'Gorman Building, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
luke.gaughan@ncl.ac.uk

The importance of the estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer (BCa) development
makes it a prominent target for therapy. Current treatments, however, have
limited effectiveness, and hence the definition of new therapeutic targets is
vital. The ER is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily of
transcription factors that requires co-regulator proteins for complete
regulation. Emerging evidence has implicated a small number of histone
methyltransferase (HMT) and histone demethylase (HDM) enzymes as regulators of ER
signalling, including the histone H3 lysine 9 tri-/di-methyl HDM enzyme KDM4B.
Two recent independent reports have demonstrated that KDM4B is required for
ER-mediated transcription and depletion of the enzyme attenuates BCa growth in
vitro and in vivo. Here we show that KDM4B has an overarching regulatory role in 
the ER signalling cascade by controlling expression of the ER and FOXA1 genes,
two critical components for maintenance of the estrogen-dependent phenotype.
KDM4B interacts with the transcription factor GATA-3 in BCa cell lines and
directly co-activates GATA-3 activity in reporter-based experiments. Moreover, we
reveal that KDM4B recruitment and demethylation of repressive H3K9me3 marks
within upstream regulatory regions of the ER gene permits binding of GATA-3 to
drive receptor expression. Ultimately, our findings confirm the importance of
KDM4B within the ER signalling cascade and as a potential therapeutic target for 
BCa treatment.

PMCID: PMC3737554
PMID: 23723241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Sep;6(5):1285-91. doi: 10.1242/dmm.011965. Epub 2013 May 29.

Ahsa1 and Hsp90 activity confers more severe craniofacial phenotypes in a
zebrafish model of hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia
(HDR).

Sheehan-Rooney K(1), Swartz ME, Zhao F, Liu D, Eberhart JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Patterson 522, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78713, USA.

The severity of most human birth defects is highly variable. Our ability to
diagnose, treat and prevent defects relies on our understanding of this
variability. Mutation of the transcription factor GATA3 in humans causes the
highly variable hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia
(HDR) syndrome. Although named for a triad of defects, individuals with HDR can
also exhibit craniofacial defects. Through a forward genetic screen for
craniofacial mutants, we isolated a zebrafish mutant in which the first cysteine 
of the second zinc finger of Gata3 is mutated. Because mutation of the homologous
cysteine causes HDR in humans, these zebrafish mutants could be a quick and
effective animal model for understanding the role of gata3 in the HDR disease
spectrum. We demonstrate that, unexpectedly, the chaperone proteins Ahsa1 and
Hsp90 promote severe craniofacial phenotypes in our zebrafish model of HDR
syndrome. The strengths of the zebrafish system, including rapid development,
genetic tractability and live imaging, make this an important model for
variability.

PMCID: PMC3759348
PMID: 23720234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Aug;37(8):1236-41. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318289c765.

A study of gata3 and phox2b expression in tumors of the autonomic nervous system.

Nonaka D(1), Wang BY, Edmondson D, Beckett E, Sun CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, The Christie Hospital, Christie NHS Foundation
Trust, Wilmslow Road,Manchester, UK. dnonaka@msn.com

Autonomic neurons and chromaffin cells, which constitute the autonomic nervous
system, are derived from a common progenitor from the neural crest, and its
development is controlled by a network of transcription factors, including the
master regulator, Phox2b, and its downstream, Gata3. Anti-Phox2b and anti-Gata3
antibodies were applied to a total of 77 autonomic nervous system tumors,
including 35 paragangliomas, 21 pheochromocytomas, 9 neuroblastomas, 4
ganglioneuroblastomas, and 8 ganglioneuromas, as well as their potential
morphologic mimics, including tumors of the small round cell tumor group,
neuroendocrine carcinomas of lung and gastrointestinal tract (carcinoid
tumors/neuroendocrine tumors, large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, and small
cell carcinomas), Merkel cell carcinomas, benign and malignant tumors of thyroid,
parathyroid, and adrenal cortex, and malignant melanomas. A variety of
nonendocrine/neuroendocrine carcinomas were also studied. Gata3 expression was
seen in 89% of paragangliomas, 95% of pheochromocytomas, and all neuroblastomas, 
ganglioneuroblastomas, and ganglioneuromas, as well as in all parathyroid tumors,
a majority of urothelial and mammary carcinomas, and a subset of squamous cell
carcinomas, but all other tumors were negative. Phox2b expression was seen in all
neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastomas, and ganglioneuromas and in 40% of
paragangliomas, but pheochromocytomas and all other tumors were negative. Gata3
is a highly reliable marker for paragangliomas, pheochromocytomas, and
neuroblastic tumors to distinguish from their simulators. This is an additional
utility for this marker, which is used for the diagnosis of urothelial and
mammary carcinomas. Phox2b is also highly specific, but its low sensitivity to
paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas would limit the utility only to neuroblastic
tumors.

PMID: 23715162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jul;14(7):714-22. doi: 10.1038/ni.2623. Epub 2013 May 26.

GATA-3 controls the maintenance and proliferation of T cells downstream of TCR
and cytokine signaling.

Wang Y(1), Misumi I, Gu AD, Curtis TA, Su L, Whitmire JK, Wan YY.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

GATA-3 controls T helper type 2 (TH2) differentiation. However, whether GATA-3
regulates the function of mature T cells beyond TH2 determination remains poorly 
understood. We found that signaling via the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) and
cytokine stimulation promoted GATA-3 expression in CD8(+) T cells, which
controlled cell proliferation. Although GATA-3-deficient CD8(+) T cells were
generated, their peripheral maintenance was impaired, with lower expression of
the receptor for interleukin 7 (IL-7R). GATA-3-deficient T cells had defective
responses to viral infection and alloantigen. The proto-oncoprotein c-Myc was a
critical target of GATA-3 in promoting T cell proliferation. Our study thus
demonstrates an essential role for GATA-3 in controlling the maintenance and
proliferation of T cells and provides insight into immunoregulation.

PMCID: PMC3688666
PMID: 23708251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Aug;16(4):451-6. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.05.002.
Epub 2013 May 23.

Preventive effects of andrographolide on the development of diabetes in
autoimmune diabetic NOD mice by inducing immune tolerance.

Zhang C(1), Gui L, Xu Y, Wu T, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430033, China.

Andrographolide, an active component in traditional anti-diabetic herbal plants, 
is a diterpenoid lactone isolated from Andrographis paniculata because of its
potent anti-inflammatory and hypoglycemic effects. However, the effect of
andrographolide on the development of diabetes in autoimmune non-obese diabetic
(NOD) mice remains unknown. This study aimed to investigate the protective
effects of andrographolide on the development of autoimmune diabetes and clarify 
the underlying mechanism. NOD mice were randomly divided into four groups and
administered with water and andrographolide at 50, 100, and 150mg/kg body weight 
for four weeks. ICR mice were also selected as the control group. Oral glucose
tolerance and histopathological insulitis were examined. Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokine
secretion was determined by ELISA. The transcriptional profiles of T-bet, GATA3, 
and ROR<U+03B3>t in the pancreatic lymphatic node samples derived from the NOD mice were
detected by RT-PCR. After four weeks of oral supplementation, andrographolide
significantly inhibited insulitis, delayed the onset, and suppressed the
development of diabetes in 30-week-old NOD mice in a dose dependent manner. This 
protective status was correlated with a substantially decreased production of
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-2, increased IL-10 and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß, and a reduced IL-17. Andrographolide also increased GATA3 
mRNA expression but decreased T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA expressions. Our results
suggested that andrographolide prevented type 1 diabetes by maintaining
Th1/Th2/Th17 homeostasis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neuroimage. 2013 Nov 15;82:273-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.066. Epub
2013 May 24.

Transcriptomics of cortical gray matter thickness decline during normal aging.

Kochunov P(1), Charlesworth J, Winkler A, Hong LE, Nichols TE, Curran JE,
Sprooten E, Jahanshad N, Thompson PM, Johnson MP, Kent JW Jr, Landman BA,
Mitchell B, Cole SA, Dyer TD, Moses EK, Goring HH, Almasy L, Duggirala R, Olvera 
RL, Glahn DC, Blangero J.

Author information: 
(1)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA. pkochunov@mprc.umaryland.edu

INTRODUCTION: We performed a whole-transcriptome correlation analysis, followed
by the pathway enrichment and testing of innate immune response pathway analyses 
to evaluate the hypothesis that transcriptional activity can predict cortical
gray matter thickness (GMT) variability during normal cerebral aging.
METHODS: Transcriptome and GMT data were available for 379 individuals (age
range=28-85) community-dwelling members of large extended Mexican American
families. Collection of transcriptome data preceded that of neuroimaging data by 
17 years. Genome-wide gene transcriptome data consisted of 20,413 heritable
lymphocytes-based transcripts. GMT measurements were performed from
high-resolution (isotropic 800 µm) T1-weighted MRI. Transcriptome-wide and
pathway enrichment analysis was used to classify genes correlated with GMT.
Transcripts for sixty genes from seven innate immune pathways were tested as
specific predictors of GMT variability.
RESULTS: Transcripts for eight genes (IGFBP3, LRRN3, CRIP2, SCD, IDS, TCF4,
GATA3, and HN1) passed the transcriptome-wide significance threshold. Four
orthogonal factors extracted from this set predicted 31.9% of the variability in 
the whole-brain and between 23.4 and 35% of regional GMT measurements. Pathway
enrichment analysis identified six functional categories including cellular
proliferation, aggregation, differentiation, viral infection, and metabolism. The
integrin signaling pathway was significantly (p<10(-6)) enriched with GMT.
Finally, three innate immune pathways (complement signaling, toll-receptors and
scavenger and immunoglobulins) were significantly associated with GMT.
CONCLUSION: Expression activity for the genes that regulate cellular
proliferation, adhesion, differentiation and inflammation can explain a
significant proportion of individual variability in cortical GMT. Our findings
suggest that normal cerebral aging is the product of a progressive decline in
regenerative capacity and increased neuroinflammation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3759649
PMID: 23707588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell. 2013 May 23;153(5):963-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.001.

Induction of pluripotency in mouse somatic cells with lineage specifiers.

Shu J(1), Wu C, Wu Y, Li Z, Shao S, Zhao W, Tang X, Yang H, Shen L, Zuo X, Yang
W, Shi Y, Chi X, Zhang H, Gao G, Shu Y, Yuan K, He W, Tang C, Zhao Y, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of Life 
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1229.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):261-2.
    Cell. 2013 May 23;153(5):939-40.

The reprogramming factors that induce pluripotency have been identified primarily
from embryonic stem cell (ESC)-enriched, pluripotency-associated factors. Here,
we report that, during mouse somatic cell reprogramming, pluripotency can be
induced with lineage specifiers that are pluripotency rivals to suppress ESC
identity, most of which are not enriched in ESCs. We found that OCT4 and SOX2,
the core regulators of pluripotency, can be replaced by lineage specifiers that
are involved in mesendodermal (ME) specification and in ectodermal (ECT)
specification, respectively. OCT4 and its substitutes attenuated the elevated
expression of a group of ECT genes, whereas SOX2 and its substitutes curtailed a 
group of ME genes during reprogramming. Surprisingly, the two counteracting
lineage specifiers can synergistically induce pluripotency in the absence of both
OCT4 and SOX2. Our study suggests a "seesaw model" in which a balance that is
established using pluripotency factors and/or counteracting lineage specifiers
can facilitate reprogramming.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4640445
PMID: 23706735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Jul;8(1):161-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1485. Epub 2013 May 20.

Suplatast tosilate ameliorates airway hyperreactivity and inflammation through
inhibition of the GATA-3/IL-5 signaling pathway in asthmatic rats.

Tan Y(1), Li Y, Liu D, Zhong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital, Changsha, Hunan 
410005, PR China.

Airway hyperreactivity and inflammation are important factors in the aggravation 
of lung function. Suplatast tosilate (IPD) is a novel and unique anti-asthma
clinical compound. However, the mechanisms of IPD action in the inhibition of
asthma remain to be elucidated. The present study aimed to investigate the role
of the GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3)/interleukin (IL)-5 signaling pathway in
IPD-induced inhibition of asthma. Sprague-Dawley rats were sensitized by
intraperitoneal injection with ovalbumin (OVA) to establish an animal model of
asthma. IPD was administered continuously (C-IPD) or at a later stage (L-IPD).
Budesonide (BUD) was used as a positive control. Airway resistance and the
expression of genes at the mRNA and protein levels were measured. Morphological
changes in lung tissue and the percentage of eosinophils (EOS) in peripheral
blood were observed and correlation analysis was performed. The results revealed 
that sensitization by OVA significantly increased airway resistance and the
percentage of EOS in peripheral blood and induced significant inflammatory
changes in lung tissue, as demonstrated by thick epithelium, goblet cell
hyperplasia and submucosal cell infiltration. In addition, sensitization by OVA
was found to markedly upregulate IL-5 mRNA and protein expression. Airway
resistance was found to positively correlate with the expression of IL-5 in the
rat lung tissues. Sensitization by OVA was also observed to markedly enhance
GATA-3 protein expression and GATA-3 levels were found to positively correlate
with airway resistance and IL-5 levels. Similar to the effect of BUD, treatment
with C-IPD or L-IPD was found to significantly attenuate OVA-induced increases in
airway resistance and the percentage of EOS in peripheral blood. Notably,
treatment with C-IPD or L-IPD markedly reduced the OVA-induced expression of IL-5
and GATA-3. In the present study, IPD intervention was demonstrated to ameliorate
airway hyperreactivity and inflammation and the mechanisms may involve inhibition
of the GATA-3/IL-5 signaling pathway.

PMID: 23695442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;161(4):325-32. doi: 10.1159/000347136. Epub 2013
May 14.

Immunotherapy with a recombinant hybrid molecule alleviates allergic responses
more efficiently than an allergenic cocktail or pollen extract in a model of
chenopodium album allergy.

Nouri HR(1), Sankian M, Afsharzadeh D, Varasteh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Babol
University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to assess the therapeutic potential of a
recombinant hybrid molecule (rHM) alongside an allergenic cocktail from
recombinant wild-type allergens as well as pollen extract on Chenopodium album
allergy, using a BALB/c mouse model.
METHODS: The BALB/c mice had already been sensitized to C. album via
intraperitoneal injections of alum-adsorbed allergenic cocktail and immunotherapy
procedure was followed by subcutaneous injections of the rHM, allergenic cocktail
and pollen extract at weekly intervals. Humoral immune responses were determined 
via measurement of specific antibodies in serum. Splenocytes of immunized mice
were stimulated in vitro and then proliferation responses, cytokine secretion and
mRNA expression of genes involved in immunotherapy were examined by ELISA and
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Sensitized mice were identified with high specific IgE against
allergenic cocktail when compared with healthy mice. Immunotherapy with the rHM
induced the highest ratio of the IgG2a/IgG1 levels compared to allergenic
cocktail or C. album pollen extract. The rHM was able to induce proliferative
responses as well as the allergenic cocktail in cultured splenocytes.
Immunotherapy with the rHM significantly improved secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-10,
while secretion of IL-13 rapidly diminished. Interestingly, mRNA expression of
GATA3 was strongly decreased in rHM-treated mice whereas mRNA expression of T-bet
and Foxp3 was significantly increased.
CONCLUSION: Our results prove that immunotherapy with the rHM effectively
controlled allergic responses by shifting from a Th2-like immune response to a
Th1-dominated immune response.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23689669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Immunity. 2013 May 23;38(5):930-42. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.01.014. Epub 2013 
May 16.

Transcriptional repression of Gata3 is essential for early B cell commitment.

Banerjee A(1), Northrup D, Boukarabila H, Jacobsen SE, Allman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6082, USA.

The mechanisms underlying the silencing of alternative fate potentials in very
early B cell precursors remain unclear. Using gain- and loss-of-function
approaches together with a synthetic Zinc-finger polypeptide (6ZFP) engineered to
prevent transcription factor binding to a defined cis element, we show that the
transcription factor EBF1 promotes B cell lineage commitment by directly
repressing expression of the T-cell-lineage-requisite Gata3 gene. Ebf1-deficient 
lymphoid progenitors exhibited increased T cell lineage potential and elevated
Gata3 transcript expression, whereas enforced EBF1 expression inhibited T cell
differentiation and caused rapid loss of Gata3 mRNA. Notably, 6ZFP-mediated
perturbation of EBF1 binding to a Gata3 regulatory region restored Gata3
expression, abrogated EBF1-driven suppression of T cell differentiation, and
prevented B cell differentiation via a GATA3-dependent mechanism. Furthermore,
EBF1 binding to Gata3 regulatory sites induced repressive histone modifications
across this region. These data identify a transcriptional circuit critical for B 
cell lineage commitment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3664383
PMID: 23684985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2691-705. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00069-13. Epub 2013 May
13.

EED and KDM6B coordinate the first mammalian cell lineage commitment to ensure
embryo implantation.

Saha B(1), Home P, Ray S, Larson M, Paul A, Rajendran G, Behr B, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

The first mammalian cell lineage commitment is the formation of the trophectoderm
(TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM) lineages during preimplantation development.
Proper development of the TE and ICM lineages is dependent upon establishment of 
specific transcriptional programs. However, the epigenetic mechanisms that
functionally contribute to establish TE- and ICM-specific transcriptional
programs are poorly understood. Here, we show that proper development of the TE
and ICM lineages is coordinated via combinatorial regulation of embryonic
ectoderm development (EED) and lysine-specific demethylase 6B (KDM6B). During
blastocyst formation, the relative levels of EED and KDM6B expression determine
altered polycomb repressor 2 (PRC2) complex recruitment and incorporation of the 
repressive histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27Me3) mark at the chromatin
domains of TE-specific master regulators CDX2 and GATA3, leading to their
activation in the TE lineage and repression in the ICM lineage. Furthermore,
ectopic gain of EED along with depletion of KDM6B in preimplantation mouse
embryos abrogates CDX2 and GATA3 expression in the nascent TE lineage. The loss
of CDX2 and GATA3 in the nascent TE lineage results in improper TE development,
leading to failure in embryo implantation to the uterus. Our study delineates a
novel epigenetic mechanism that orchestrates proper development of the first
mammalian cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC3700131
PMID: 23671187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Immunology. 2013 Sep;140(1):111-22. doi: 10.1111/imm.12122.

Acute infection of mice with Clostridium difficile leads to eIF2a phosphorylation
and pro-survival signalling as part of the mucosal inflammatory response.

Sadighi Akha AA(1), Theriot CM, Erb-Downward JR, McDermott AJ, Falkowski NR, Tyra
HM, Rutkowski DT, Young VB, Huffnagle GB.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5642, USA.

The current study sought to delineate the gene expression profile of the host
response in the caecum and colon during acute infection with Clostridium
difficile in a mouse model of infection, and to investigate the nature of the
unfolded protein response in this process. The infected mice displayed a
significant up-regulation in the expression of chemokines (Cxcl1, Cxcl2 and
Ccl2), numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines (Ifng, Il1b, Il6, and Il17f), as well 
as Il22 and a number of anti-microbial peptides (Defa1, Defa28, Defb1, Slpi and
Reg3g) at the site(s) of infection. This was accompanied by a significant influx 
of neutrophils, dendritic cells, cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage and all
major subsets of lymphocytes to these site(s). However, CD4 T cells of the
untreated and C. difficile-infected mice expressed similar levels of CD69 and
CD25. Neither tissue had up-regulated levels of Tbx21, Gata3 or Rorc. The caeca
and colons of the infected mice showed a significant increase in eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, but neither the splicing of Xbp1
nor the up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones, casting doubt on the
full-fledged induction of the unfolded protein response by C. difficile. They
also displayed significantly higher phosphorylation of AKT and signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), an indication of pro-survival
signalling. These data underscore the local, innate, pro-inflammatory nature of
the response to C. difficile and highlight eIF2a phosphorylation and the
interleukin-22-pSTAT3-RegIII<U+03B3> axis as two of the pathways that could be used to
contain and counteract the damage inflicted on the intestinal epithelium.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3809711
PMID: 23668260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Immunology. 2013 Sep;140(1):31-8. doi: 10.1111/imm.12121.

'All things considered': transcriptional regulation of T helper type 2 cell
differentiation from precursor to effector activation.

Zeng WP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Marshall University Joan C.
Edwards School of Medicine, Huntington, WV, USA. zengw@marshall.edu

T helper type 2 (Th2) cells are critical to host defence against helminth
infection and the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. The differentiation of Th2
cells from naive CD4 T cells is controlled by intricate transcriptional
mechanisms. At the precursor stage of naive CD4 T cells, transcriptional
mechanisms maintain the potential and in the meantime prevent spontaneous
differentiation to Th2 fate. In addition, intrachromosomal interactions important
for co-ordinated expression of Th2 cytokines pre-exist in naive CD4 T cells. Upon
T-cell receptor (TCR) engagement, naive CD4 T cells are induced by polarizing
signals of the interleukin-4/Stat6 and Jagged/Notch pathways to up-regulate the
expression of GATA-3. Once up-regulated, GATA-3 drives Th2 and suppresses Th1
differentiation in a cell autonomous fashion. In this stage of differentiation,
the Th2 cytokine locus, as well as the interferon-<U+03B3> locus, undergoes chromatin
remodelling and epigenetic modifications that contribute to the somatic memory of
Th2 cytokine gene expression pattern. Once differentiated, Th2 effector cells
promptly produce Th2 cytokines upon TCR stimulation, which is regulated by
concerted actions of GATA-3, TCR signalling, enhancers and the Th2 locus control 
region. This review provides a detailed account of the transcriptional regulatory
events at these different stages of Th2 differentiation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3809703
PMID: 23668241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Sep 15;22(18):3609-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt212. Epub 2013 May
10.

GATA3 controls the specification of prosensory domain and neuronal survival in
the mouse cochlea.

Luo XJ(1), Deng M, Xie X, Huang L, Wang H, Jiang L, Liang G, Hu F, Tieu R, Chen
R, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

HDR syndrome (also known as Barakat syndrome) is a developmental disorder
characterized by hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal disease.
Although genetic mapping and subsequent functional studies indicate that GATA3
haplo-insufficiency causes human HDR syndrome, the role of Gata3 in sensorineural
deafness and auditory system development is largely unknown. In this study, we
show that Gata3 is continuously expressed in the developing mouse inner ear.
Conditional knockout of Gata3 in the developing inner ear disrupts the
morphogenesis of mouse inner ear, resulting in a disorganized and shortened
cochlear duct with significant fewer hair cells and supporting cells. Loss of
Gata3 function leads to the failure in the specification of prosensory domain and
subsequently, to increased cell death in the cochlear duct. Moreover, though the 
initial generation of cochleovestibular ganglion (CVG) cells is not affected in
Gata3-null mice, spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) are nearly depleted due to
apoptosis. Our results demonstrate the essential role of Gata3 in specifying the 
prosensory domain in the cochlea and in regulating the survival of SGNs, thus
identifying a molecular mechanism underlying human HDR syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3749857
PMID: 23666531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hum Pathol. 2013 Sep;44(9):1890-4. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 
May 7.

Tubular adenoma of the urinary tract: a newly described entity.

Kao CS(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. yutkao@iupui.edu

Tubular adenomas in the urinary tract with the same appearance as those in the
gastrointestinal tract have not yet been described in the literature. We herein
report 4 cases of tubular adenomas in the urinary tract encountered within our
consult practice. This lesion was defined by the presence of a collection of
small round tubular glands with intestinal-type epithelium showing moderate
dysplasia, identical to the histology of tubular adenomas in the intestinal
tract. Patients ranged in age from 37 to 63 years (mean, 45 years), with 3 of the
4 being male (male-to-female ratio, 3:1). The locations were urinary bladder,
prostatic urethra and ureter with hematuria, polyps, and obstructive mass as
their presentations, respectively. One lesion was large measuring 1.4 cm
associated with pseudoinvasion as well as invasive adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemically, the tubular adenomas stained positive for CDX2 and CK20,
while negative for GATA3 and CK7. One case showed positive nuclear ß-catenin
staining. Tubular adenoma of the urinary tract is a rare lesion, and recognition 
of this entity will encourage further reports and help to better understand the
relation of tubular adenoma to concurrent and subsequent urinary tract
malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2013 Jan;16(1):91-3. doi: 10.4103/0972-2327.107707.

Seizure, deafness and renal agenesis: A rare case of barakat syndrome.

Sau T(1), Chatterjee A, Ghosh K, Dey S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nilratan Sircar Medical College, Kolkata, WB, India.

Etiologic diagnosis of seizure requires proper consideration of apparently
unrelated clinical features of the patient. Here, we report the case of a patient
of status epilepticus with moderate-to-severe bilateral sensorineural deafness.
Investigations showed extensive intracranial calcification, hypoparathyroidism
and unilateral renal agenesis. The features were consistent with Barakat
syndrome, a rare developmental disorder associated with mutations in the GATA3
gene. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of Barakat
syndrome from India.

PMCID: PMC3644792
PMID: 23661972  [PubMed]


134. BMC Genet. 2013 May 9;14:40. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-40.

The juvenile alopecia mutation (jal) maps to mouse Chromosome 2, and is an allele
of GATA binding protein 3 (Gata3).

Ramirez F(1), Feliciano AM, Adkins EB, Child KM, Radden LA 2nd, Salas A,
Vila-Santana N, Horák JM, Hughes SR, Spacek DV, King TR.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences, Central Connecticut State University, 1615 Stanley
Street, New Britain, CT 06053, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mice homozygous for the juvenile alopecia mutation (jal) display
patches of hair loss that appear as soon as hair develops in the neonatal period 
and persist throughout life. Although a report initially describing this mouse
variant suggested that jal maps to mouse Chromosome 13, our preliminary mapping
analysis did not support that claim.
RESULTS: To map jal to a particular mouse chromosome, we produced a 103-member
intraspecific backcross panel that segregated for jal, and typed it for 93
PCR-scorable, microsatellite markers that are located throughout the mouse
genome. Only markers from the centromeric tip of Chromosome 2 failed to segregate
independently from jal, suggesting that jal resides in that region. To more
precisely define jal's location, we characterized a second, 374-member backcross 
panel for the inheritance of five microsatellite markers from proximal Chromosome
2. This analysis restricted jal's position between D2Mit359 and D2Mit80, an
interval that includes Il2ra (for interleukin 2 receptor, alpha chain), a gene
that is known to be associated with alopecia areata in humans. Complementation
testing with an engineered null allele of Il2ra, however, showed that jal is a
mutation in a distinct gene. To further refine the location of jal, the
374-member panel was typed for a set of four single-nucleotide markers located
between D2Mit359 and D2Mit80, identifying a 0.55<U+2009>Mb interval where jal must lie. 
This span includes ten genes-only one of which, Gata3 (for GATA binding protein
3)-is known to be expressed in skin. Complementation testing between jal and a
Gata3 null allele produced doubly heterozygous, phenotypically mutant offspring.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented indicate that the jal mutation is a mutant
allele of the Gata3 gene on mouse Chromosome 2. We therefore recommend that the
jal designation be changed to Gata3jal, and suggest that this mouse variant may
provide an animal model for at least some forms of focal alopecia that have their
primary defect in the hair follicle and lack an inflammatory component.

PMCID: PMC3656803
PMID: 23659281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;27(2):81-4.

[The role of sinomenine in treatment of allergic rhinitis mice model and its
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Z(1), Tao Z, Zhang N, Ren J, Deng Y, Xiao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, People's Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, 430060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of sinomenine in treatment of allergic rhinitis
mice model and its possible mechanism.
METHOD: We used ovalbumin (OVA) to make allergic rhinitis model of BALB/c mice.
Saline was used in the control group. When we challenged the mice with OVA
intranasally, the mice in sinomenine treatment group were feed by the food
containing sinomenine. Mice were then killed 24 h after the last OVA challenge.
The noses of mice from each group were removed en bloc and fixed, then each
section was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. ELISA assay was used to measure
the concentration of anti-OVA IgE, IL-4 and IFN-gamma. The proteins expressive
level of T-bet and GATA3 were examined.
RESULT: Nasal mucosa of the mice in sinomenine treatment group were not
hyperplasia and without obvious infiltration of eosinophils. The concentration of
anti-OVA IgE, IL-4 and IFN-gamma in the serum and T-bet and GATA3 expression
levels of sinomenine treatment group were lower than those of allergic rhinitis
group.
CONCLUSION: The sinomenine can be used to treat allergic rhinitis mice, and the
mechanism may rely on the improvements of the Th1/Th2 imbalance.

PMID: 23650707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Oct;114(10):2203-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24584.

Estrogen receptor alpha: molecular mechanisms and emerging insights.

Candelaria NR(1), Liu K, Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5506, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is a cellular receptor for the female sex hormone
estrogen and other natural and synthetic ligands and play critical roles in
normal development and physiology and in the etiology and treatment of
endocrine-related diseases. ERa is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
of transcription factors and regulates target gene expression in a
ligand-dependent manner. It has also been shown to interact with G-protein
coupled receptors and associated signaling molecules in the cytoplasm.
Transcriptionally, ERa either binds DNA directly through conserved estrogen
response element sequence motifs or indirectly by tethering to other interacting 
transcription factors and nucleate transcriptional regulatory complexes which
include an array of co-regulator proteins. Genome-scale studies of ERa
transcriptional activity and localization have revealed mechanistic complexity
and insights including novel interactions with several transcription factors,
including FOXA1, AP-2g, GATA3, and RUNX1, which function as pioneering,
collaborative, or tethering factors. The major challenge and exciting prospect
moving forward is the comprehensive definition and integration of ERa complexes
and mechanisms and their tissue-specific roles in normal physiology and in human 
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23649536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):286-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.027. Epub 2013 
May 3.

The LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor Islet-1 is required for the development 
of sympathetic neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells.

Huber K(1), Narasimhan P, Shtukmaster S, Pfeifer D, Evans SM, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany. katrin.huber@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Islet-1 is a LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor with important functions for
the development of distinct neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations. We show
here that Islet-1 acts genetically downstream of Phox2B in cells of the
sympathoadrenal cell lineage and that the development of sympathetic neurons and 
chromaffin cells is impaired in mouse embryos with a conditional deletion of
Islet-1 controlled by the wnt1 promotor. Islet-1 is not essential for the initial
differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells, as indicated by the correct expression 
of pan-neuronal and catecholaminergic subtype specific genes in primary
sympathetic ganglia of Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos. However, our data
indicate that the subsequent survival of sympathetic neuron precursors and their 
differentiation towards TrkA expressing neurons depends on Islet-1 function. In
contrast to spinal sensory neurons, sympathetic neurons of Islet-1 deficient mice
did not display ectopic expression of genes normally present in the CNS. In
Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos the numbers of chromaffin cells were only mildly 
reduced, in contrast to that of sympathetic neurons, but the initiation of the
adrenaline synthesizing enzyme PNMT was abrogated and the expression level of
chromogranin A was diminished. Microarray analysis revealed that developing
chromaffin cells of Islet-1 deficient mice displayed normal expression levels of 
TH, DBH and the transcription factors Phox2B, Mash-1, Hand2, Gata3 and Insm1, but
the expression levels of the transcription factors Gata2 and Hand1, and AP-2ß
were significantly reduced. Together our data indicate that Islet-1 is not
essentially required for the initial differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells,
but has an important function for the correct subsequent development of
sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23648511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):208-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.023. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Differential BMP signaling controls formation and differentiation of multipotent 
preplacodal ectoderm progenitors from human embryonic stem cells.

Leung AW(1), Kent Morest D, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Sensory and endoneurocrine tissues as diverse as the lens, the olfactory
epithelium, the inner ear, the cranial sensory ganglia, and the anterior
pituitary arise from a common pool of progenitors in the preplacodal ectoderm
(PPE). Around late gastrulation, the PPE forms at the border surrounding the
anterior neural plate, and expresses a unique set of evolutionarily conserved
transcription regulators including Six1, Eya 1 and Eya2. Here, we describe the
first report to generate and characterize the SIX1(+) PPE cells from human
embryonic stem (ES) cells by adherent differentiation. Before forming PPE cells, 
differentiating cultures first expressed the non-neural ectoderm specific
transcriptional factors TFAP2A, GATA2, GATA3, DLX3, and DLX5, which are crucial
in establishing the PPE competence. We demonstrated that bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) activity plays a transient but essential role in inducing
expression of these PPE competence factors and eventually the PPE cells.
Interestingly, we found that attenuating BMP signaling after establishing the
competence state induces anterior placode precursors. By manipulating BMP and
hedgehog signaling pathways, we further differentiate these precursors into
restricted lineages including the lens placode and the oral ectoderm (pituitary
precursor) cells. Finally, we also show that sensory neurons can be generated
from human PPE cells, demonstrating the multipotency of the human ES-derived PPE 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712508
PMID: 23643939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Life Sci. 2013 Jun 13;92(22):1093-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.04.010. Epub 2013
Apr 30.

Macelignan attenuated allergic lung inflammation and airway hyper-responsiveness 
in murine experimental asthma.

Shin K(1), Chung HC, Kim DU, Hwang JK, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Biomedical Research
Center, KAIST Institute for the BioCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

AIMS: Macelignan isolated from Myristica fragrans Houtt. is widely used for spice
and flavoring for foods, and has been reported to have anti-inflammatory
activity. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of macelignan on
allergic lung inflammation with a murine model of experimental asthma.
MAIN METHODS: Fungal protease mixed with chicken egg ovalbumin allergen was used 
as a challenge to induce murine experimental asthma. To determine its effects on 
allergy and inflammation, macelignan was administered orally during allergen
challenge, and the symptoms of allergic asthma and its underlined mechanisms were
examined.
KEY FINDINGS: Treatment with macelignan attenuated eosinophilic airway
inflammation and airway hyper-responsiveness. With the administration of
macelignan, interleukin-4 (IL-4) producing cells, but not interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) or
IL-17 producing cells, were diminished in the lungs. Additionally, activation of 
the T helper type 2 (Th2) cell-specific master transcription factor, GATA3 was
decreased with macelignan treatment. Finally, production of IL-4 but not IFN-<U+03B3> or
IL-17, by CD4(+) T cells was reduced with stimulation when combined with the
administration of macelignan.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data show that macelignan has anti-inflammatory effects on Th2 
cell-mediated allergic lung inflammation and could potentially provide a novel
preventative and/or therapy for the treatment of allergic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061135. Print 2013.

Enhanced immune response and protective effects of nano-chitosan-based DNA
vaccine encoding T cell epitopes of Esat-6 and FL against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Feng G(1), Jiang Q, Xia M, Lu Y, Qiu W, Zhao D, Lu L, Peng G, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Development of a novel and effective vaccine against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(M.tb) is a challenging for preventing TB infection. In this study, a novel
nanoparticle-based recombinant DNA vaccine was developed, which contains Esat-6
three T cell epitopes (Esat-6/3e) and fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FL)
genes (termed Esat-6/3e-FL), and was enveloped with chitosan (CS) nanoparticles
(nano-chitosan). The immunologic and protective efficacy of the
nano-chitosan-based DNA vaccine (termed nano-Esat-6/3e-FL) was assessed in
C57BL/6 mice after intramuscular prime vaccination with the plasmids DNA and
nasal boost with the Esat-6/3e peptides. The results showed that the immunized
mice remarkably elicited enhanced T cell responses and protection against M.tb
H37Rv challenge. These findings indicate that the nano-chitosan can significantly
elevate the immunologic and protective effects of the DNA vaccine, and the
nano-Esat-6/3e-FL is a useful vaccine for preventing M.tb infection in mice.

PMCID: PMC3634041
PMID: 23637790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 14;110(20):8152-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1216671110. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Steroidogenic enzyme Cyp11a1 regulates Type 2 CD8+ T cell skewing in allergic
lung disease.

Jia Y(1), Domenico J, Takeda K, Han J, Wang M, Armstrong M, Reisdorph N, O'Connor
BP, Lucas JJ, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Allergic asthma is a heterogeneous inflammatory disorder of the airways
characterized by chronic airway inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness.
Numbers of CD8(+)IL-13(+) T cells are increased in asthmatics and during the
development of experimental asthma in mice. In an atopic environment rich in
IL-4, these CD8(+) T cells mediate asthmatic responses, but the mechanisms
regulating the conversion of CD8(+) effector T cells from IFN-<U+03B3>- to pathogenic
IL-13-producing effector cells that contribute to an asthma phenotype have not
been defined. Here, we show that cholesterol side-chain cleavage P450 enzyme,
Cyp11a1, is a key regulator of CD8(+) T-cell conversion. Expression of the gene, 
protein, and enzymatic activity of Cyp11a1 were markedly increased in CD8(+) T
cells differentiated in the presence of IL-2 plus IL-4 compared with cells
differentiated in IL-2 alone. Inhibition of Cyp11a1 enzymatic activity with
aminoglutethimide or reduction in the expression of Cyp11a1 using short hairpin
RNA prevented the IL-4-induced conversion of IFN-<U+03B3>- to IL-13-producing cells
without affecting expression of the lineage-specific transcription factors T-box 
expressed in T cells (T-bet) or GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3). Adoptive transfer
of aminoglutethimide-treated CD8(+) T cells into sensitized and challenged
CD8-deficient recipients failed to restore airway hyperresponsiveness and
inflammation. We demonstrate that Cyp11a1 controls the phenotypic conversion of
CD8(+) T cells from IFN-<U+03B3> to IL-13 production, linking steroidogenesis in CD8(+) 
T cells, a nonclassical steroidogenic tissue, to a proallergic differentiation
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3657775
PMID: 23630275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e62046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062046. Print 2013.

Continued expression of GATA3 is necessary for cochlear neurosensory development.

Duncan JS(1), Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of
America. jeremyduncan@jhmi.edu

Hair cells of the developing mammalian inner ear are progressively defined
through cell fate restriction. This process culminates in the expression of the
bHLH transcription factor Atoh1, which is necessary for differentiation of hair
cells, but not for their specification. Loss of several genes will disrupt ear
morphogenesis or arrest of neurosensory epithelia development. We previously
showed in null mutants that the loss of the transcription factor, Gata3, results 
specifically in the loss of all cochlear neurosensory development. Temporal
expression of Gata3 is broad from the otic placode stage through the postnatal
ear. It therefore remains unclear at which stage in development Gata3 exerts its 
effect. To better understand the stage specific effects of Gata3, we investigated
the role of Gata3 in cochlear neurosensory specification and differentiation
utilizing a LoxP targeted Gata3 line and two Cre lines. Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f)
mice show recombination of Gata3 around E8.5 but continue to develop a cochlear
duct without differentiated hair cells and spiral ganglion neurons. qRT-PCR data 
show that Atoh1 was down-regulated but not absent in the duct whereas other hair 
cell specific genes such as Pou4f3 were completely absent. In addition, while
Sox2 levels were lower in the Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f) cochlea, Eya1 levels remained
normal. We conclude that Eya1 is unable to fully upregulate Atoh1 or Pou4f3, and 
drive differentiation of hair cells without Gata3. Pax2-Cre:Gata3(f/f) mice show 
a delayed recombination of Gata3 in the ear relative to Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f) .
These mice exhibited a cochlear duct containing patches of partially
differentiated hair cells and developed only few and incorrectly projecting
spiral ganglion neurons. Our conditional deletion studies reveal a major role of 
Gata3 in the signaling of prosensory genes and in the differentiation of cochlear
neurosenory cells. We suggest that Gata3 may act in combination with Eya1, Six1, 
and Sox2 in cochlear prosensory gene signaling.

PMCID: PMC3628701
PMID: 23614009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Jul;6(4):993-1000. doi: 10.1242/dmm.011247. Epub 2013 Apr
23.

Epigenetic changes associated with disease progression in a mouse model of
childhood allergic asthma.

Collison A(1), Siegle JS, Hansbro NG, Kwok CT, Herbert C, Mattes J, Hitchins M,
Foster PS, Kumar RK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, University of Newcastle and Hunter 
Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, NSW 2308, Australia.

Development of asthma in childhood is linked to viral infections of the lower
respiratory tract in early life, with subsequent chronic exposure to allergens.
Progression to persistent asthma is associated with a Th2-biased immunological
response and structural remodelling of the airways. The underlying mechanisms are
unclear, but could involve epigenetic changes. To investigate this, we employed a
recently developed mouse model in which self-limited neonatal infection with a
pneumovirus, followed by sensitisation to ovalbumin via the respiratory tract and
low-level chronic challenge with aerosolised antigen, leads to development of an 
asthmatic phenotype. We assessed expression of microRNA by cells in the proximal 
airways, comparing changes over the period of disease progression, and used
target prediction databases to identify genes likely to be up- or downregulated
as a consequence of altered regulation of microRNA. In parallel, we assessed DNA 
methylation in pulmonary CD4(+) T cells. We found that a limited number of
microRNAs exhibited marked up- or downregulation following early-life infection
and sensitisation, for many of which the levels of expression were further
changed following chronic challenge with the sensitizing antigen. Targets of
these microRNAs included genes involved in immune or inflammatory responses (e.g.
Gata3, Kitl) and in tissue remodelling (e.g. Igf1, Tgfbr1), as well as genes for 
various transcription factors and signalling proteins. In pulmonary CD4(+) T
cells, there was significant demethylation at promoter sites for interleukin-4
and interferon-<U+03B3>, the latter increasing following chronic challenge. We conclude 
that, in this model, progression to an asthmatic phenotype is linked to
epigenetic regulation of genes associated with inflammation and structural
remodelling, and with T-cell commitment to a Th2 immunological response.
Epigenetic changes associated with this pattern of gene activation might play a
role in the development of childhood asthma.

PMCID: PMC3701218
PMID: 23611895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Dec;7(4):311-5. doi: 10.1007/s12105-013-0442-3. Epub 2013 
Apr 20.

GATA3 immunohistochemical expression in salivary gland neoplasms.

Schwartz LE(1), Begum S, Westra WH, Bishop JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
401 N. Broadway, Weinberg 2249, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA, lauren.ende@gmail.com.

GATA3 is a zinc finger transcription factor that regulates the normal development
of many tissues and cell types. Recent studies have shown that
immunohistochemical nuclear staining for GATA3 among tumors is highly restricted 
to carcinomas of breast and urothelial origin; however salivary gland tumors have
not been tested. Given that breast and salivary gland tissues are very similar
with respect to embryologic development and structure, we performed GATA3
staining on a spectrum of salivary gland neoplasms. GATA3 immunohistochemistry
was performed on a diverse collection of 180 benign and malignant salivary gland 
neoplasms including 10 acinic cell carcinomas, 2 adenocarcinomas not otherwise
specified, 41 adenoid cystic carcinomas, 2 epithelial-myoepithelial carcinomas, 1
low grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma, 15 mammary analogue secretory
carcinomas, 7 metastatic squamous cell carcinomas, 27 mucoepidermoid carcinomas, 
2 oncocytic carcinomas, 5 oncocytomas, 34 pleomorphic adenomas, 4 polymorphous
low grade adenocarcinomas, 25 salivary duct carcinomas, and 5 Warthin tumors.
Staining for GATA3 was observed in 92/180 (51 %) of salivary gland tumors. GATA3 
staining was observed in most of the tumor types, but diffuse immunolabeling was 
consistently seen in salivary duct carcinoma (25 of 25) and mammary analogue
secretory carcinoma (15 of 15)-the two tumor types that most closely resemble
breast neoplasia. Background benign salivary gland tissue was also usually weakly
positive in both acini and ducts. GATA3 immunostaining is not restricted to
tumors of breast and urothelial origin. Rather, it is expressed across many
different types of salivary gland neoplasms. As a result, salivary gland origin
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a GATA3-positive carcinoma,
particularly in the head and neck. Although GATA3 immunohistochemistry is not
helpful in resolving the differential diagnosis between a primary salivary gland 
neoplasm and metastatic breast cancer, it may have some utility in subtyping
salivary gland tumors, particularly salivary duct carcinoma and mammary analogue 
secretory carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3824803
PMID: 23604756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mod Pathol. 2013 Oct;26(10):1365-70. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.76. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

GATA3 expression in paragangliomas: a pitfall potentially leading to misdiagnosis
of urothelial carcinoma.

So JS(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

GATA3 is a zinc-finger transcription factor, which is expressed in various normal
and neoplastic tissues. Amongst tumors, it labels urothelial carcinoma,
collecting duct carcinoma of the kidney, breast carcinoma, lymphoma and,
uncommonly, endometrial carcinoma. Few studies have investigated its positivity
in various neoplasms that may mimic urothelial neoplasms. In this study, we
evaluated GATA3 expression in urinary bladder paragangliomas, which may closely
mimic urothelial carcinomas. We retrieved 12 cases of paragangliomas from the
urinary bladder and 20 cases of paragangliomas from non-urologic sites using the 
Hopkins Pathology Data Base system. GATA3 was positive in 10 of the 12 (83%)
urinary bladder paragangliomas studied on routine slide sections. Most (6/12) of 
the staining was diffusely strong (3+) staining, whereas the rest (4/12) that
were positive showed mixed intensities (strong 3+ to moderate 2+). The 20
paragangliomas from other sites were constructed into tissue microarrays, wherein
three cores from each tumor were taken. Fifteen out of 20 (75%) paragangliomas
outside of the bladder were positive for GATA3 staining. Moderate (2+) or strong 
(3+) staining was seen in 13/20 (65%) of extravesical paragangliomas, ranging
from 5 to 100% of the cell labeling (mean 59%, median 60%). In the remaining 7/20
(35%) cases, only weak (2/7) or negative (5/7) immunoreactivity for GATA3 was
seen. An additional 15 cases of metastatic paraganglioma from various primary
sites were retrieved with 12 of 15 (80%) metastatic paragangliomas staining
positively for GATA3. Overall, for paragangliomas, regardless of site, 78.7% were
positive for GATA3. Recognition of this finding will aid pathologists in
preventing a misdiagnosis of a urothelial tumor based on GATA3 expression, which 
is critical given the differences in treatment, follow-up and prognosis between
bladder paragangliomas and urothelial carcinoma.

PMID: 23599157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Tradit Chin Med. 2013 Feb;33(1):78-84.

Effects of Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder on expression of janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription signal pathway in the
brain of spleen-deficiency model rats.

Xiong B(1), Qian H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medicine, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Beijing 100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the influence of Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder on
the expression of the relevant DNAs of janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) signal pathway of the brain in
spleen-deficiency model rats.
METHODS: Eighty male Wistar rats of sanitary degree were divided randomly into
four groups: normal group, model group, treatment group 1, treatment group 2.
Besides the rats in the normal group, all the rats in other 3 groups were
prepared as spleen deficiency model. The treatment group 1 were treated with
Sijunzi decoction and the treatment group 2 were treated with Yupingfeng powder. 
After treatment for 6 weeks, perfusion was given and the brain was taken for
detection of the expression of the relevant DNAs of JAK-STAT signal pathway of
the brain in SD rats bygene chip method.
RESULTS: Spleen deficiency could lead to increase expression of JAK1, STAT1 and
Interleukin 4 (IL-4) in the brain, but the decrease expression of Suppressor of
cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), prolactin receptor (PRLR) and binding protein 3
(GATA 3). Sijunzi decoction could increase expression of STAT3, Prolactin (PRL)
and GATA3, but decrease expression of JAK1, STAT, STAT4, Interleukin 10 receptor,
alpha (IL10RA), Coagulation factor II (F2), PRLR, MAD homolog 3 (SMAD3) and IL-4.
Yupingfeng powder could decrease expression of JAK1, STAT1, STAT4, SOCS4_
predicted, Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), PRLR, High mobility group
AT-hook 1 (HMGA10), IL-4.
CONCLUSION: Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder can improve immune function
of the rat through influencing the genetic expression of JAK-STAT signal pathway.

PMID: 23596817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e61125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061125. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Expression of GATA3 in MDA-MB-231 triple-negative breast cancer cells induces a
growth inhibitory response to TGFß.

Chu IM(1), Lai WC, Aprelikova O, El Touny LH, Kouros-Mehr H, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Transgenic Oncogenesis and Genomics Section, Laboratory of Cancer Biology and 
Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Transforming growth factor (ß1TGFß1) can promote proliferation in late stage
cancers but acts as a tumor suppressor in normal epithelial cells and in early
stage cancers. Although, the TGFß pathway has been shown to play a key role in
tumorigenesis and metastasis, only a limited number of models have been developed
to understand this process. Here, we present a novel model system to discern this
paradoxical role of TGFß1 using the MDA-MB-231 (MB-231) cell line. The MB-231
triple-negative breast cancer cell line has been extensively characterized and
has been shown to continue to proliferate and undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) upon TGFß1 stimulation. We have previously shown by microarray
analysis that expression of GATA3 in MB-231 cells results in reprogramming of
these cells from a basal to a luminal subtype associated with a reduction of
metastasis and tumorigenesis when implanted as xenografts. We now demonstrate
that GATA3 overexpression in these cells results in a reduction of TGFß1
response, reversal of EMT, and most importantly, restoration of sensitivity to
the inhibitory effects on proliferation of TGFß1. Microarray analysis revealed
that TGFß1 treatment resulted in reduction of several cell cycle effectors in
231-GATA3 cells but not in control cells. Furthermore, our microarray analysis
revealed a significant increase of BMP5 in 231-GATA3 cells. We demonstrate that
combined treatment of MB-231 control cells with TGFß1 and BMP5 results in a
significant reduction of cellular proliferation. Thus, this model offers a means 
to further investigate potentially novel mechanisms involved in the switch in
response to TGFß1 from tumor promoter to tumor suppressor through the
reprogramming of a triple-negative breast cancer cell line by the GATA3
transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3620110
PMID: 23577196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060326. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Changes in the Expression of Transcription Factors Involved in Modulating the
Expression of EPO-R in Activated Human CD4-Positive Lymphocytes.

Lisowska KA(1), Frackowiak JE, Mikosik A, Witkowski JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
katlis@gumed.edu.pl

We have recently described the presence of the erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) on
CD4(+) lymphocytes and demonstrated that its expression increases during their
activation, reaching a level reported to be typical for erythroid progenitors.
This observation suggests that EPO-R expression is modulated during lymphocyte
activation, which may be important for the cells' function. Here we investigated 
whether the expression of GATA1, GATA3 and Sp1 transcription factors is
correlated with the expression of EPO-R in human CD4(+) lymphocytes stimulated
with monoclonal anti-CD3 antibody. The expression of GATA1, GATA3 and Sp1
transcription factors in CD4(+) cells was estimated before and after stimulation 
with anti-CD3 antibody by Western Blot and flow cytometry. The expression of
EPO-R was measured using real-time PCR and flow cytometry. There was no change in
the expression of GATA1 and GATA3 in CD4(+) lymphocytes after stimulation with
anti-CD3 antibody. However, stimulation resulted in the significantly increased
expression of the Sp1 factor. CD4(+) lymphocytes stimulated with anti-CD3
antibody exhibited an increase in both the expression level of EPOR gene and the 
number of EPO-R molecules on the cells' surface, the latter being significantly
correlated with the increased expression of Sp1. Sp1 is noted to be the single
transcription factor among the ones studied whose level changes as a result of
CD4(+) lymphocyte stimulation. It seems that Sp1 may significantly affect the
number of EPO-R molecules present on the surface of activated CD4(+) lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3618423
PMID: 23577103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013 Apr;25(2):148-55. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.02.010. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Development and function of group 2 innate lymphoid cells.

Walker JA(1), McKenzie AN.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.

The innate lymphoid cell (ILC) family has recently expanded with the discovery of
type-2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2). These cells arise from lymphoid progenitors 
in the bone marrow and, under the control of the transcriptional regulators RORa 
and Gata3, they mature to give rise to IL-5, IL-9 and IL-13 producing ILC2. These
cells are critical components of the innate immune response to parasitic worm
infections and have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of asthma and
allergy. Recent advances in our understanding of the molecular regulation of ILC2
development and function now present the opportunity to develop new genetic
models to assess ILC2 immune function and to investigate possible therapeutic
interventions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3776222
PMID: 23562755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Oral Dis. 2014 Mar;20(2):212-8. doi: 10.1111/odi.12094. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Potential pathogenetic role of Th17, Th0, and Th2 cells in erosive and reticular 
oral lichen planus.

Piccinni MP(1), Lombardelli L, Logiodice F, Tesi D, Kullolli O, Biagiotti R,
Giudizi M, Romagnani S, Maggi E, Ficarra G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Center of Excellence
DENOTHE, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The role of Th17 cells and associated cytokines was investigated in
oral lichen planus.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 14 consecutive patients with oral lichen planus were
investigated. For biological studies, tissues were taken from reticular or
erosive lesions and from normal oral mucosa (controls) of the same patient. mRNA 
expression for IL-17F, IL-17A, MCP-1, IL-13, IL-2, IL-10, IL-1ß, RANTES, IL-4,
IL-12B, IL-8, IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-1a, IL-18, TGF-ß1, IL-23R, IL-7, IL-15, IL-6, MIG,
IP-10, LTB, VEGF, IL-5, IL-27, IL-23A, GAPDH, PPIB, Foxp3, GATA3, and RORC was
measured using the QuantiGene 2.0.
RESULTS: Results showed that Th17-type and Th0-type molecules' mRNAs, when
compared with results obtained from tissue controls, were increased in biopsies
of erosive lesions, whereas Th2-type molecules' mRNAs were increased in reticular
lesions. When the CD4+ T-cell clones, derived from oral lichen planus tissues and
tissue controls, were analyzed, a higher prevalence of Th17 (confirmed by an
increased CD161 expression) and Th0 CD4+ T clones was found in erosive lesions,
whereas a prevalence of Th2 clones was observed in reticular lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Th17, Th0, and Th2 cells, respectively, may
have a role in the pathogenesis of erosive and reticular oral lichen planus.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23556506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 May 15;19(10):2723-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2986. 
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Identification of prognosis-relevant subgroups in patients with chemoresistant
triple-negative breast cancer.

Yu KD(1), Zhu R, Zhan M, Rodriguez AA, Yang W, Wong S, Makris A, Lehmann BD, Chen
X, Mayer I, Pietenpol JA, Shao ZM, Symmans WF, Chang JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Shanghai Cancer Center and Cancer Institute of
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and residual disease 
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy generally have worse outcome; however, some
patients with residual tumor after neoadjuvant chemotherapy do not relapse. We
hypothesize that there are subgroups of patients with chemoresistant TNBC with
different prognosis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Forty-nine chemoresistant cases from 111 patients with TNBC 
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX) 
constituted the discovery cohort, and 25 chemoresistant samples from 47
neoadjuvant chemotherapy-treated TNBC (The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX) were 
chosen for validation. Extended validation was carried out in 269 operable TNBC
predicted to be chemoresistant by expression pattern from published datasets.
RESULTS: We established a seven-gene prognostic signature using dChip and gene
set enrichment analyses. In the independent validation cohort, the classifier
predicted correctly with positive predictive value of 75.0% and negative
predictive value (i.e., relapse-free survival; RFS) of 76.9% at 3 years. Those
predicted to relapse had a HR of 4.67 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.27-17.15] 
for relapse in 3 years. In extended validation, patients predicted not to relapse
exhibited 3-year RFS of 78.9%, whereas the 3-year RFS was 48.5% for patients
predicted to relapse, with HR of 2.61 (95% CI: 1.52-4.49). The TNBC subgroup that
predicted to have relatively favorable prognosis was characterized by high
expression of "luminal-like" genes [androgen-receptor (AR) and GATA3], whereas
the subgroup with worse prognosis was characterized by expression of cancer
stem-cell markers.
CONCLUSION: We developed a clinically relevant signature for patients with
chemoresistant TNBC. For these women, new therapeutic strategies like targeting
AR activation or cancer stem cells may need to be developed.

©2013 AACR

PMCID: PMC3655097
PMID: 23549873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr 4;92(4):489-503. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.002. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Functional variants at the 11q13 risk locus for breast cancer regulate cyclin D1 
expression through long-range enhancers.

French JD, Ghoussaini M, Edwards SL, Meyer KB, Michailidou K, Ahmed S, Khan S,
Maranian MJ, O'Reilly M, Hillman KM, Betts JA, Carroll T, Bailey PJ, Dicks E,
Beesley J, Tyrer J, Maia AT, Beck A, Knoblauch NW, Chen C, Kraft P, Barnes D,
González-Neira A, Alonso MR, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Luccarini
C, Baynes C, Conroy D, Dennis J, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Schmidt
MK, Broeks A, Verhoef S, Cornelissen S, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, 
Siriwanarangsan P, Fasching PA, Loehberg CR, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Peto J, dos
Santos Silva I, Johnson N, Aitken Z, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, 
Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Burwinkel B, Guénel P, Truong T, Laurent-Puig P, 
Menegaux F, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Milne RL, Zamora
MP, Arias Perez JI, Benitez J, Anton-Culver H, Brenner H, Müller H, Arndt V,
Stegmaier C, Meindl A, Lichtner P, Schmutzler RK, Engel C, Brauch H, Hamann U,
Justenhoven C; GENICA Network, Aaltonen K, Heikkilä P, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, 
Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Sueta A, Bogdanova NV, Antonenkova NN, Dörk T, Lindblom
A, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM; kConFab
Investigators, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, Lambrechts D, Peeters
S, Smeets A, Floris G, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Nickels S, Flesch-Janys D,
Radice P, Peterlongo P, Bonanni B, Sardella D, Couch FJ, Wang X, Pankratz VS, Lee
A, Giles GG, Severi G, Baglietto L, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le
Marchand L, Simard J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Teo SH, Yip CH, Ng CH,
Vithana EN, Kristensen V, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, Long J,
Winqvist R, Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Grip M, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon
G, Mulligan AM, Devilee P, Seynaeve C, García-Closas M, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ,
Lissowska J, Czene K, Klevebring D, Schoof N, Hooning MJ, Martens JW, Collée JM, 
Tilanus-Linthorst M, Hall P, Li J, Liu J, Humphreys K, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai 
H, Cox A, Balasubramanian SP, Blot W, Signorello LB, Cai Q, Pharoah PD, Healey
CS, Shah M, Pooley KA, Kang D, Yoo KY, Noh DY, Hartman M, Miao H, Sng JH, Sim X, 
Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau
V, McKay J, Toland AE, Ambrosone CB, Yannoukakos D, Godwin AK, Shen CY, Hsiung
CN, Wu PE, Chen ST, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Schoemaker MJ, Ponder BA,
Nevanlinna H, Brown MA, Chenevix-Trench G, Easton DF, Dunning AM.

Analysis of 4,405 variants in 89,050 European subjects from 41 case-control
studies identified three independent association signals for
estrogen-receptor-positive tumors at 11q13. The strongest signal maps to a
transcriptional enhancer element in which the G allele of the best candidate
causative variant rs554219 increases risk of breast cancer, reduces both binding 
of ELK4 transcription factor and luciferase activity in reporter assays, and may 
be associated with low cyclin D1 protein levels in tumors. Another candidate
variant, rs78540526, lies in the same enhancer element. Risk association signal
2, rs75915166, creates a GATA3 binding site within a silencer element. Chromatin 
conformation studies demonstrate that these enhancer and silencer elements
interact with each other and with their likely target gene, CCND1.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3617380
PMID: 23540573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2013 Jan-Mar;26(1):85-92.

Activity of corilagin on post-parasiticide liver fibrosis in Schistosomiasis
animal model.

Huang YF(1), Zhang SL, Jin F, Cheng D, Zhou YP, Li HR, Tang ZM, Xue J, Cai W,
Dong JH, Zhao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

This study investigates the effects and possible molecular mechanisms of
corilagin extraction on prevention of Schistosoma japonicum ova-induced
granulomas and liver fibrosis. As a result, under a light microscope, when
compared to a model group, the corilagin group showed smaller granulomas, less
liver cell denaturation and less inflammatory cell infiltration, and the
connective tissues were significantly decreased. By Masson staining, the liver
sections from the corilagin group showed less collagen distributed around
granulomas, decreased liver fibrosis in the portal tracts and less formed
interlobular tissue. The expression of hydroxyproline, IL-13 in liver and GATA3
in spleen in the model group was significantly higher than that in the normal
group (P less than 0.05 or 0.01), while the level of hydroxyproline, IL-13 and
GATA3 in the corilagin group were significantly lower than that in the model
group (P less than 0.05). In conclusion, corilagin extraction can decrease the
level of Th2-associated profibrotic cytokine IL-13, and down-regulate the
transcription of GATA3 mRNA in spleen cells, which alleviate the hepatic fibrosis
caused by egg granuloma in Schistosoma japonicum infection.

PMID: 23527711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):653-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.613. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Identifying targets for the restoration and reactivation of BRM.

Kahali B(1), Gramling SJ(1), Marquez SB(1), Thompson K(1), Lu L(2), Reisman D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.

Brahma (BRM) is a novel anticancer gene, which is frequently inactivated in a
variety of tumor types. Unlike many anticancer genes, BRM is not mutated, but
rather epigenetically silenced. In addition, histone deacetylase complex (HDAC)
inhibitors are known to reverse BRM silencing, but they also inactivate it via
acetylation of its C-terminus. High-throughput screening has uncovered many
compounds that are effective at pharmacologically restoring BRM and thereby
inhibit cancer cell growth. As we do not know which specific proteins, if any,
regulate BRM, we sought to identify the proteins, which underlie the epigenetic
suppression of BRM. By selectively knocking down each HDAC, we found that HDAC3
and HDAC9 regulate BRM expression, whereas HDAC2 controls its acetylation.
Similarly, we ectopically overexpressed 21 different histone acetyltransferases
and found that KAT6A, KAT6B and KAT7 induce BRM expression, whereas KAT2B and
KAT8 induce its acetylation. We also investigated the role of two transcription
factors (TFs) linked to either BRM (GATA3) or HDAC9 (MEF2D) expression. Knockdown
of either GATA3 and/or MEF2D downregulated HDAC9 and induced BRM. As targets for 
molecular biotherapy are typically uniquely, or simply differentially expressed
in cancer cells, we also determined if any of these proteins are dysregulated.
However, by sequencing, no mutations were found in any of these BRM-regulating
HDACs, HATs or TFs. We selectively knocked down GATA3, MEF2D, HDAC3 and HDAC9,
and found that each gene-specific knockdown induced growth inhibition. We
observed that both GATA3 and HDAC9 were greatly overexpressed only in
BRM-negative cell lines indicating that HDAC9 may be a good target for therapy.
We also found that the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway regulates
both BRM acetylation and BRM silencing as MAP kinase pathway inhibitors both
induced BRM as well as caused BRM deacetylation. Together, these data identify a 
cadre of key proteins, which underlie the epigenetic regulation of BRM.

PMID: 23524580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 15;190(8):4056-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202640. Epub 2013
Mar 18.

Stepwise epigenetic and phenotypic alterations poise CD8+ T cells to mediate
airway hyperresponsiveness and inflammation.

Jia Y(1), Takeda K, Han J, Joetham A, Marcus RA, Lucas JJ, O'Connor BP, Gelfand
EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

The functional plasticity of CD8(+) T cells in an atopic environment,
encompassing a spectrum from IFN-<U+03B3>- to IL-13-producing cells, is pivotal in the
development of allergic airway hyperresponsiveness and inflammation, and yet
remains mechanistically undefined. We demonstrate that CD8(+) T cell IL-13
induction proceeded through a series of distinct IL-4/GATA3-regulated stages
characterized by gene expression and epigenetic changes. In vivo, CD8(+) T cells 
exposed to an environment rich in IL-4 displayed epigenetic changes at the GATA3 
and IL-13 promoter indicative of transcriptional activation and IL-13 production.
In vitro, IL-4 triggered the stepwise molecular conversion of CD8(+) T cells from
IFN-<U+03B3> to IL-13 production. During the initial stage, IL-4 suppressed T-bet and
induced GATA3 expression, characterized by enhanced activating histone
modifications and RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment to the GATA3 locus.
Notably, recruitment of GATA3 and RNA Pol II to the IL-13 promoter was also
detected at this initial stage. However, enhanced IL-13 transcription only
occurred at a later stage after TCR stimulation, indicating that IL-4-induced
GATA3 recruitment poises the IL-13 locus for TCR-mediated transcription. Thus,
both in vivo and in vitro, an atopic (IL-4) environment poises CD8(+) T cells via
stepwise epigenetic and phenotypic mechanisms for pathogenic conversion to IL-13 
production, which is ultimately triggered via an allergen-mediated TCR stimulus.

PMCID: PMC3622148
PMID: 23509358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013 Apr;25(2):139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.02.007. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

T-bet and Gata3 in controlling type 1 and type 2 immunity mediated by innate
lymphoid cells.

Hoyler T(1), Connor CA, Kiss EA, Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11,
D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are an emerging group of innate lymphocytes that
share functional and transcriptional attributes with the various T helper cell
effector fates (e.g. Th1, Th2, Th17). ILCs are substantially represented in the
intestinal mucosa but are rare in secondary lymphoid organs. They play important 
roles in epithelial homeostasis, tissue repair and in immunity to intestinal
infections. They are also involved in immune-mediated pathology. Here, we will
review the emerging roles of the transcription factors T-bet and Gata3 in the
development, lineage specification and function of distinct ILC lineages. We will
also highlight the requirement of these transcriptional programs for the control 
of infections and the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23490163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cytokine. 2013 Apr;62(1):131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Mar
7.

Detection of TCD4+ subsets in human carotid atheroma.

Oliveira RT(1), Silva RM, Teo FH, Mineiro MF, Ferreira MC, Altemani A, Mamoni RL,
Menezes FH, Blotta MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, State
University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Activated TCD4(+) cells are detected in human atherosclerotic plaques which
indicate their participation in disease progression and destabilization. Among
these cells, IFN-<U+03B3>-producing T cells (TH1) are recognized as having a
pro-atherogenic role. Recently, the IL-17-producing T helper lineage of cells
(TH17) has been identified in atherosclerotic lesions. They have been linked to
atheroma development through the production of pro-inflammatory mediators present
in these lesions. Furthermore, IL-22 producing TCD4(+) cells (TH22) have been
identified in the atheromatous environment, but their presence and function has
not been investigated. The aim of this study was to analyze the immune response
mediated by pro-inflammatory subtypes of TCD4(+) cells in atheromatous lesions.
Atherosclerotic plaques of 57 patients with critical stenosis of carotid
submitted to endarterectomy were evaluated. Three carotid fragments from organ
donors were used as control. mRNA analysis showed expression of TH1 (IFN-<U+03B3>,
T-bet, IL-2, IL-12p35, TNF-a and IL-18); TH2 (GATA-3); TH17 (IL-17A, IL-17RA,
Ror<U+03B3>t, TGF-ß, IL-6, IL-1ß, IL-23p19, CCL20, CCR4 and CCR6) and TH22 (IL-22 and
Ahr) related markers. Asymptomatic patients showed higher expression of mRNA of
IL-10, TGF-ß, CCR4 and GATA-3 when compared to symptomatic ones.
Immunohistochemistry analysis showed higher levels of IL-23, TGF-ß, IL-1ß and
IL-18 in macrophages and foam cells in unstable lesions compared to stable and
control ones. In vitro stimulation of atheroma cells induced IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3>
production. Finally we were able to detect, the following subpopulations of
TCD3(+) cells: TCD4(+) IFN-<U+03B3>(+), TCD4(+)IL-17(+), TCD4(+)IL-4(+), TCD4(+)IL-22(+)
and double positive cells (IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-17(+), IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-22(+) or IL-17/IL-22(+)). Our
results showed the presence of distinct TCD4(+) cells subsets in human carotid
lesions and suggest that interactions among them may contribute to the atheroma
progression and destabilization.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23474106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4691-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220865110. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Functionally distinct Gata3/Chd4 complexes coordinately establish T helper 2
(Th2) cell identity.

Hosokawa H(1), Tanaka T, Suzuki Y, Iwamura C, Ohkubo S, Endoh K, Kato M, Endo Y, 
Onodera A, Tumes DJ, Kanai A, Sugano S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
260-8670, Japan.

GATA binding protein 3 (Gata3) is a GATA family transcription factor that
controls differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper 2 (Th2) cells.
However, it is unknown how Gata3 simultaneously activates Th2-specific genes
while repressing those of other Th lineages. Here we show that chromodomain
helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (Chd4) forms a complex with Gata3 in Th2 cells
that both activates Th2 cytokine transcription and represses the Th1 cytokine
IFN-<U+03B3>. We define a Gata3/Chd4/p300 transcriptional activation complex at the Th2 
cytokine loci and a Gata3/Chd4-nucleosome remodeling histone deacetylase
repression complex at the Tbx21 locus in Th2 cells. We also demonstrate a
physiological role for Chd4 in Th2-dependent inflammation in an in vivo model of 
asthmatic inflammation. Thus, Gata3/Chd4 forms functionally distinct complexes,
which mediate both positive and negative gene regulation to facilitate Th2 cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3606997
PMID: 23471993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Blood. 2013 Mar 7;121(10):1673-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-477737.

GATA-3 locks the door to the B-cell option.

Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)California Institute of Technology, CA, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Mar 7;121(10):1749-59.

In this issue of Blood, García-Ojeda et al demonstrate a key mechanism that
drives T and B lymphocytes to divergent fates from early in their development.

PMCID: PMC3591792
PMID: 23471221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2013 Feb;35(1):121-4. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2013.01.023.

[Roles of trichorhinophalangeal syndrome-1 gene in normal breast development and 
breast cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Bao Y(1), Zhong ZX, Cui G, Guo L, Wang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, the Second Hospital of Jiaxing, Jiaxing, Zhejiang, China. 
ybao2011@gmail.com

GATA transcription factor family members have been found to involve in the growth
and differentiation of mammary gland. Among them GATA-3 is regarded as the most
critical regulator involving the tumorigenesis of breast cancer (BC). Recently,
trichorhinophalangeal syndrome-1 gene (TRPS-1), a new GATA family member, has
been identified to be highly prevalent in breast cancer. Compared with
ER-negative breast cancer, the expression of TRPS-1 is higher in ER-positive
breast cancer and was significantly correlates with estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and GATA-3, indicating it may serve as a ductal epithelial
cell-specific regulator in the differentiation of breast ductal epithelial cells.
Studies have shown that miR221/222 is able to downregulate the expression of an
epithelial cell marker E-cadherin by targeting TRPS-1, resulting in mammary
epithelial cells transition to mesenchymal cell (EMT). In addition, it has been
well accepted that, and the Science and Technology Bureau of Jiaxing
(2012AY1071-2)TRPS-1 plays a role in the differentiation of several other cell
types including kidney nephric mesenchymal cells, columnar chondrocytes, and
osteoclasts, indicating that TRPS-1 involves in mesenchymal-to-epithelial cell
transition (MET). In this article, we summarize the roles of GATA transcription
factor TRPS-1 in ductal epithelial cells and the roles of its gene and protein
expressions in predicting the prognosis of breast cancer.

PMID: 23469802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Genes Immun. 2013 Jun;14(4):212-6. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.6. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

T helper 17 polarization in familial Mediterranean fever.

Ovadia A(1), Livneh A, Feld O, Ben-Zvi I, Kukuy E, Kivity S, Lidar M, Barda-Saad 
M, Shinar Y.

Author information: 
(1)Heller Institute of Medical Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.

Autoinflammatory attacks in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) are accompanied by
elevated levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), and are controllable by IL-1-targeting
drugs. In combination, IL-6 and IL-1 are known to be potent inducers of T helper 
(Th) 17 cells development. Therefore, we studied the Th17 population size, and
activation potential, of FMF patients. Based on the relative mRNA expression of
the Th1, Th2, Treg and Th17 transcription factors T-bet, GATA3, FOXP3 and
retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>T (ROR<U+03B3>T), respectively, the Th17
population in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of healthy subjects was 
estimated at 2.5% of the entire Th population and 4.4% in FMF patients in
remission (n=6 for each group, P=0.03). IL-17 secretion after universal
stimulation of the T-cell receptor in PBMCs culture was twice higher in cultures 
of patients with frequent attacks (n=18) than in those of patients with
infrequent attacks (n=10, 1124±266 vs 615±196<U+2009>pg<U+2009>ml(-1), P=0.009). IL-17
secretion correlated well with IL17A mRNA level. Part of the increased secretion 
was related to the deleterious, MEFV p.M694V homozygous genotype (n=19, 1.5-fold,
P=0.03). Almost all IL-17 producer cells were CD4-positive (CD4(+)IL-17(+)). In
conclusion, frequent attacks and the deleterious FMF genotype appear to drive FMF
patients to a heightened Th17 response.

PMID: 23466494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hum Pathol. 2013 Aug;44(8):1563-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.12.012. Epub 2013 
Feb 28.

Use of PAX8 and GATA3 in diagnosing sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma and
sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma.

Chang A(1), Brimo F, Montgomery EA, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Immunohistochemistry for PAX8 and GATA3 are sensitive markers for renal cell
carcinoma and urothelial carcinoma, respectively. However, there are limited data
on these markers in sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma (SARCRCC) and sarcomatoid
urothelial carcinoma (SARCUC). Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed from 45
cases of SARCRCC and 45 cases of SARCUC of the lower urinary tract, with an
additional 11 SARCUCs of the upper tract. PAX8 and GATA3 were also evaluated in
TMAs from 161 sarcomas from other sites, 14 atypical epithelioid angiomyolipomas 
(AMLs) of the kidney, 23 bladder inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors (IMTs), and 
2 bladder and 4 renal leiomyosarcomas. In the SARCRCC, PAX8 and GATA3 were
positive in the sarcomatoid areas in 31 (69%) and 0 (0%) of cases, respectively. 
In the bladder SARCUC, GATA3 and PAX8 were positive in 14 (31%) and 2 (4%) of
cases, respectively. Of the 11 SARCUCs of the upper urinary tract, 2 (18%) cases 
were PAX8 positive and 2 (18%) separate cases were GATA3 positive. Only 1 tumor
present on the sarcoma TMAs, a Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, was
PAX8 positive, and all sarcomas were GATA3 negative. Of the AMLs, IMTs, and
leiomyosarcoma, only 1 case of IMT showed moderate GATA3 positivity, and all were
negative for PAX8. PAX8 can be used to distinguish SARCCRCC from atypical
epithelioid AMLs and primary renal or retroperitoneal sarcomas. However, in a
kidney/renal pelvic tumor, PAX8 shows overlap in staining between SARCUC and
SARCRCC. GATA3 lacks sensitivity but is more specific for SARCUC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23453625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013 Mar-Apr;19(4):779-84. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e3182802b0e.

Predictors of endoscopic inflammation in patients with ulcerative colitis in
clinical remission.

Rosenberg L(1), Lawlor GO, Zenlea T, Goldsmith JD, Gifford A, Falchuk KR, Wolf
JL, Cheifetz AS, Robson SC, Moss AC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) who are in clinical remission
may still have underlying endoscopic inflammation, which is associated with
inferior clinical outcomes. The goal of this study was to determine the
prevalence of active endoscopic disease, and factors associated with it, in
patients with UC who are in clinical remission.
METHODS: Prospective observational study in a single center. Patients with UC in 
clinical remission (by Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index) were enrolled
prospectively at the time of surveillance colonoscopy. Disease phenotype,
endoscopic activity (Mayo subscore), and histologic score (Geboes) were recorded,
and blood was drawn for peripheral blood biomarkers.
RESULTS: Overall, 149 patients in clinical remission were prospectively enrolled 
in this cohort; 81% had been in clinical remission for >6 months, and 86% were
currently prescribed maintenance medications. At endoscopy, 45% of patients in
clinical remission had any endoscopic inflammation (Mayo endoscopy subscore >0), 
and 13% had scores >1. In a multivariate model, variables independently
associated with a Mayo endoscopic score >1 were remission for <6 months (P =
0.001), white blood count (P = 0.01), and C-reactive protein level (P = 0.009). A
model combining these 3 variables had a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of
73% for predicting moderate-to-severe endoscopic activity in patients in clinical
remission (area under the curve, 0.86). In an unselected subgroup of patients who
had peripheral blood mononuclear cell messenger RNA profiling, GATA3 messenger
RNA levels were significantly higher in patients with endoscopic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Duration of clinical remission, white blood count, and C-reactive
protein level can predict the probability of ongoing endoscopic activity, despite
clinical remission in patients with UC. These parameters could be used to
identify patients who require intensification of treatment to achieve mucosal
healing.

PMCID: PMC3749843
PMID: 23446338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Development. 2013 Mar;140(6):1207-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.088559.

Architecture of a lymphomyeloid developmental switch controlled by PU.1, Notch
and Gata3.

Del Real MM(1), Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Hematopoiesis is a classic system with which to study developmental potentials
and to investigate gene regulatory networks that control choices among alternate 
lineages. T-cell progenitors seeding the thymus retain several lineage
potentials. The transcription factor PU.1 is involved in the decision to become a
T cell or a myeloid cell, and the developmental outcome of expressing PU.1 is
dependent on exposure to Notch signaling. PU.1-expressing T-cell progenitors
without Notch signaling often adopt a myeloid program, whereas those exposed to
Notch signals remain in a T-lineage pathway. Here, we show that Notch signaling
does not alter PU.1 transcriptional activity by degradation/alteration of PU.1
protein. Instead, Notch signaling protects against the downregulation of T-cell
factors so that a T-cell transcriptional network is maintained. Using an early
T-cell line, we describe two branches of this network. The first involves
inhibition of E-proteins by PU.1 and the resulting inhibition of Notch signaling 
target genes. Effects of E-protein inhibition can be reversed by exposure to
Notch signaling. The second network is dependent on the ability of PU.1 to
inhibit important T-cell transcription factor genes such as Myb, Tcf7 and Gata3
in the absence of Notch signaling. We show that maintenance of Gata3 protein
levels by Myb and Notch signaling is linked to the ability to retain T-cell
identity in response to PU.1.

PMCID: PMC3585658
PMID: 23444353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Horm Cancer. 2013 Jun;4(3):123-39. doi: 10.1007/s12672-013-0138-x. Epub 2013 Feb 
22.

GATA3 mutations found in breast cancers may be associated with aberrant nuclear
localization, reduced transactivation and cell invasiveness.

Gaynor KU(1), Grigorieva IV, Allen MD, Esapa CT, Head RA, Gopinath P, Christie
PT, Nesbit MA, Jones JL, Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism (OCDEM), University of Oxford, 
Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

Somatic and germline mutations in the dual zinc-finger transcription factor GATA3
are associated with breast cancers expressing the estrogen receptor (ER) and the 
autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism-deafness-renal dysplasia syndrome,
respectively. To elucidate the role of GATA3 in breast tumorigenesis, we
investigated 40 breast cancers that expressed ER, for GATA3 mutations. Six
different heterozygous GATA3 somatic mutations were identified in eight tumors,
and these consisted of: a frameshifting deletion/insertion (944_945delGGinsAGC), 
an in-frame deletion of a key arginine residue (991_993delAGG), a
seven-nucleotide frameshifting insertion (991_992insTGGAGGA), a frameshifting
deletion (1196_1197delGA), and two frameshifting single nucleotide insertions
(1224_1225insG found in three tumors and 1224_1225insA). Five of the eight
mutations occurred in tumors that retained GATA3 immunostaining, indicating that 
absence of GATA3 immunostaining is an unreliable predictor of the presence of
GATA3 mutations. Luciferase reporter assays, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, immunofluorescence, invasion and proliferation assays demonstrated that
the GATA3 mutations resulted in loss (or reduction) of DNA binding, decrease in
transactivational activity, and alterations in invasiveness but not
proliferation. The 991_992insTGGAGGA (Arg330 frameshift) mutation led to a loss
of nuclear localization, yet the 991_993delAGG (Arg330deletion) retained nuclear 
localization. Investigation of the putative nuclear localization signal (NLS)
sites showed that the NLS of GATA3 does not conform to either a classical mono-
or bi-partite signal, but contains multiple cooperative NLS elements residing
around the N-terminal zinc-finger which comprises residues 264-288. Thus,
approximately 20 % ER-positive breast cancers have somatic GATA3 mutations that
lead to a loss of GATA3 transactivation activity and altered cell invasiveness.

PMID: 23435732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Med Oncol. 2013 Jun;30(2):504. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0504-0. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Polymorphic CT dinucleotide repeat in the GATA3 gene and risk of breast cancer in
Iranian women.

Zakieh A(1), Simin H, Forousan S, Manoochehr T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Isfahan,
Hezar-Jarib, Isfahan, Iran.

GATA3 is an enriched transcription factor in mammary epithelium. To date, there
has been no study on the relationship between microsatellites in the GATA3 gene
and breast cancer risk. In this study, we investigated the existence of
polymorphisms in the cytosine-thymine (CT) dinucleotide repeat in intron 3 of the
GATA3 gene and its association with breast cancer risk. A case-control study of
206 breast cancer patients and 262 controls was conducted in Iranian women.
Several different CT repeat alleles of GATA3 were detected in both the patients
and controls. The frequencies of 17 and 18 alleles in patients were significantly
lower than controls. Our findings demonstrate that women who carry 17-CT (OR =
0.5; p = 0.003) or 18-CT (OR = 0.41, p = 0.02) alleles of GATA3 gene are at lower
risk of developing breast cancer. The highest protection against breast cancer
was observed with heterozygotes of 16/17 repeats (OR = 0.12, p = 0.02). Also, the
presence of the 17-CT allele has a positive relation with estrogen receptor
expression. However, we found that the allelic length of GATA3 polymorphisms had 
no significant effect on the age onset or grade of the disease, as well as the
expression of progesterone receptors and HER2.

PMID: 23430443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jun 15;22(12):2400-10. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt088. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Gata3 antagonizes cancer progression in Pten-deficient prostates.

Nguyen AH(1), Tremblay M, Haigh K, Koumakpayi IH, Paquet M, Pandolfi PP,
Mes-Masson AM, Saad F, Haigh JJ, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre and Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A3.

Loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN is a common occurrence in prostate cancer. This
aberration leads to the ectopic activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway, which
promotes tumor growth. Here, we show that the transcription factor Gata3 is
progressively lost in Pten-deficient mouse prostate tumors as a result of both
transcriptional down-regulation and increased proteasomal degradation. To
determine the significance of this loss, we used conditional loss- and
gain-of-function approaches to manipulate Gata3 expression levels in prostate
tumors. Our results show that Gata3 inactivation in Pten-deficient prostates
accelerates tumor invasion. Conversely, enforced expression of GATA3 in
Pten-deficient tissues markedly delays tumor progression. In Pten-deficient
prostatic ducts, enforced GATA3 prevented Akt activation, which correlated with
the down-regulation of Pik3cg and Pik3c2a mRNAs, encoding respectively class I
and II PI3K subunits. Remarkably, the majority of human prostate tumors similarly
show loss of active GATA3 as they progress to the aggressive castrate-resistant
stage. In addition, GATA3 expression levels in hormone-sensitive tumors holds
predictive value for tumor recurrence. Together, these data establish Gata3 as an
important regulator of prostate cancer progression.

PMID: 23428429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 20;33(8):3679-91. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4703-12.2013.

Gata3 is a critical regulator of cochlear wiring.

Appler JM(1), Lu CC, Druckenbrod NR, Yu WM, Koundakjian EJ, Goodrich LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) play a key role in hearing by rapidly and
faithfully transmitting signals from the cochlea to the brain. Identification of 
the transcriptional networks that ensure the proper specification and wiring of
SGNs during development will lay the foundation for efforts to rewire a damaged
cochlea. Here, we show that the transcription factor Gata3, which is expressed in
SGNs throughout their development, is essential for formation of the intricately 
patterned connections in the cochlea. We generated conditional knock-out mice in 
which Gata3 is deleted after SGNs are specified. Cochlear wiring is severely
disrupted in these animals, with premature extension of neurites that follow
highly abnormal trajectories toward their targets, as shown using in vitro
neurite outgrowth assays together with time-lapse imaging of whole embryonic
cochleae. Expression profiling of mutant neurons revealed a broad shift in gene
expression toward a more differentiated state, concomitant with minor changes in 
SGN identity. Thus, Gata3 appears to serve as an "intermediate regulator" that
guides SGNs through differentiation and preserves the auditory fate. As the first
auditory-specific regulator of SGN development, Gata3 provides a useful molecular
entry point for efforts to engineer SGNs for the restoration of hearing.

PMCID: PMC3613247
PMID: 23426694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Vaccine. 2013 Apr 8;31(15):1956-63. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.02.008. Epub 2013
Feb 17.

The kinetics of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell gene expression correlate with protection in
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L) vaccinated against infectious pancreatic
necrosis.

Munang'andu HM(1), Fredriksen BN, Mutoloki S, Dalmo RA, Evensen O.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, Department of Basic Sciences and
Aquatic Medicine, PO Box 8146 Dep., N-0033 Oslo, Norway.

Infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) is a highly contagious disease
causing high mortalities in juvenile salmonids. Lack of correlation between
neutralizing antibodies and infecting virus suggests a likelihood of involvement 
of the cellular mediated immune response in vaccine protection. To elucidate the 
kinetics of CD4 and CD8 T-cells responses in vaccine protection, Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L) were vaccinated with a high antigen (HiAg) or low antigen (LoAg) 
dose vaccine and challenged by cohabitation using a highly virulent Norwegian Sp 
strain. Analysis of T-cell gene expression in lymphoid organs (headkidney and
spleen) showed that GATA-3 was positively correlated with increase in antibody
levels when T-bet was low. Conversely, T-bet and FoxP3 were positively correlated
with viral infection and negatively correlated with increase in antibody levels. 
Among the CD8+ T cell genes, expression of eomes and CD8a were positively
correlated with increase in viral copy numbers and negatively correlated with
increase in antibody levels. Up-regulation of granzyme A was highly correlated
with increase in viral copy numbers in the LoAg and control groups indicating
that this gene could save as a diagnostic marker of acute infection for IPNV
during acute infection. In contrast, its down regulation in the HiAg which had
low viral copy numbers corresponded with high antibody levels. Overall, these
data show that the kinetics of CD4 and CD8 T-cell genes expression follow the
same pattern as that observed in higher vertebrates. These findings suggest that 
functional signatures of the cellular mediated immune response could be
evolutionary conserved across the vertebrate taxa and that they can effectively
be used to monitor vaccine protection and infection progression of IPNV in
Atlantic salmon.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23422142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Toxicology. 2013 Apr 5;306:59-67. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Feb
14.

Maternal exposure to airborne particulate matter causes postnatal immunological
dysfunction in mice offspring.

Hong X(1), Liu C, Chen X, Song Y, Wang Q, Wang P, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fuzhou General Hospital, Fujian,
China. hxr0812@163.com

Evidence suggests that prenatal exposure to air pollution affects the ontogeny
and development of the fetal immune system. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect of maternal exposure to airborne particulate matter (PM)
on immune function in postnatal offspring. Pregnant female ICR mice were
intralaryngopharyngeally administered with 30 µl of phosphate buffered solution
(the control group) or resuspended PM of Standard Reference Material 1649a at
0.09 (low), 0.28 (medium), 1.85 (high) or 6.92 (overdose) µg/µl once every three 
days from day 0 to 18 of pregnancy (n=8-10). Offspring were sacrificed on
postnatal day 30. Interleukin-4 and interferon-<U+03B3> levels in plasma and
splenocytes, splenic lymphocyte proliferation, and expressions of GATA-3 and
T-bet mRNA in the spleen were tested. The spleen and thymus were
histopathologically examined. The offspring of the medium, high and overdose
PM-exposed dams showed significantly suppressed splenocyte proliferation.
Decreased interferon-<U+03B3> and increased interleukin-4 levels in the blood and
splenocytes, and lowered T-bet and elevated GATA-3 mRNA expressions were found in
the spleen in the medium, high and overdose groups when compared with the control
or low dose group (P<0.05). Histopathology revealed prominent tissue damage in
the spleen and thymus in the overdose group. These results suggest that exposure 
of pregnant mice to PM modulates the fetal immune system, resulting in postnatal 
immune dysfunction by exacerbation of Thl/Th2 deviation. This deviation is
associated with altered T-bet and GATA-3 gene expressions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Immunol. 2013 Jul;54(3-4):435-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.01.006. Epub
2013 Feb 13.

The Bcl6 target gene microRNA-21 promotes Th2 differentiation by a T cell
intrinsic pathway.

Sawant DV(1), Wu H, Kaplan MH, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 is a critical regulator of T helper cell fate,
and inhibits Th2-type inflammation. We have found that microRNA-21 (miR-21) is a 
novel target gene for Bcl6 in Treg cells. Bcl6 represses and Stat3 activates
miR-21 transcription through a Stat3 binding element in the promoter, indicating 
opposing regulation of miR-21 by the two transcription factors via the same DNA
site. Ectopic expression of miR-21 promoted Th2 differentiation in non-polarized 
T cells. The pro-Th2 activity of miR-21 was associated with increased Gata3
expression and decreased expression of the miR-21 target gene Sprouty1. Increased
miR-21 promoted Th2 and Treg gene expression in wild-type Tregs. MiR-21 could
thus help promote the Th2 bias of Bcl6-deficient conventional T cells and Treg
cells. MiR21 expression is increased in Th2-type inflammation, and our results
define miR-21 as a critical target of Bcl6, thus providing a new link between
Bcl6 and Th2 inflammation. Finally, our results reveal a novel T cell autonomous 
role for miR-21 in promoting Th2 differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3602238
PMID: 23416424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Immunotherapy. 2013 Feb;5(2):143-53. doi: 10.2217/imt.12.139.

Effect of immune modulation therapy on cardiac function and T-bet/GATA-3 gene
expression in aging male patients with chronic cardiac insufficiency.

Han LN(1), Guo SL, Li TL, Ding GL, Zhang YJ, Ma JL.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Geriatric Cardiology Internal Medicine, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Number 28 Fuxing Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100853, China.

AIM: The aim of this study was to explore the role of immune modulation therapy
in regulating the imbalance of Th1/Th2, serum IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and the T-cell-specific
transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 in peripheral blood in aging male patients
with chronic cardiac insufficiency (CCI).
PATIENTS & METHODS: In total, 156 participants were divided into three groups:
the CCI intervention group, which received regular therapy and thymopetidum (20
mg intramuscular injection, once every other day for 3 months; n = 70), the CCI
control group, which received regular therapy (n = 56) and 50 healthy individuals
older than 57 years of age, who served as normal controls.
RESULTS: Before therapy, in comparison with the control group, levels of left
ventricular end diastolic diameter, NT-proBNP, C-reactive protein (CRP), Th1,
Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3>, and T-bet mRNA and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA all increased, and the level
of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 6MWT, Th2, IL-4, and GATA-3 mRNA
also decreased in both the CCI intervention and control groups. Linear
correlation analysis indicated that LVEF was inversely correlated with serum
NT-proBNP, CRP, Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA, and was positively
correlated with plasma IL-4. After 3 months of therapy, levels of left
ventricular end diastolic diameter, NT-proBNP, CRP, Th1, Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet
mRNA and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA decreased in the two CCI subgroups, but levels in the 
CCI intervention group were lower in comparison to the control group. Levels of
LVEF, 6MWT, Th2 and GATA-3 mRNA increased in the two CCI subgroups, while levels 
in the CCI intervention group were higher in comparison with the control group.
Plasma levels of IL-4 showed no change after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Immune modulation improved cardiac function of CCI patients and was
associated with amelioration of T-helper superficial transcription factor
polarization and its related cytokine imbalance. Immune modulation might be a new
treatment strategy for aging CCI patients.

PMID: 23413906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Infect Dis. 2013 May 15;207(10):1590-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit058. Epub 2013
Feb 13.

Asymptomatic plasmodial infection is associated with increased tumor necrosis
factor receptor II-expressing regulatory T cells and suppressed type 2 immune
responses.

Wammes LJ(1), Wiria AE, Toenhake CG, Hamid F, Liu KY, Suryani H, Kaisar MM,
Verweij JJ, Sartono E, Supali T, Smits HH, Luty AJ, Yazdanbakhsh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Center, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In malaria-endemic areas, a proportion of individuals becomes chronic
carriers of parasites with few or no clinical signs. There is little information 
on cellular immune responses in asymptomatic parasite carriers.
METHODS: In 80 schoolchildren residing in a malaria-endemic area of Flores
Island, Indonesia, T-helper subsets, regulatory T-cell (Treg) frequencies, tumor 
necrosis factor receptor type II (TNFRII) expression on Tregs, and cytokine
responses induced by Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells (RBCs) were
measured, and values for asymptomatic infected subjects were compared to those
for uninfected controls. To ascertain that alterations found were due to the
presence of malaria parasites, the immune responses were analyzed in 16 children 
before and 1 month after antimalarial treatment.
RESULTS: TNFRII expression, a marker of activation on Tregs, was higher during
infection but decreased upon treatment. GATA3-positive cells and the level of
interleukin 13 secretion in response to P. falciparum-infected RBCs appeared to
be suppressed by plasmodial infection, as both increased after antimalarial
treatment. TNFRII expression on Tregs correlated positively with TNF in response 
to P. falciparum-infected RBCs, but this association disappeared following
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Malaria parasites associated with asymptomatic infections seem to
result in increased TNFRII expression on Tregs, as well as suppressed Th2
cytokine responses, features that might be important for survival of the
parasites in asymptomatic carriers.

PMID: 23408847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9373-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374744. Epub 2013
Feb 10.

Identification of the E3 deubiquitinase ubiquitin-specific peptidase 21 (USP21)
as a positive regulator of the transcription factor GATA3.

Zhang J(1), Chen C, Hou X, Gao Y, Lin F, Yang J, Gao Z, Pan L, Tao L, Wen C, Yao 
Z, Tsun A, Shi G, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 411 Hefei Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

The expression of the transcription factor GATA3 in FOXP3(+) regulatory T (Treg) 
cells is crucial for their physiological function in limiting inflammatory
responses. Although other studies have shown how T cell receptor (TcR) signals
induce the up-regulation of GATA3 expression in Treg cells, the underlying
mechanism that maintains GATA3 expression in Treg cells remains unclear. Here, we
show how USP21 interacts with and stabilizes GATA3 by mediating its
deubiquitination. In a T cell line model, we found that TcR stimulation promoted 
USP21 expression, which was further up-regulated in the presence of FOXP3. The
USP21 mutant C221A reduced its capacity to stabilize GATA3 expression, and its
knockdown led to the down-regulation of GATA3 protein expression in Treg cells.
Furthermore, we found that FOXP3 could directly bind to the USP21 gene promoter
and activated its transcription upon TcR stimulation. Finally, USP21, GATA3, and 
FOXP3 were found up-regulated in Treg cells that were isolated from asthmatic
subjects. In summary, we have identified a USP21-mediated pathway that promotes
GATA3 stabilization and expression at the post-translational level. We propose
that this pathway forms an important signaling loop that stabilizes the
expression of GATA3 in Treg cells.

PMCID: PMC3611007
PMID: 23395819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb 6;13:5. doi: 10.1186/1472-6890-13-5.

A simple immunohistochemical panel comprising 2 conventional markers, Ki67 and
p53, is a powerful tool for predicting patient outcome in luminal-type breast
cancer.

Kobayashi T(1), Iwaya K, Moriya T, Yamasaki T, Tsuda H, Yamamoto J, Matsubara O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pathology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8513, Japan. tkobayashi.g@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ki67 is widely used in order to distinguish the "A" and "B" subtypes 
of luminal-type breast cancer. This study aimed to validate the prognostic value 
of adding p53 to Ki67 for characterizing luminal-type breast cancer.
METHODS: Immunostaining for Ki67, p53, and the molecular markers HER2, CK5/6,
CK14, EGFR, FOXA1, GATA3, and P-cadherin was examined hormone receptor
(HR)-positive cancer tissues from 150 patients. The prognostic value of an
immunohistochemical panel comprising Ki67 and p53 was compared with that of the
single Ki67 labeling index (LI), and uni- and multivariate analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: Division of the patients based on the immunohistochemistry results into 
favorable- (low Ki67 LI, p53-negative) and unfavorable- (high Ki67 LI and/or
p53-positive) phenotype groups yielded distinctly different Kaplan-Meier's curves
of both disease-free (P<0.0001) and overall survival (P=0.0007). These
differences were much more distinct than those between the corresponding low Ki67
LI vs. high Ki67LI curves. While the prognostic values of the other molecular
markers were not significant, combined Ki67-p53 status was an independent
prognostic factor by multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that an immunohistochemical panel comprising Ki67
and p53 is a practical tool for management of patients with HR-positive breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3577510
PMID: 23384409  [PubMed]


176. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;15(2):139-40. doi: 10.1038/ncb2684.

miR-29b moulds the tumour microenvironment to repress metastasis.

Melo SA(1), Kalluri R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, 77054, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;15(2):201-13.

Tumour cells are influenced by their microenvironment, which can promote
uncontrolled growth, invasion and metastasis. The GATA3 transcription factor is
now shown to regulate the tumour microenvironment by inducing the expression of
miR-29b in cancer cells. This microRNA in turn inhibits the expression of genes
involved in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix signalling and remodelling to
suppress metastasis.

PMID: 23377028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jul;44(7):1341-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.11.003. Epub 2013 
Jan 31.

GATA3 expression in breast carcinoma: utility in triple-negative, sarcomatoid,
and metastatic carcinomas.

Cimino-Mathews A(1), Subhawong AP, Illei PB, Sharma R, Halushka MK, Vang R,
Fetting JH, Park BH, Argani P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.
acimino@jhmi.edu

GATA3 plays an integral role in breast luminal cell differentiation and is
implicated in breast cancer progression. GATA3 immunohistochemistry is a useful
marker of breast cancer; however, its use in specific subtypes is unclear. Here, 
we evaluate GATA3 expression in 86 invasive ductal carcinomas including
triple-negative, Her-2, and luminal subtypes, in addition to 13 metaplastic
carcinomas and in 34 fibroepithelial neoplasms. In addition, we report GATA3
expression in matched primary and metastatic breast carcinomas in 30 patients
with known estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and Her-2 status, 
including 5 with ER and/or PR loss from primary to metastasis. Tissue microarrays
containing 5 to 10 cores per tumor were stained for GATA3, scored as follows: 0
(0-5%), 1+ (6%-25%), 2+ (26%-50%), 3+ (51%-75%), and 4+ (>75%). GATA3 labeling
was seen in 67% (66/99) of primary ductal carcinomas including 43% of
triple-negative and 54% of metaplastic carcinomas. In contrast, stromal GATA3
labeling was seen in only 1 fibroepithelial neoplasm. GATA3 labeling was seen in 
90% (27/30) of primary breast carcinomas in the paired cohort, including 67% of
triple-negative carcinomas. GATA3 labeling was overwhelmingly maintained in
paired metastases. Notably, GATA3 was maintained in all "luminal loss"
metastases, which showed ER and/or PR loss. In conclusion, GATA3 expression is
maintained between matched primary and metastatic carcinomas including
ER-negative cases. GATA3 can be particularly useful as a marker for metastatic
breast carcinoma, especially triple-negative and metaplastic carcinomas, which
lack specific markers of mammary origin. Finally, GATA3 labeling may help
distinguish metaplastic carcinoma from malignant phyllodes tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3991123
PMID: 23375642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53767. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053767. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

t(8;9)(p22;p24)/PCM1-JAK2 activates SOCS2 and SOCS3 via STAT5.

Ehrentraut S(1), Nagel S, Scherr ME, Schneider B, Quentmeier H, Geffers R,
Kaufmann M, Meyer C, Prochorec-Sobieszek M, Ketterling RP, Knudson RA, Feldman
AL, Kadin ME, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute, DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures,
Department of Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Fusions of the tyrosine kinase domain of JAK2 with multiple partners occur in
leukemia/lymphoma where they reportedly promote JAK2-oligomerization and
autonomous signalling, Affected entities are promising candidates for therapy
with JAK2 signalling inhibitors. While JAK2-translocations occur in myeloid,
B-cell and T-cell lymphoid neoplasms, our findings suggest their incidence among 
the last group is low. Here we describe the genomic, transcriptional and
signalling characteristics of PCM1-JAK2 formed by t(8;9)(p22;p24) in a trio of
cell lines established at indolent (MAC-1) and aggressive (MAC-2A/2B) phases of a
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). To investigate signalling, PCM1-JAK2 was
subjected to lentiviral knockdown which inhibited 7 top upregulated genes in
t(8;9) cells, notably SOCS2/3. SOCS3, but not SOCS2, was also upregulated in a
chronic eosinophilic leukemia bearing PCM1-JAK2, highlighting its role as a
central signalling target of JAK2 translocation neoplasia. Conversely, expression
of GATA3, a key T-cell developmental gene silenced in aggressive lymphoma cells, 
was partially restored by PCM1-JAK2 knockdown. Treatment with a selective JAK2
inhibitor (TG101348) to which MAC-1/2A/2B cells were conspicuously sensitive
confirmed knockdown results and highlighted JAK2 as the active moiety. PCM1-JAK2 
signalling required pSTAT5, supporting a general paradigm of STAT5 activation by 
JAK2 alterations in lymphoid malignancies. MAC-1/2A/2B--the first
JAK2-translocation leukemia/lymphoma cell lines described--display conspicuous
JAK/STAT signalling accompanied by T-cell developmental and autoimmune disease
gene expression signatures, confirming their fitness as CTCL disease models. Our 
data support further investigation of SOCS2/3 as signalling effectors, prognostic
indicators and potential therapeutic targets in cancers with JAK2 rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3553112
PMID: 23372669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053190. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

FLT3 mutations in early T-cell precursor ALL characterize a stem cell like
leukemia and imply the clinical use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Neumann M(1), Coskun E, Fransecky L, Mochmann LH, Bartram I, Sartangi NF, Heesch 
S, Gökbuget N, Schwartz S, Brandts C, Schlee C, Haas R, Dührsen U, Griesshammer
M, Döhner H, Ehninger G, Burmeister T, Blau O, Thiel E, Hoelzer D, Hofmann WK,
Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, University Hospital Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ETP-ALL) has been identified
as high-risk subgroup of acute T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) with a high rate 
of FLT3-mutations in adults. To unravel the underlying pathomechanisms and the
clinical course we assessed molecular alterations and clinical characteristics in
a large cohort of ETP-ALL (n = 68) in comparison to non-ETP T-ALL adult patients.
Interestingly, we found a high rate of FLT3-mutations in ETP-ALL samples (n = 24,
35%). Furthermore, FLT3 mutated ETP-ALL was characterized by a specific
immunophenotype (CD2+/CD5-/CD13+/CD33-), a distinct gene expression pattern
(aberrant expression of IGFBP7, WT1, GATA3) and mutational status (absence of
NOTCH1 mutations and a low frequency, 21%, of clonal TCR rearrangements). The
observed low GATA3 expression and high WT1 expression in combination with lack of
NOTCH1 mutations and a low rate of TCR rearrangements point to a leukemic
transformation at the pluripotent prothymocyte stage in FLT3 mutated ETP-ALL. The
clinical outcome in ETP-ALL patients was poor, but encouraging in those patients 
with allogeneic stem cell transplantation (3-year OS: 74%). To further explore
the efficacy of targeted therapies, we demonstrate that T-ALL cell lines
transfected with FLT3 expression constructs were particularly sensitive to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In conclusion, FLT3 mutated ETP-ALL defines a
molecular distinct stem cell like leukemic subtype. These data warrant clinical
studies with the implementation of FLT3 inhibitors in addition to early
allogeneic stem cell transplantation for this high risk subgroup.

PMCID: PMC3554732
PMID: 23359050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;15(2):201-13. doi: 10.1038/ncb2672. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

GATA3 suppresses metastasis and modulates the tumour microenvironment by
regulating microRNA-29b expression.

Chou J(1), Lin JH, Brenot A, Kim JW, Provot S, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, 94143-0452,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;15(2):139-40.

Despite advances in our understanding of breast cancer, patients with metastatic 
disease have poor prognoses. GATA3 is a transcription factor that specifies and
maintains mammary luminal epithelial cell fate, and its expression is lost in
breast cancer, correlating with a worse prognosis in human patients. Here, we
show that GATA3 promotes differentiation, suppresses metastasis and alters the
tumour microenvironment in breast cancer by inducing microRNA-29b (miR-29b)
expression. Accordingly, miR-29b is enriched in luminal breast cancers and loss
of miR-29b, even in GATA3-expressing cells, increases metastasis and promotes a
mesenchymal phenotype. Mechanistically, miR-29b inhibits metastasis by targeting 
a network of pro-metastatic regulators involved in angiogenesis, collagen
remodelling and proteolysis, including VEGFA, ANGPTL4, PDGF, LOX and MMP9, and
targeting ITGA6, ITGB1 and TGFB, thereby indirectly affecting differentiation and
epithelial plasticity. The discovery that a GATA3-miR-29b axis regulates the
tumour microenvironment and inhibits metastasis opens up possibilities for
therapeutic intervention in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3660859
PMID: 23354167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Clin Immunol. 2013 Mar;146(3):165-75. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.12.009. Epub 2013 
Jan 3.

Aberrant histone modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with Henoch-Schönlein purpura.

Luo S(1), Liang G, Zhang P, Zhao M, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP), the most common type of leukocytoclastic
vasculitis, is caused by T cell-mediated autoimmune reactions. In this study, we 
analyze histone modification patterns in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) of HSP patients, and investigate the expression levels of inflammatory
cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and IL-13), transcription factors (T-bet,
GATA-3 and TIM-1) and chemokines (CXCL4 and CXCL10) in HSP patients. Our results 
show that histone H3 acetylation and methylation are significantly enhanced in
PBMCs from HSP patients. We also demonstrate specifically that marked increases
in histone H3 acetylation and H3 lysine 4 trimethylation occur at the IL-4 loci
in these patients. In addition, the expression levels of IL-4, IL-6, IL-13,
GATA-3, TIM-1 and CXCL4 are also increased. These findings suggest that abnormal 
histone modifications are present in the PBMCs of patients with HSP, possibly
contributing to the activation of pathological immune responses associated with
HSP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23353785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54406. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054406. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Toll-like receptor ligands induce expression of the costimulatory molecule CD155 
on antigen-presenting cells.

Kamran N(1), Takai Y, Miyoshi J, Biswas SK, Wong JS, Gasser S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Programme, Department of Microbiology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Genotoxic stress and RAS induce the expression of CD155, a ligand for the immune 
receptors DNAM-1, CD96 and TIGIT. Here we show that antigen-presenting cells
upregulate CD155 expression in response to Toll-like receptor activation.
Induction of CD155 by Toll-like receptors depended on MYD88, TRIF and NF-<U+03BA>B. In
addition, IRF3, but not IRF7, modulated CD155 upregulation in response to TLR3
signals. Immunization of CD155-deficient mice with OVA and the TLR9 agonist CpG
resulted in increased OVA-specific IgG2a/c titers when compared to wild type
mice. Splenocytes of immunized CD155-deficient mice secreted lower levels of IL-4
and fewer IL-4 and GATA-3 expressing CD4(+) T cells were present in the spleen of
Cd155(-/-) mice. Our data suggest that CD155 regulates T(h)2 differentiation.
Targeting of CD155 in immunization protocols using peptides may represent a
promising new approach to boost protective humoral immunity in viral vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3547938
PMID: 23349877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mod Pathol. 2013 May;26(5):725-32. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.229. Epub 2013 Jan
25.

Distinguishing primary adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder from secondary
involvement by colorectal adenocarcinoma: extended immunohistochemical profiles
emphasizing novel markers.

Rao Q(1), Williamson SR, Lopez-Beltran A, Montironi R, Huang W, Eble JN, Grignon 
DJ, Koch MO, Idrees MT, Emerson RE, Zhou XJ, Zhang S, Baldridge LA, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.

Glandular neoplasms involving the urinary bladder carry a challenging
differential diagnosis including primary and secondary processes. We investigated
the potential diagnostic utility of cadherin-17 and GATA3 in 25 primary
adenocarcinomas of the urinary bladder, as compared with other commonly used
markers including ß-catenin and p63. Urothelial carcinoma with glandular
differentiation (11), colorectal adenocarcinoma secondarily involving the bladder
(25), and primary colorectal adenocarcinoma (22) were also analyzed and the
results were compared using a Fisher exact test. Cadherin-17 was expressed in
23/25 primary bladder adenocarcinomas (92%), 23/25 colorectal adenocarcinomas
involving the bladder (92%), 21/22 primary colorectal adenocarcinomas (95%) and
entirely negative (0/11) in both components of urothelial carcinoma with
glandular differentiation (P<0.001). In urothelial carcinoma with glandular
differentiation, positive nuclear staining for GATA3 was evident in the
urothelial component for 18% (2/11) and the glandular component for 9% (1/11)
with additional tumors showing only cytoplasmic staining. Nuclear reactivity for 
GATA3 was not present in primary bladder adenocarcinoma and primary/secondary
colorectal adenocarcinoma (P<0.05). Positive nuclear and cytoplasmic
immunostaining for ß-catenin was evident in 21/22 primary colorectal
adenocarcinomas (95%) and 23/25 cases of secondary involvement by colorectal
adenocarcinoma (92%). In contrast, positive membranous and cytoplasmic staining
for ß-catenin was observed in 23/25 primary bladder adenocarcinomas (92%) and
11/11 urothelial carcinomas with glandular differentiation (100%, P<0.001). p63
was expressed only in the urothelial component of urothelial carcinoma with
glandular differentiation and not in the glandular component (P<0.001). In
summary, cadherin-17 is a relatively specific and sensitive marker for primary
adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder, distinguishing it from urothelial
carcinoma with glandular differentiation. However, it does not distinguish
primary bladder adenocarcinoma from secondary involvement by colorectal
adenocarcinoma. The pattern of reactivity for ß-catenin remains the most useful
marker for distinguishing these two tumors.

PMID: 23348900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Oct;37(5):357-62.

[Effects of acupoint injection of autoblood on expression of pulmonary
transcription factor GATA 3 and T-bet proteins and genes in asthma rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Mo L(1), Li JX, Kravitz J, Tang CZ, Guo ZK, Li PY, Guo FM.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Foshan 528200, 
China. mollc@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of autoblood acupoint-injection (ABAI) on
expression levels of pulmonary transacting T-cell-specific transcription factor
GATA 3 (involving Th 2 cytokine expression), Th 1-specific T-box transcription
factor T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet) proteins and genes in asthmatic rats so
as to explore its mechanisms underlying asthma relief.
METHODS: Forty-eight male SD rats were randomized into normal control (n = 8),
model (n = 10), saline acupoint-injection (SAI, n = 10), ABAI (n = 10), and
Dexamethasone (DXM, n = 10) groups. Asthma model was established during 28 days
by 10% Ovalbumin + 10% aluminium hydroxide solution injection (i. p.) and
vapourized 2% Ovalbumin inhaling for 14 days. For rats of the ABAI group, 0.4 mL 
autoblood was injected into the bilateral "Feishu" (BL 13) or "Shenshu" (BL 23)
alternately, once every other day for six times. For rats of the DXM group, 50%
DXM solution (0.5 mg/kg, i. p.) was given from the 17th day on after starting the
modeling, once every other day for 11 days. Pulmonary GATA 3 and T-bet protein
expression was detected by immunohistochemistry, and GATA 3 mRNA and T-bet mRNA
expression detected by real time-PCR.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal group, pulmonary GATA 3 protein and mRNA
expression levels in the model group were up-regulated significantly (P < 0.01), 
while T-bet mRNA expression in the model group was down-regulated obviously (P < 
0.01). Compared to the model group, GATA 3 protein and mRNA expression levels
were down-regulated significantly in both ABAI and DXM groups (P < 0.01), while
T-bet protein expression in ABAI group and T-bet mRNA expression in both ABAI and
DXM groups were up-regulated significantly (P < 0.01, P < 0.05). No significant
differences were found between model and SAI groups, and between ABAI and DXM
groups in GATA 3 protein expression levels; and between ABAI and DXM groups in
GATA 3 mRNA expression levels; between normal and model groups, and between SAI
and ABAI groups in T-bet protein expression levels; between model and SAI groups 
and between ABAI and DXM groups in T-bet mRNA expression levels (P > 0.05). The
ratio of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA expression was significantly higher in the model 
group than in the normal group (P < 0.01), while obviously lower in the SAI, ABAI
and DXM groups than in the model group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Additionally, the
ratios of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA in ABAI and DXM groups were comparable (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Autoblood acupoint injection is comparable to DXM intraperitoneal
injection in down-regulating asthma-induced increase of pulmonary GATA 3 protein 
and mRNA expression as well as ratio of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA, and in
up-regulating asthma-induced decrease of T-bet mRNA expression in asthma rats,
which may contribute to their effects in relieving asthma.

PMID: 23342773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1393. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2393.

MicroRNA-30c inhibits human breast tumour chemotherapy resistance by regulating
TWF1 and IL-11.

Bockhorn J(1), Dalton R, Nwachukwu C, Huang S, Prat A, Yee K, Chang YF, Huo D,
Wen Y, Swanson KE, Qiu T, Lu J, Park SY, Dolan ME, Perou CM, Olopade OI, Clarke
MF, Greene GL, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Chemotherapy resistance frequently drives tumour progression. However, the
underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly characterized.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition has been shown to correlate with therapy
resistance, but the functional link and signalling pathways remain to be
elucidated. Here we report that microRNA-30c, a human breast tumour prognostic
marker, has a pivotal role in chemoresistance by a direct targeting of the
actin-binding protein twinfilin 1, which promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. An interleukin-6 family member, interleukin-11 is identified as a
secondary target of twinfilin 1 in the microRNA-30c signalling pathway.
Expression of microRNA-30c inversely correlates with interleukin-11 expression in
primary breast tumours and low interleukin-11 correlates with relapse-free
survival in breast cancer patients. Our study demonstrates that microRNA-30c is
transcriptionally regulated by GATA3 in breast tumours. Identification of a novel
microRNA-mediated pathway that regulates chemoresistance in breast cancer will
facilitate the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3723106
PMID: 23340433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Plant Cell. 2013 Jan;25(1):83-101. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.107854. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Transcription repressor HANABA TARANU controls flower development by integrating 
the actions of multiple hormones, floral organ specification genes, and GATA3
family genes in Arabidopsis.

Zhang X(1), Zhou Y, Ding L, Wu Z, Liu R, Meyerowitz EM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, People's Republic of China. zhxiaolan@cau.edu.cn

Plant inflorescence meristems and floral meristems possess specific boundary
domains that result in proper floral organ separation and specification. HANABA
TARANU (HAN) encodes a boundary-expressed GATA3-type transcription factor that
regulates shoot meristem organization and flower development in Arabidopsis
thaliana, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Through time-course
microarray analyses following transient overexpression of HAN, we found that HAN 
represses hundreds of genes, especially genes involved in hormone responses and
floral organ specification. Transient overexpression of HAN also represses the
expression of HAN and three other GATA3 family genes, HANL2 (HAN-LIKE 2), GNC
(GATA, NITRATE-INDUCIBLE, CARBON-METABOLISM-INVOLVED), and GNL (GNC-LIKE),
forming a negative regulatory feedback loop. Genetic analysis indicates that HAN 
and the three GATA3 family genes coordinately regulate floral development, and
their expression patterns are partially overlapping. HAN can homodimerize and
heterodimerize with the three proteins encoded by these genes, and HAN directly
binds to its own promoter and the GNC promoter in vivo. These findings, along
with the fact that constitutive overexpression of HAN produces an even stronger
phenotype than the loss-of-function mutation, support the hypothesis that HAN
functions as a key repressor that regulates floral development via regulatory
networks involving genes in the GATA3 family, along with genes involved in
hormone action and floral organ specification.

PMCID: PMC3584552
PMID: 23335616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov 20;92(43):3079-84.

[FLT3 signaling manipulates conventional dendritic cells to regulate acute lung
injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong L(1), Xu JY, Liu J, Lu XM, Yang Y, Qiu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Nanjing Zhongda Hospital, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of FLT3 signaling on the accumulation and
maturation of pulmonary conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) and determine whether
or not the inhibition of FLT3 signaling may attenuate acute lung
inflammation/injury (ALI).
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were pretreated separately with FLT3-ligand (FLT3L) and
lestaurtinib for 5 days. Murine model of ALI was subsequently induced by an
intra-tracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lung specimens were
harvested 24 hours later. The accumulation and maturation status of pulmonary
cDCs were assessed by flow cytometry. Lung myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity was
measured to evaluate the infiltration of neutrophils. The ratio between
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA was determined to estimate the
balance of Th1/Th2 response. Lung injury was estimated by lung wet weight/body
weight ratio (LWW/BW) and histopathological assessment.
RESULTS: LPS challenge resulted in rapid accumulation and maturation of pulmonary
cDCs. FLT3L pretreatment further stimulated the accumulation and maturation of
pulmonary cDCs, leading to a marked deterioration of LWW/BW and lung
histopathological changes. Meanwhile, the lung MPO activity and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA
ratio were boosted by the administration of FLT3L. In contrast, the lestaurtinib 
pretreatment inhibited the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading
to a significant improvement of LWW/BW and lung histopathological changes. The
administration of lestaurtinib also suppressed the lung MPO activity and
T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio in the lung.
CONCLUSIONS: FLT3 signaling attenuates ALI by regulating the accumulation and
maturation of pulmonary cDCs, indicating a potential pharmacotherapy for ALI.

PMID: 23328383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e47434. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047434. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Neem leaf glycoprotein activates CD8(+) T cells to promote therapeutic anti-tumor
immunity inhibiting the growth of mouse sarcoma.

Mallick A(1), Barik S, Goswami KK, Banerjee S, Ghosh S, Sarkar K, Bose A, Baral
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute (CNCI), Kolkata, India.

In spite of sufficient data on Neem Leaf Glycoprotein (NLGP) as a prophylactic
vaccine, little knowledge currently exists to support the use of NLGP as a
therapeutic vaccine. Treatment of mice bearing established sarcomas with NLGP (25
µg/mice/week subcutaneously for 4 weeks) resulted in tumor regression or dormancy
(Tumor free/Regressor, 13/24 (NLGP), 4/24 (PBS)). Evaluation of CD8(+) T cell
status in blood, spleen, TDLN, VDLN and tumor revealed increase in cellular
number. Elevated expression of CD69, CD44 and Ki67 on CD8(+) T cells revealed
their state of activation and proliferation by NLGP. Depletion of CD8(+) T cells 
in mice at the time of NLGP treatment resulted in partial termination of tumor
regression. An expansion of CXCR3(+) and CCR5(+) T cells was observed in the TDLN
and tumor, along with their corresponding ligands. NLGP treatment enhances type 1
polarized T-bet expressing T cells with downregulation of GATA3. Treg cell
population was almost unchanged. However, T:Treg ratios significantly increased
with NLGP. Enhanced secretion/expression of IFN<U+03B3> was noted after NLGP therapy. In
vitro culture of T cells with IL-2 and sarcoma antigen resulted in significant
enhancement in cytotoxic efficacy. Consistently higher expression of CD107a was
also observed in CD8(+) T cells from tumors. Reinoculation of sarcoma cells in
tumor regressed NLGP-treated mice maintained tumor free status in majority. This 
is correlated with the increment of CD44(hi)CD62L(hi) central memory T cells.
Collectively, these findings support a paradigm in which NLGP dynamically
orchestrates the activation, expansion, and recruitment of CD8(+) T cells into
established tumors to operate significant tumor cell lysis.

PMCID: PMC3543399
PMID: 23326300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Aug;3(2):82-8. doi: 10.1159/000339639. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Duplication of the Miller-Dieker Critical Region in a Patient with a Subtelomeric
Unbalanced Translocation t(10;17)(p15.3;p13.3).

Ruiz Esparza-Garrido R(1), Velázquez-Wong AC, Araujo-Solís MA, Huicochea-Montiel 
JC, Velázquez-Flores MÁ, Salamanca-Gómez F, Arenas-Aranda DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Genética Humana (UIMGH), Hospital de
Pediatría, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS), Mexico City, Mexico.

Submicroscopic duplications in the Miller-Dieker critical region have been
recently described as new genomic disorders. To date, only a few cases have been 
reported with overlapping 17p13.3 duplications in this region. Also, small
deletions that affect chromosome region 10p14<U+2192>pter are rarely described in the
literature. In this study, we describe, to our knowledge for the first time, a
5-year-old female patient with intellectual disability who has an unbalanced
10;17 translocation inherited from the father. The girl was diagnosed by
subtelomeric FISH and array-CGH, showing a 4.43-Mb heterozygous deletion on
chromosome 10p that involved 14 genes and a 3.22-Mb single-copy gain on
chromosome 17p, which includes the critical region of the Miller-Dieker syndrome 
and 61 genes. The patient's karyotype was established as 46,XX.arr
10p15.3p15.1(138,206-4,574,436)x1,17p13.3(87,009-3,312,600)x3. Because our
patient exhibits a combination of 2 imbalances, she has phenotypic features of
both chromosome abnormalities, which have been reported separately.
Interestingly, the majority of patients who carry the deletion 10p have visual
and auditory deficiencies that are attributed to loss of the GATA3 gene. However,
our patient also presents severe hearing and visual problems even though GATA3 is
present, suggesting the involvement of different genes that affect the
development of the visual and auditory systems.

PMCID: PMC3542935
PMID: 23326253  [PubMed]


190. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Mar;10(2):228-40. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2012.12.002. Epub 2012
Dec 9.

All-trans retinoic acid and basic fibroblast growth factor synergistically direct
pluripotent human embryonic stem cells to extraembryonic lineages.

Jagtap S(1), Meganathan K, Wagh V, Natarajan K, Hescheler J, Sachinidis A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology,
Robert-Koch-Str. 39, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can be used to model the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that underlie embryonic development. Understanding the
cellular mechanisms and pathways involved in extraembryonic (ExE) differentiation
is of great interest because of the important role of this process in maternal
health and fertility. Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) is widely used to
maintain the self-renewal of hESCs and induced pluripotent stem cells, while all 
trans retinoic acid (RA) is used to facilitate the directed differentiation of
hESCs. Here, we monitored the RA induced differentiation of hESCs to the ExE
lineage with and without FGF-2 over a 7-day period via global transcriptional
profiling. The stemness markers POU5F1, NANOG and TDGF1 were markedly
downregulated, whereas an upregulation of the ExE markers KRT7, CGA, DDAH2 and
IGFBP3 was observed. Many of the differentially expressed genes were involved in 
WNT and TGF-ß signaling. RA inactivated WNT signaling even in the presence of
exogenous FGF-2, which that promotes the maintenance of the pluripotent state. We
also show that BMP4 was upregulated and that RA was able to modulate the TGF-ß
signaling pathway and direct hESCs toward the ExE lineage. In addition, an
epigenetic study revealed hypermethylation of the DDAH2, TDGF1 and GATA3 gene
promoters, suggesting a role for epigenetic regulation during ExE
differentiation. These data reveals that the effect of RA prevails in the
presence of exogenous FGF-2 thus resulting in the direction of hESCs toward the
ExE lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23314291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013 Mar;148(3):383-90. doi:
10.1177/0194599812472864. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

The effect of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine in a mouse model of allergic
rhinitis.

Shin JH(1), Kim BY, Park HR, Kim SW, Kim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine,
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine if pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine 
(PPV) could suppress allergic inflammation in an allergic rhinitis mouse model
and to explore whether differences exist regarding the effect of PPV according to
timing of administration.
STUDY DESIGN: In vivo study using an animal model.
SETTING: Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: BALB/c mice were divided into control, Der f, Pre-S, and
Post-S groups. The allergen was Dermatophagoides farinae (Der f). Pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine was administered before (Pre-S) or after (Post-S)
sensitization. Allergic symptoms and eosinophils in nasal mucosa, interferon-<U+03B3>,
interleukin (IL)-13, and IL-10 in nasal lavage fluid and serum Der f-specific IgE
were measured. T-bet, GATA-3, and Foxp3 mRNA in spleen were determined by
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Flow cytometry of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T
cells in spleen was analyzed.
RESULTS: In the Pre-S group, symptom score, serum Der f-specific IgE,
eosinophils, IL-13, and GATA-3 mRNA were decreased (P < .05), and IL-10, Foxp3
mRNA, and CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T cells were increased compared with those in Der
f group (P < .05). In the Post-S group, symptom score, serum Der f-specific IgE, 
and GATA-3 mRNA were decreased (P < .05), and Foxp3 mRNA and
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T cells were increased compared with those in the Der f
group (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that PPV administered before or after
sensitization suppresses Th2 response and enhanced induction of regulatory T
cells in an allergic rhinitis model. In addition, there was no significant
difference between the degrees of effects in these 2 conditions. In the future,
we can consider PPV to be a preventative agent for allergic rhinitis.

PMID: 23314157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Apr;43(4):918-28. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242944. Epub 2013 Feb
12.

Thpok-independent repression of Runx3 by Gata3 during CD4+ T-cell differentiation
in the thymus.

Xiong Y(1), Castro E, Yagi R, Zhu J, Lesourne R, Love PE, Feigenbaum L, Bosselut 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda 20892-4259, MD, USA.

CD4(+) helper T cells are essential for immune responses and differentiate in the
thymus from CD4(+) CD8(+) "double-positive" (DP) thymocytes. The transcription
factor Runx3 inhibits CD4(+) T-cell differentiation by repressing Cd4 gene
expression; accordingly, Runx3 is not expressed in DP thymocytes or developing
CD4(+) T cells. The transcription factor Thpok is upregulated in
CD4-differentiating thymocytes and required to repress Runx3. However, how Runx3 
is controlled at early stages of CD4(+) T-cell differentiation, before the onset 
of Thpok expression, remains unknown. Here we show that Gata3, a transcription
factor preferentially and transiently upregulated by CD4(+) T-cell precursors,
represses Runx3 and binds the Runx3 locus in vivo. Accordingly, we show that
high-level Gata3 expression and expression of Runx3 are mutually exclusive.
Furthermore, whereas Runx3 represses Cd4, we show that Gata3 promotes Cd4
expression in Thpok-deficient thymocytes. Thus, in addition to its previously
documented role in promoting CD4-lineage gene-expression, Gata3 represses
CD8-lineage gene expression. These findings identify Gata3 as a critical pivot of
CD4-CD8 lineage differentiation.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23310955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Reprod Sci. 2013 Jun;20(6):699-709. doi: 10.1177/1933719112466297. Epub 2013 Jan 
10.

Modulation of the expression of the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in
immortalized human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) by sex steroid hormones and 
cAMP.

Lu Y(1), Bocca S, Anderson S, Wang H, Manhua C, Beydoun H, Oehninger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Jones Institute for Reproductive 
Medicine, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.

T-bet and GATA-3 are known to regulate cytokine expression in T lymphocytes, and 
cytokines have been implicated in endometrial regulation and implantation.
Previous work showed that female steroid hormones modulate the expression of
T-bet in endometrial epithelial cells, suggesting a mechanism for local immune
regulation in the human endometrium. We hypothesized that stromal cells are
involved in immune regulation, as they have been shown to exert paracrine effects
on other endometrial cells and compartments and also secrete cytokines. The
objective of this study was to examine the modulation of the gene expression of
T-bet and GATA-3, and of the cytokines interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin 4
(IL-4), by female steroid hormones, in human endometrial stromal cells (HESC) in 
long-term cultures (30 days) mimicking the normal menstrual cycle. T-bet and
GATA-3 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was detected by real-time polymerase chain
reaction, and intracellular protein production was demonstrated by
immunoblotting. In addition, secretion of IL-4 and IL-15 was measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. T-bet and IL-4 mRNA expression increased and
GATA-3 decreased under decidualization conditions; IFN-<U+03B3> was not detected.
Secretion of IL-15 increased during decidualization, and IL-15 upregulated T-bet 
gene expression. In conclusion, gene expression of T-bet and GATA-3 by
endometrial stromal cells is under hormonal conditions mimicking decidualization,
and the results are consistent with an autocrine regulatory mechanism of IL-15
secretion and T-bet expression.

PMID: 23308012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1348-57. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Bivalent promoter marks and a latent enhancer may prime the leukaemia oncogene
LMO1 for ectopic expression in T-cell leukaemia.

Oram SH(1), Thoms J, Sive JI, Calero-Nieto FJ, Kinston SJ, Schütte J, Knezevic K,
Lock RB, Pimanda JE, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and
Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

LMO1 is a transcriptional regulator and a T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL)
oncogene. Although first identified in association with a chromosomal
translocation in T-ALL, the ectopic expression of LMO1 occurs far more frequently
in the absence of any known mutation involving its locus. Given that LMO1 is
barely expressed in any haematopoietic lineage, and activation of transcriptional
drivers in leukaemic cells is not well described, we investigated the regulation 
of this gene in normal haematopoietic and leukaemic cells. We show that LMO1 has 
two promoters that drive reporter gene expression in transgenic mice to neural
tissues known to express endogenous LMO1. The LMO1 promoters display bivalent
histone marks in multiple blood lineages including T-cells, and a 3' flanking
region at LMO1 +57 contains a transcriptional enhancer that is active in
developing blood cells in transgenic mouse embryos. The LMO1 promoters become
activated in T-ALL together with the 3' enhancer, which is bound in primary T-ALL
cells by SCL/TAL1 and GATA3. Taken together, our results show that LMO1 is poised
for expression in normal progenitors, where activation of SCL/TAL1 together with 
a breakdown of epigenetic repression of LMO1 regulatory elements induces ectopic 
LMO1 expression that contributes to the development and maintenance of T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3677138
PMID: 23302769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e51268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051268. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Neutralization of TSLP inhibits airway remodeling in a murine model of allergic
asthma induced by chronic exposure to house dust mite.

Chen ZG(1), Zhang TT, Li HT, Chen FH, Zou XL, Ji JZ, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Institute of Respiratory Diseases of Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

Chronic allergic asthma is characterized by Th2-typed inflammation, and
contributes to airway remodeling and the deterioration of lung function. However,
the initiating factor that links airway inflammation to remodeling is unknown.
Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), an epithelium-derived cytokine, can strongly
activate lung dendritic cells (DCs) through the TSLP-TSLPR and OX40L-OX40
signaling pathways to promote Th2 differentiation. To determine whether TSLP is
the underlying trigger of airway remodeling in chronic allergen-induced asthma,
we induced allergic airway inflammation in mice by intranasal administration of
house dust mite (HDM) extracts for up to 5 consecutive weeks. We showed that
repeated respiratory exposure to HDM caused significant airway eosinophilic
inflammation, peribronchial collagen deposition, goblet cell hyperplasia, and
airway hyperreactivity (AHR) to methacholine. These effects were accompanied with
a salient Th2 response that was characterized by the upregulation of Th2-typed
cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-13, as well as the transcription factor GATA-3.
Moreover, the levels of TSLP and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-ß1) were 
also increased in the airway. We further demonstrated, using the chronic
HDM-induced asthma model, that the inhibition of Th2 responses via neutralization
of TSLP with an anti-TSLP mAb reversed airway inflammation, prevented structural 
alterations, and decreased AHR to methacholine and TGF-ß1 level. These results
suggest that TSLP plays a pivotal role in the initiation and persistence of
airway inflammation and remodeling in the context of chronic allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC3534685
PMID: 23300949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e53498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053498. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Slug controls stem/progenitor cell growth dynamics during mammary gland
morphogenesis.

Nassour M(1), Idoux-Gillet Y, Selmi A, Côme C, Faraldo ML, Deugnier MA, Savagner 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U896, Université Montpellier, Centre Régional
de Lutte contre le Cancer Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Morphogenesis results from the coordination of distinct cell
signaling pathways controlling migration, differentiation, apoptosis, and
proliferation, along stem/progenitor cell dynamics. To decipher this puzzle, we
focused on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) "master genes". EMT has
emerged as a unifying concept, involving cell-cell adhesion, migration and
apoptotic pathways. EMT also appears to mingle with stemness. However, very
little is known on the physiological role and relevance of EMT master-genes. We
addressed this question during mammary morphogenesis. Recently, a link between
Slug/Snai2 and stemness has been described in mammary epithelial cells, but EMT
master genes actual localization, role and targets during mammary gland
morphogenesis are not known and we focused on this basic question.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a Slug-lacZ transgenic model and
immunolocalization, we located Slug in a distinct subpopulation covering about
10-20% basal cap and duct cells, mostly cycling cells, coexpressed with basal
markers P-cadherin, CK5 and CD49f. During puberty, Slug-deficient mammary
epithelium exhibited a delayed development after transplantation, contained less 
cycling cells, and overexpressed CK8/18, ER, GATA3 and BMI1 genes, linked to
luminal lineage. Other EMT master genes were overexpressed, suggesting
compensation mechanisms. Gain/loss-of-function in vitro experiments confirmed
Slug control of mammary epithelial cell luminal differentiation and
proliferation. In addition, they showed that Slug enhances specifically clonal
mammosphere emergence and growth, cell motility, and represses apoptosis.
Strikingly, Slug-deprived mammary epithelial cells lost their potential to
generate secondary clonal mammospheres.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that Slug pathway controls the growth
dynamics of a subpopulation of cycling progenitor basal cells during mammary
morphogenesis. Overall, our data better define a key mechanism coordinating cell 
lineage dynamics and morphogenesis, and provide physiological relevance to
broadening EMT pathways.

PMCID: PMC3531397
PMID: 23300933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Blood. 2013 Feb 28;121(9):1534-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-449447. Epub 2013
Jan 7.

E2A transcription factors limit expression of Gata3 to facilitate T lymphocyte
lineage commitment.

Xu W(1), Carr T, Ramirez K, McGregor S, Sigvardsson M, Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Committees on Cancer Biology and. Immunology, Department of Pathology, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The E2A transcription factors promote the development of thymus-seeding cells,
but it remains unknown whether these proteins play a role in T lymphocyte lineage
specification or commitment. Here, we showed that E2A proteins were required to
promote T-lymphocyte commitment from DN2 thymocytes and to extinguish their
potential for alternative fates. E2A proteins functioned in DN2 cells to limit
expression of Gata3, which encodes an essential T-lymphocyte transcription factor
whose ectopic expression can arrest T-cell differentiation. Genetic, or small
interfering RNA-mediated, reduction of Gata3 rescued T-cell differentiation in
the absence of E2A and restricted the development of alternative lineages by
limiting the expanded self-renewal potential in E2A-/- DN2 cells. Our data
support a novel paradigm in lymphocyte lineage commitment in which the E2A
proteins are necessary to limit the expression of an essential lineage
specification and commitment factor to restrain self-renewal and to prevent an
arrest in differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3587319
PMID: 23297135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1056-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202386. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Transcription factors GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t are important for determining the
phenotype of allergic airway inflammation in a murine model of asthma.

Ano S(1), Morishima Y, Ishii Y, Yoh K, Yageta Y, Ohtsuka S, Matsuyama M,
Kawaguchi M, Takahashi S, Hizawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Medicine, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

In refractory asthma, neutrophils, rather than eosinophils, often predominate in 
the airways. Neutrophilic airway inflammation appears to be resistant to steroids
and may be related to the Th17, rather than the Th2, cytokine milieu. However,
the role of GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t, transcription factors for Th2 and Th17 cell
differentiation, respectively, in the pathogenesis of steroid-insensitive asthma 
remains unclear. To examine the effect of GATA-3- and ROR<U+03B3>t-overexpression
backgrounds on airway inflammation and steroid sensitivity, we generated two
strains of transgenic mice overexpressing GATA-3 or ROR<U+03B3>t. Mice were sensitized
and challenged with OVA. Some OVA-sensitized/challenged mice were treated with
dexamethasone, anti-IL-17 Ab, CXCR2 antagonist, or anti-IL-6R Ab to demonstrate
their therapeutic effects on airway inflammation. Although Ag-specific airway
inflammation and hyperresponsiveness were induced in each mouse, the phenotype of
inflammation showed a distinct difference that was dependent upon the genotype.
GATA-3-overexpressing mice exhibited steroid-sensitive eosinophilic inflammation 
with goblet cell hyperplasia and mucus hyperproduction under Th2-biased
conditions, and ROR<U+03B3>t-overexpressing mice developed steroid-insensitive
neutrophilic inflammation under Th17-biased conditions. The levels of
keratinocyte-derived chemokine, MIP-2, IL-6, and other neutrophil
chemotaxis-related mediators were significantly elevated in OVA-exposed
ROR<U+03B3>t-overexpressing mice compared with wild-type mice. Interestingly, airway
hyperresponsiveness accompanied by neutrophilic airway inflammation in
ROR<U+03B3>t-overexpressing mice was effectively suppressed by anti-IL-17 Ab, CXCR2
antagonist, or anti-IL-6R Ab administration. In conclusion, our results suggest
that the expression levels of GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t may be important for determining
the phenotype of asthmatic airway inflammation. Furthermore, blockade of the
Th17-signaling pathway may be a treatment option for steroid-insensitive asthma.

PMID: 23293351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Intern Med. 2013;52(1):161-2. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

Intracranial calcification in a patient with HDR syndrome and a GATA3 mutation.

Hayashi Y(1), Suwa T, Inuzuka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan. hayashiy@gifu-u.ac.jp

PMID: 23291697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2013 Mar 7;121(10):1749-59. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-440065. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

GATA-3 promotes T-cell specification by repressing B-cell potential in pro-T
cells in mice.

García-Ojeda ME(1), Klein Wolterink RG, Lemaître F, Richard-Le Goff O, Hasan M,
Hendriks RW, Cumano A, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Mar 7;121(10):1673-4.

Transcription factors orchestrate T-lineage differentiation in the thymus. One
critical checkpoint involves Notch1 signaling that instructs T-cell commitment at
the expense of the B-lineage program. While GATA-3 is required for T-cell
specification, its mechanism of action is poorly understood. We show that GATA-3 
works in concert with Notch1 to commit thymic progenitors to the T-cell lineage
via 2 distinct pathways. First, GATA-3 orchestrates a transcriptional
repertoire that is required for thymocyte maturation up to and beyond the
pro-T-cell stage. Second, GATA-3 critically suppresses a latent B-cell potential 
in proT cells. As such, GATA-3 is essential to sealing in Notch-induced T-cell
fate in early thymocyte precursors by promoting T-cell identity through the
repression of alternative developmental options.

PMID: 23287858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51301. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051301. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

HSD3B and gene-gene interactions in a pathway-based analysis of genetic
susceptibility to bladder cancer.

Andrew AS(1), Hu T, Gu J, Gui J, Ye Y, Marsit CJ, Kelsey KT, Schned AR, Tanyos
SA, Pendleton EM, Mason RA, Morlock EV, Zens MS, Li Z, Moore JH, Wu X, Karagas
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, 
New Hampshire, United States of America.

Bladder cancer is the 4(th) most common cancer among men in the U.S. We analyzed 
variant genotypes hypothesized to modify major biological processes involved in
bladder carcinogenesis, including hormone regulation, apoptosis, DNA repair,
immune surveillance, metabolism, proliferation, and telomere maintenance.
Logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between genetic variation
affecting these processes and susceptibility in 563 genotyped urothelial cell
carcinoma cases and 863 controls enrolled in a case-control study of incident
bladder cancer conducted in New Hampshire, U.S. We evaluated gene-gene
interactions using Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) and Statistical
Epistasis Network analysis. The 3'UTR flanking variant form of the hormone
regulation gene HSD3B2 was associated with increased bladder cancer risk in the
New Hampshire population (adjusted OR 1.85 95%CI 1.31-2.62). This finding was
successfully replicated in the Texas Bladder Cancer Study with 957 controls, 497 
cases (adjusted OR 3.66 95%CI 1.06-12.63). The effect of this prevalent SNP was
stronger among males (OR 2.13 95%CI 1.40-3.25) than females (OR 1.56 95%CI
0.83-2.95), (SNP-gender interaction P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.048). We also identified a SNP-SNP
interaction between T-cell activation related genes GATA3 and CD81 (interaction
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0003). The fact that bladder cancer incidence is 3-4 times higher in males 
suggests the involvement of hormone levels. This biologic process-based analysis 
suggests candidate susceptibility markers and supports the theory that disrupted 
hormone regulation plays a role in bladder carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3526593
PMID: 23284679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Br J Dermatol. 2013 May;168(5):990-8. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12175.

Ustekinumab improves psoriasis-related gene expression in noninvolved psoriatic
skin without inhibition of the antimicrobial response.

Baerveldt EM(1), Onderdijk AJ, Kurek D, Kant M, Florencia EF, Ijpma AS, van der
Spek PJ, Bastiaans J, Jansen PA, van Kilsdonk JW, Laman JD, Prens EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, PO Box 2040,
3000 CA, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. e.baerveldt@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Ustekinumab is a fully human anti-p40 monoclonal antibody which
neutralizes interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23, thereby interfering with T-helper
(Th)1/Th17 pathways and keratinocyte activation, and is highly effective in the
treatment of psoriasis. During ustekinumab treatment, some of our patients
noticed reduced koebnerization of noninvolved skin and less new plaque formation.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether ustekinumab improves psoriasis-related gene
expression and tape-strip responses in noninvolved skin.
METHODS: Before and 4 weeks after ustekinumab treatment, noninvolved skin was
tape-stripped. After 5 h, biopsies were taken from untouched and tape-stripped
skin. The mRNA expression of psoriasis-related markers such as NGF, GATA3 and
IL-22RA1, and several antimicrobial peptides (AMP) was quantified. Leucocyte
counts and a broad range of inflammatory serum proteins were analysed to gain
insight into the systemic alterations.
RESULTS: Four weeks following a single ustekinumab injection, NGF showed a
significant decrease, whereas GATA3 and IL-22RA1 expression increased, indicative
of reduced responsiveness to epidermal triggering. This was accompanied by an
increase of the inflammation-related serum proteins GPNMB, MST1 and TRADD. The
baseline and tape-strip-induced mRNA expression of the AMP human ß-defensin-2
(hBD-2), S100A7 and LL-37 remained unaltered. Clinically, after 4 weeks, eight
out of 11 patients showed a 50% psoriasis area and severity index (PASI)
improvement, which was accompanied by a significant reduction in serum hBD-2
levels. No changes were noted in total leucocytes, C-reactive protein and
erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that ustekinumab reduces psoriasis-related
gene expression in noninvolved psoriatic skin, making it more resistant to
exogenous triggering, without disturbing its antimicrobial response. In parallel,
ustekinumab modulates important circulating inflammation-related proteins.

© 2013 The Authors. BJD © 2013 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 23278632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Mar;131(3):805-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.10.060. 
Epub 2012 Dec 28.

The natural history of milk allergy in an observational cohort.

Wood RA(1), Sicherer SH, Vickery BP, Jones SM, Liu AH, Fleischer DM, Henning AK, 
Mayer L, Burks AW, Grishin A, Stablein D, Sampson HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Md., USA. rwood@jhmi.edu

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Mar;131(3):813-4.

OBJECTIVE: There are few studies on the natural history of milk allergy. Most are
single-site and not longitudinal, and these have not identified a means for early
prediction of outcomes.
METHODS: Children aged 3 to 15 months were enrolled in an observational study
with either (1) a convincing history of egg allergy, milk allergy, or both with a
positive skin prick test (SPT) response to the trigger food and/or (2)
moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis (AD) and a positive SPT response to milk or 
egg. Children enrolled with a clinical history of milk allergy were followed
longitudinally, and resolution was established by means of successful ingestion.
RESULTS: The cohort consists of 293 children, of whom 244 were given a diagnosis 
of milk allergy at baseline. Milk allergy has resolved in 154 (52.6%) subjects at
a median age of 63 months and a median age at last follow-up of 66 months.
Baseline characteristics that were most predictive of resolution included
milk-specific IgE level, milk SPT wheal size, and AD severity (all P < .001).
Baseline milk-specific IgG4 level and milk IgE/IgG4 ratio were not predictive of 
resolution and neither was expression of cytokine-inducible SH2-containing
protein, forkhead box protein 3, GATA3, IL-10, IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3>, or T-bet by using
real-time PCR in CD25-selected, casein-stimulated mononuclear cells. A calculator
to estimate resolution probabilities using baseline milk IgE level, SPT response,
and AD severity was devised for use in the clinical setting.
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of infants with milk allergy, approximately one half 
had resolved over 66 months of follow-up. Baseline milk-specific IgE level, SPT
wheal size, and AD severity were all important predictors of the likelihood of
resolution.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3691063
PMID: 23273958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jun;44(6):1065-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.09.010. Epub 2012
Dec 23.

GATA-3 expression in male and female breast cancers: comparison of
clinicopathologic parameters and prognostic relevance.

Gonzalez RS(1), Wang J, Kraus T, Sullivan H, Adams AL, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Expression of GATA-3 in female breast cancers has been linked to estrogen
receptor (ER) expression and, in turn, to improved outcomes. However, GATA-3 has 
not been studied in male breast cancers. Nineteen male breast carcinomas (average
age: 63 years) and 164 female breast carcinomas (average age: 57 years) were
immunostained for GATA-3. Results were compared to age, tumor size, tumor grade, 
lymph node status, distant metastases, survival, and positivity for ER,
progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2/neu. Six of 19 (31.6%) male and 135 of 164
(82.3%) female breast carcinomas were GATA-3 positive (P < .001). In women, 82.1%
of GATA-3-positive cancers were grade 1 or 2, whereas 75.9% of GATA-3-negative
cancers were grade 3 (P < .001); no such significant correlation was seen in men.
Unlike female cancers, male cancers showed no correlation between GATA-3
positivity and ER positivity, PR positivity, or distant metastases. Nodal
metastasis and HER2 status were not linked to GATA-3 in either sex. Seventeen
(89.5%) men were alive at follow-up (average: 61 months); only 1 died of disease.
Most women (159/164, 97.0%) were also alive at follow-up (average: 41 months),
with a higher proportion of GATA-3-negative women dead than GATA-3-positive women
(3/29 [10.3%] vs. 2/135 [1.5%], P = .039). GATA-3 is expressed less often in male
than female breast cancers. Male cancers show no correlation between GATA-3
positivity and ER/PR positivity or distant metastases, unlike female cancers.
There appears to be no link between GATA-3 positivity and survival in men,
whereas in women, GATA-3-positive tumors are typically lower grade with a better 
prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Apr;26(2):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.12.005. Epub 
2012 Dec 20.

Toxicity profile of the GATA-3-specific DNAzyme hgd40 after inhalation exposure.

Fuhst R(1), Runge F, Buschmann J, Ernst H, Praechter C, Hansen T, von Erichsen J,
Turowska A, Hoymann HG, Müller M, Pohlmann G, Sewald K, Ziemann C, Schlüter G,
Garn H.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (ITEM),
Hannover, Germany.

DNAzymes are single-stranded catalytic DNA molecules that bind and cleave
specific sequences in a target mRNA molecule. Their potential as novel
therapeutic agents has been demonstrated in a variety of disease models. However,
no studies have yet addressed their toxicology and safety pharmacology profiles
in detail. Here we describe a detailed toxicological analysis of inhaled hgd40, a
GATA-3-specific DNAzyme designed for the treatment of allergic bronchial asthma. 
Subacute toxicity, immunotoxicity, and respiratory, cardiovascular, and CNS
safety pharmacology were analyzed in rodents and non-rodents, and genotoxicity
was assessed in human peripheral blood. Overall, hgd40 was very well tolerated
when delivered by aerosol inhalation or slow intravenous infusion. Only marginal 
reversible histopathological changes were observed in the lungs of rats receiving
the highest dose of inhaled hgd40. The changes consisted of slight mononuclear
cell infiltration and alveolar histiocytosis, and moderate hyperplasia of
bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue. No local or systemic adverse effects were
observed in dogs. No compound-related respiratory, cardiovascular, or CNS adverse
events were observed. The only relevant immunological findings were very slight
dose-dependent changes in interleukin-10 and interferon-<U+03B3> levels in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Taken together, these results support direct
delivery of a DNAzyme via inhalation for the treatment of respiratory disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(2):151-8. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Changes in the expression patterns of the genes involved in the segregation and
function of inner cell mass and trophectoderm lineages during porcine
preimplantation development.

Fujii T(1), Sakurai N, Osaki T, Iwagami G, Hirayama H, Minamihashi A, Hashizume
T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

In mouse embryos, segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE)
lineages is regulated by genes, such as OCT-4, CDX2 and TEAD4. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the segregation of the ICM and TE lineages in 
porcine embryos remain unknown. To obtain insights regarding the segregation of
the ICM and TE lineages in porcine embryos, we examined the mRNA expression
patterns of candidate genes, OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc
and FGFR2-IIIc, in blastocyst and elongated stage embryos. In blastocyst embryos,
the expression levels of OCT-4, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were significantly higher in 
the ICM than in the TE, while the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels did not differ
between the ICM and TE. The expression ratio of CDX2 to OCT-4 (CDX2/OCT-4) also
did not differ between the ICM and TE at the blastocyst stage. In elongated
embryos, OCT-4, NANOG, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were abundantly expressed in the
embryo disc (ED; ICM lineage), but their expression levels were very low in the
TE. In contrast, the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels were significantly higher in
the TE than in the ED. In addition, the CDX2/OCT-4 ratio was markedly higher in
the TE than in the ED. We demonstrated that differences in the expression levels 
of OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc and FGFR2-IIIc genes
between ICM and TE lineages cells become more clear during development from
porcine blastocyst to elongated embryos, which indicates the possibility that in 
porcine embryos, functions of ICM and TE lineage cells depend on these gene
expressions proceed as transition from blastocyst to elongated stage.

PMCID: PMC3934199
PMID: 23257836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 2;110(1):276-81. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1214682110.
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Transcription factor YY1 is essential for regulation of the Th2 cytokine locus
and for Th2 cell differentiation.

Hwang SS(1), Kim YU, Lee S, Jang SW, Kim MK, Koh BH, Lee W, Kim J, Souabni A,
Busslinger M, Lee GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea 121-742.

The Th2 locus control region (LCR) has been shown to be important in efficient
and coordinated cytokine gene regulation during Th2 cell differentiation.
However, the molecular mechanism for this is poorly understood. To study the
molecular mechanism of the Th2 LCR, we searched for proteins binding to it. We
discovered that transcription factor YY1 bound to the LCR and the entire Th2
cytokine locus in a Th2-specific manner. Retroviral overexpression of YY1 induced
Th2 cytokine expression. CD4-specific knockdown of YY1 in mice caused marked
reduction in Th2 cytokine expression, repressed chromatin remodeling, decreased
intrachromosomal interactions, and resistance in an animal model of asthma. YY1
physically associated with GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA3) and is required for
GATA3 binding to the locus. YY1 bound to the regulatory elements in the locus
before GATA3 binding. Thus, YY1 cooperates with GATA3 and is required for
regulation of the Th2 cytokine locus and Th2 cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3538243
PMID: 23248301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:949821. doi: 10.1155/2012/949821. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Downregulation of Hlx closely related to the decreased expressions of T-bet and
Runx3 in patients with gastric cancer may be associated with a pathological event
leading to the imbalance of Th1/Th2.

Xu Y(1), Gao J, Su Z, Dai X, Li Y, Liu Y, Chen J, Tong J, Zhang Y, Wu C, Zheng D,
Wang S, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212013, China.

T-bet plays an important role in immunoregulation; it induces the differentiation
of Th1 together with the homeobox transcription factor gene Hlx. Recent studies
show that T-bet and Th1-associated factors are critical in regulating tumor
development. However, the contributions of Hlx in the occurrence and development 
of cancer remain unknown. In this study, the Hlx, T-bet, Runx3, and IFN-<U+03B3> were
measured in PBMC from patients with gastric cancer and the correlation between
Hlx and T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3> was assessed. The expression levels of Hlx, T-bet, and
IFN-<U+03B3> were significantly decreased, and there was a positive correlation between 
Hlx and T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3>. In addition, the Runx3 expression was also downregulated 
with the lower T-bet mRNA level. These results suggested that the decreased Hlx
expression was closely associated with T-bet and Runx3 downregulations and may
contribute to the development of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3514004
PMID: 23243425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1123-4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.11.009.

A universal program for tissue regeneration?

Strähle U(1), Schmidt R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Postfach 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. uwe.straehle@kit.edu

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1230-7.

Reporting in this issue of Developmental Cell, Kizil et al. (2012) identify the
transcription factor Gata3 as an important player in regeneration of the
zebrafish adult telencephalon. Other injured tissues like the heart and the fin
also upregulate Gata3 in response to injury, suggesting that Gata3 is a general
response to tissue damage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23237947  [PubMed]


210. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1268. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2260.

T-bet and GATA3 orchestrate Th1 and Th2 differentiation through lineage-specific 
targeting of distal regulatory elements.

Kanhere A(1), Hertweck A, Bhatia U, Gökmen MR, Perucha E, Jackson I, Lord GM,
Jenner RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity and UCL Cancer Institute, University
College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

T-bet and GATA3 regulate the CD4+ T cell Th1/Th2 cell fate decision but little is
known about the interplay between these factors outside of the murine Ifng and
Il4/Il5/Il13 loci. Here we show that T-bet and GATA3 bind to multiple distal
sites at immune regulatory genes in human effector T cells. These sites display
markers of functional elements, act as enhancers in reporter assays and are
associated with a requirement for T-bet and GATA3. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that both factors bind distal sites at Tbx21 and that T-bet directly activates
its own expression. We also show that in Th1 cells, GATA3 is distributed away
from Th2 genes, instead occupying T-bet binding sites at Th1 genes, and that
T-bet is sufficient to induce GATA3 binding at these sites. We propose these
aspects of T-bet and GATA3 function are important for Th1/Th2 differentiation and
for understanding transcription factor interactions in other T cell lineage
decisions.

PMCID: PMC3535338
PMID: 23232398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 1;190(1):428-37. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201361. Epub 2012 Dec
5.

GATA-3 regulates the homeostasis and activation of CD8+ T cells.

Tai TS(1), Pai SY, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA-3, a C2C2-type zinc finger transcription factor, regulates many steps of T
cell development and differentiation. It is also required for optimal production 
of type 2 cytokines by CD8(+) T cells. However, its role in the development and
function of this subset of T cells is still poorly characterized. In this paper, 
we report that GATA-3 is required for MHC-mediated positive selection and final
maturation of CD8 single-positive thymocytes. Deficiency of GATA-3 mediated by a 
CD4cre transgene led to age-dependent lymphadenopathy partly because of abnormal 
expansion of CD8(+) T cells driven by a cell-extrinsic mechanism. Paradoxically, 
GATA-3-deficient CD8(+) T cells were hyporesponsive to Ag stimulation due to a
defect in the maintenance/progression, but not initiation, of activation signals.
More importantly, GATA-3-deficient CD8(+) T cells were less efficient in killing 
Ag-bearing tumor cells in vivo. Taken together, our data further expand the role 
of GATA-3 in T cells.

PMCID: PMC3529853
PMID: 23225883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):210-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.028. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

Gata3 directly regulates early inner ear expression of Fgf10.

Economou A(1), Datta P, Georgiadis V, Cadot S, Frenz D, Maconochie M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QG, UK.
a.economou@sussex.ac.uk

The analysis of Fgf10 mouse mutants has demonstrated a critical role for this
ligand in neurosensory development of the vertebrate inner ear, and we have been 
looking to define the direct upstream regulators of Fgf10 in this sensory organ, 
as part of constructing the programme of early inner ear development. Through the
analysis of reporter constructs in transgenic mouse embryos and neonatal mice, in
this report we define a minimal 1400 bp enhancer from the 5' flanking region of
Fgf10. This enhancer drives reporter transgene expression in a manner that
recapitulates endogenous expression of Fgf10, from its initial onset in the
invaginating otic placode and onwards throughout gestation, controlling Fgf10
expression in all developing sensory patches and in the developing VIIIth
ganglion. This regulatory region includes three putative Gata3 binding sites that
we demonstrate directly interacts with Gata3 protein through the DNA binding
domain with differing affinities. Site directed mutagenesis of all three sites
and functional testing in transgenic embryos using reporter transgenes reveals an
absolute requirement for Gata3 in controlling Fgf10 expression. Transgenic
analysis of individual Gata3 binding site mutations illustrates that only one of 
these binding sites is necessary for reporter expression. Together these data
demonstrate that Gata3 directly activates Fgf10 in the early inner ear, and does 
so through a single binding site.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23220102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Klin Padiatr. 2012 Nov;224(7):452-4. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1329947. Epub 2012 Nov
30.

HDR syndrome: a follow-up genotype-phenotype analysis of a de novo missense
Thr272Ile mutation in exon 4 of GATA3.

Gomes TS(1), Gortner L, Dockter G, Leitner D, Thakker RV, Rohrer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, University Children's Hospital of
the Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany. thushari.gomes@uks.eu

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome
(MIM 146255) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the
gene encoding GATA3, a dual zinc-finger transcription factor involved in
vertebrate embryonic development. In this clinical case study we report on a
follow-up of a phenotype associated with a GATA3 mutation. HDR syndrome was
clinically diagnosed at age of 1.5 years in a boy with a de novo heterozygous
missense (c.815C<U+2192>T) mutation, Thr272Ile, in exon 4 of the GATA3 gene. Both
parents were negative for Thr272Ile.At age of 17 months, the patient had a weight
of 10.7, a body length of 78<U+2009>cm, and a head circumference of 47.5<U+2009>cm. By the age 
of 7 years, growth is age-appropriate, severe bilateral hearing loss (dB 60) was 
corrected by hearing aids. However, cognitive development (auditory sensory
me-mory and language abilities) is at the lower ends of the test scores.In
conclusion, a mildly impaired clinical course was achieved by the age of 7 years 
in a patient with HDR syndrome; this report adds to the body of data on
genotype-phenotype analysis in HDR syndrome. ·

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23203342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Feb 15;701(1-3):131-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.11.033. 
Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Ursolic acid, a potential PPAR<U+03B3> agonist, suppresses ovalbumin-induced airway
inflammation and Penh by down-regulating IL-5, IL-13, and IL-17 in a mouse model 
of allergic asthma.

Kim SH(1), Hong JH, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine & Bioscience, Daejeon University, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea.

Allergic asthma is a chronic airway disorder characterized by airway
hyperresponsiveness to allergens, chronic airway inflammation, airway edema,
increased mucus secretion, excess production of Th2 cytokines, and eosinophil
accumulation in the lungs. Ursolic acid is known for its pharmacological effects,
such as its anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial activities. To
investigate the anti-asthmatic effects and mechanism of ursolic acid, we studied 
the development of pulmonary eosinophilic inflammation and enhanced pause (Penh) 
in a mouse model of allergic asthma. In this study, BALB/c mice were systemically
sensitized to ovalbumin followed by intratracheal, intraperitoneal, and aerosol
allergen challenges. We investigated the effect of ursolic acid and Cyclosporin A
(CsA) on Penh, pulmonary eosinophilic infiltration, various immune cell
phenotypes, Th2 cytokines, IL-17 production, and ovalbumin specific IgE
production in a mouse model of asthma. In BALB/c mice, ursolic acid had
suppressed eosinophil infiltration, allergic airway inflammation, and Penh, which
occurred by suppressing the production of IL-5, IL-13, IL-17, and
ovalbumin-specific IgE by blocking the GATA-3 and STAT6 pathways. Our data
suggest the therapeutic mechanism of ursolic acid in asthma is based on
reductions of Th2 cytokines (IL-5 and IL-13), ovalbumin-specific IgE production, 
and eosinophil infiltration via the Th2-GATA-3, STAT6, and IL-17-NF-<U+03BA>B pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Resuscitation. 2013 Jun;84(6):848-53. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2012.11.023.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Expression imbalance of transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet in
post-resuscitation myocardial immune dysfunction in a porcine model of cardiac
arrest.

Gu W(1), Li CS, Yin WP, Hou XM, Zhang J, Zhang D, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated whether an imbalance in Th1/Th2 cells is
involved in the post-resuscitation myocardial immune dysfunction.
METHODS: 26 Wuzhishan miniature pigs were randomly divided into return of
spontaneous circulation (ROSC) group (n=20) and sham-operated group (n=6), 20
pigs were subjected to 8min of electrically induced cardiac arrest, After
successful ROSC, the 16 surviving pigs were randomly assigned to be sacrificed
(n=8 per group) at 12 and 24h after ROSC, respectively. CD4(+) and CD8(+)
lymphocyte subsets were determined by flow cytometry, interleukin (IL)-4 and
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> in the myocardium were measured by ELISA, and protein and mRNA
levels of GATA-3 and T-bet were detected in the myocardium by Western blotting
and quantitative real-time PCR in the post-ROSC group (n=8 per group) at 12 and
24h after ROSC and sham-operated group (n=6) at 24h after ROSC, respectively.
RESULTS: CD4(+) lymphocyte subsets were significantly lower in the post-ROSC
group compared with the sham-operated group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC.
The levels of myocardium IFN-<U+03B3> were markedly increased, while IL-4 was
significantly decreased in the post-ROSC group compared with the sham-operated
group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC. Protein expression and mRNA levels of
T-bet were markedly increased in the myocardium of pigs in the post-ROSC group
compared with the sham-operated group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC, while
GATA-3 was significantly reduced (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The myocardial immune dysfunction induced by the change in expression
levels of the transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet may be involved in the
process of post-resuscitation myocardial injury in a porcine model of cardiac
arrest.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Respir Med. 2013 Mar;107(3):368-79. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.11.003. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

The role of SCCA1 in asthma related physiological events in the airway epithelium
and the effect of promoter variants on asthma and gene function.

Karaaslan C(1), Birben E, Keskin O, Sahiner U, Sackesen C, Kalayci O.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, 06800 Ankara,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Even though the systemic level of SCCA1, a serine protease inhibitor,
was shown to be elevated in asthma, its physiological role is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the effect of SCCA1 on apoptosis, cytokine
expression and mucus production by A549 cells and define the effect of promoter
variants on gene expression and association with asthma.
METHODS: SCCA levels were measured by ELISA. Promoter variants were determined by
direct sequencing. 442 asthmatic children and 191 controls were genotyped by
RFLP. The functional effect of the polymorphisms was assessed in transient
transfection experiments using reporter constructs. A transcription factor ELISA 
was used for differential binding of GATA proteins to the variant region. The
effects of SCCA1 on cytokine synthesis, mucus production and apoptosis were
determined in A549 cells transfected with SCCA1 pcDNA vector. MUC5AC expression
in A549 cells was determined with RT-PCR.
RESULTS: SCCA1 protein level was significantly higher in asthmatic children
compared to healthy controls. Four polymorphisms SCCA1 promoter that were in
linkage disequilibrium were associated with skin test positivity in asthmatic
children and showed higher promoter activity and higher binding of GATA-2 and
GATA-3 after IL-4 + IL-13 stimulation. IL-6, IL-8 levels were significantly
higher in cells transfected with SCCA1 whereas RANTES increased only after IL-4
stimulation. Transfection of A549 cells with SCCA1 resulted in decreased MUC5AC
expression and conferred protection against apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that SCCA1 has diverse effects on many of the
cellular events that characterize asthma and its role extends beyond protease
inhibition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2012 Dec;12(1):377-90. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2012-0025.

Co-expression of genes with estrogen receptor-a and progesterone receptor in
human breast carcinoma tissue.

Andres SA, Wittliff JL.

Abstract Background: To detect genes associated with the expression of ESR1 and
PGR - as well as of their protein products, estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) - 221 de-identified invasive ductal carcinomas of the 
breast were investigated. Our long-term goal is to decipher relationships between
the expression of ER- and PR-associated genes and breast cancer behavior to
improve diagnostics and identify new molecular targets for drug design.MATERIALS 
AND METHODS: Frozen tissue sections were evaluated for structural integrity and
pathology after hematoxylin and eosin staining. ER and PR protein levels were
quantified by either enzyme immunoassay or radio-ligand binding assay. Total RNA 
preparations were reverse transcribed for qPCR measurements of ESR1, PGR and 31
gene candidates.
RESULTS: Both ESR1 and PGR expression levels were correlated with their cognate
receptor protein expression (Pearson correlations of 0.82 and 0.68, p<0.001,
respectively), to assess molecular relationships between clinically relevant
biomarkers in tissue specimens. Coordinate expression of EVL, NAT1, TBC1D9,
SCUBE2, RABEP1, SLC39A6, TCEAL1, FUT8, XBP1, PTP4A2 or GATA3 with either ESR1 or 
PGR was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Examination of relationships between ESR1 and PGR gene expression
and that of other genes of interest indicated: a high degree of correlation
between ESR1 levels and expression of NAT1, SCUBE2, XBP1 and GATA3; and a high
degree of correlation between PGR expression and that of NAT1, ESR1, SCUBE2 and
RABEP1. These results suggest that direct relationships of these genes exist with
estrogen and progestin receptor mediated pathways. Pathway analysis software
provided additional evidence of gene interactions.

PMID: 25436697  [PubMed]


218. Endocr Pract. 2013 Jan-Feb;19(1):e17-20. doi: 10.4158/EP12186.CR.

A novel GATA3 nonsense mutation in a newly diagnosed adult patient of
hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome.

Nanba K(1), Usui T, Nakamura M, Toyota Y, Hirota K, Tamanaha T, Kawashima ST,
Nakao K, Yuno A, Tagami T, Naruse M, Shimatsu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Hospital Organization
Kyoto Medical Center, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome is an
autosomal dominant disorder caused by a GATA3 gene mutation. Here we report a
novel mutation of GATA3 in a patient diagnosed with HDR syndrome at the age of 58
with extensive intracranial calcification.
METHODS: A 58-year-old Japanese man showed severe hypocalcemia and marked
calcification in the basal ganglia, cerebellum, deep white matter, and gray-white
junction on computed tomography (CT). The serum intact parathyroid hormone level 
was relatively low against low serum calcium concentration. The patient had been 
diagnosed with bilateral sensorineural deafness in childhood and had a family
history of hearing disorders. Imaging studies revealed no renal anomalies. The
patient was diagnosed with HDR syndrome, and genetic testing was performed.
RESULTS: Genetic analysis of GATA3 showed a novel nonsense mutation at codon 198 
(S198X) in exon 3. The S198X mutation leads to a loss of two zinc finger
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) binding domains and is considered to be responsible
for HDR syndrome.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel nonsense mutation of GATA3 in an adult patient 
with HDR syndrome who showed extensive intracranial calcification.

PMID: 23186964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1458-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.419580. Epub 2012 
Nov 26.

Minocycline blocks asthma-associated inflammation in part by interfering with the
T cell receptor-nuclear factor <U+03BA>B-GATA-3-IL-4 axis without a prominent effect on 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.

Naura AS(1), Kim H, Ju J, Rodriguez PC, Jordan J, Catling AD, Rezk BM, Abd
Elmageed ZY, Pyakurel K, Tarhuni AF, Abughazleh MQ, Errami Y, Zerfaoui M, Ochoa
AC, Boulares AH.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA. anaura@lsuhsc.edu

Minocycline protects against asthma independently of its antibiotic function and 
was recently reported as a potent poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor.
In an animal model of asthma, a single administration of minocycline conferred
excellent protection against ovalbumin-induced airway eosinophilia, mucus
hypersecretion, and Th2 cytokine production (IL-4/IL-5/IL-12(p70)/IL-13/GM-CSF)
and a partial protection against airway hyperresponsiveness. These effects
correlated with pronounced reduction in lung and sera allergen-specific IgE. A
reduction in poly(ADP-ribose) immunoreactivity in the lungs of
minocycline-treated/ovalbumin-challenged mice correlated with decreased oxidative
DNA damage. The effect of minocycline on PARP may be indirect, as the drug failed
to efficiently block direct PARP activation in lungs of
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitroso-guanidine-treated mice or H(2)O(2)-treated cells.
Minocycline blocked allergen-specific IgE production in B cells potentially by
modulating T cell receptor (TCR)-linked IL-4 production at the mRNA level but not
through a modulation of the IL-4-JAK-STAT-6 axis, IL-2 production, or NFAT1
activation. Restoration of IL-4, ex vivo, rescued IgE production by
minocycline-treated/ovalbumin-stimulated B cells. IL-4 blockade correlated with a
preferential inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B activation arm of TCR but not GSK3, Src, p38
MAPK, or ERK1/2. Interestingly, the drug promoted a slightly higher Src and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B was linked to a complete blockade of 
TCR-stimulated GATA-3 expression, a pivotal transcription factor for IL-4
expression. Minocycline also reduced TNF-a-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and
expression of dependent genes. These results show a potentially broad effect of
minocycline but that it may block IgE production in part by modulating TCR
function, particularly by inhibiting the signaling pathway, leading to NF-<U+03BA>B
activation, GATA-3 expression, and subsequent IL-4 production.

PMCID: PMC3548459
PMID: 23184953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Feb;34(2):433-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.11.005.
Epub 2012 Nov 24.

Clonal growth of carp (Cyprinus carpio) T cells in vitro: long-term proliferation
of Th2-like cells.

Yamaguchi T(1), Katakura F, Someya K, Dijkstra JM, Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Carp kidney leukocytes co-cultured with a supporting cell layer resulted in
proliferation of polyclonal CD4(+) aßT cells as described previously. These
bulk-cultured T cells expressed transcripts for both T helper 1 cells (Th1)
master regulator (T-bet) and T helper 2 cells (Th2) master regulator (GATA-3). To
identify the Th subsets in bulk-cultured T cells, single cells were picked up
from the bulk culture, proliferated, and characterized. The majority of the
clones displayed characteristics consistent with CD4(+) aßT cell identity. These 
clones expressed both TCRa and TCRß, but could not produce a TCR<U+03B3>d heterodimer
since they typically only expressed either TCR<U+03B3> or TCRd. These clones also
expressed the TCR co-receptor genes CD4-1 or CD4-2, whereas they did not express 
CD8a or CD8ß. In addition, GATA-3 was expressed whereas T-bet was not. Among
these clones, one clone (KoThL5) continued to proliferate on the supporting cells
and was successively transferred for more than 10 months and 90-100 passages. To 
characterize the KoThL5 cells by their cytokine production profile, they were
stimulated with PHA and investigated by real-time RT-PCR. mRNA expression of
Th2-related cytokine (IL-4/13B) was only enhanced in KoThL5 cells whereas both
Th1-related cytokine (IFN<U+03B3>) and Th2-related cytokines (IL-4/13A and IL-4/13B)
were significantly enhanced in bulk-cultured T cells. Taken together, KoThL5
cells share some features with mammalian Th2 cells. This is the first study to
describe in vitro cultures of teleost cell with Th2-like features. The KoThL5
cell line has considerable potential for addressing questions concerning the
properties of teleost Th2 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23182723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Arch Dermatol Res. 2013 Apr;305(3):241-7. doi: 10.1007/s00403-012-1302-9. Epub
2012 Nov 21.

Mutant interleukin-4/13 signaling blockade successfully suppresses acute phase
inflammation.

Nakanishi T(1), Yamanaka K, Kakeda M, Tsuda K, Mizutani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie University, 2-174 
Edobashi, Tsu, Mie, 514-8507, Japan.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic disease with Th2-type-cytokine dominant
profile. Several cytokines and related peptides had been tried for the treatment 
of AD but with unsuccessful results; a part of the reason is the limitation of
their biological half time. We have recently developed a highly efficient mouse
dominant negative IL-4/IL-13 DNA vaccine, which blocks both IL-4 and IL-13 signal
transductions, resulting in the amelioration of atopic reaction. At the next
step, the further consistent protein supplementation system is required for
stable suppression of allergic reaction. To examine the effects of mutant IL-4/13
protein supplementation from skin, a keratinocyte-specific dominant negative
IL-4-transgenic mouse line (IL-4DM) was established. The anti-inflammatory
function was evaluated measuring ear thickness and analyzing histological change 
in mice AD model induced by repeated elicitation of oxazolone. In IL-4DM, ear
thickness was suppressed significantly in the early phase of the elicitation
schedule of contact hypersensitivity response. We next transplanted IL-4DM skin
to normal control mice, and investigated effects in inflammatory reactions. In
IL-4DM-skin-grafted mice, the inflammatory response was suppressed significantly 
similarly in the early phase accompanied with lesional suppressed
Th2-type-cytokine signaling transduction. IL-4DM skin has the anti-inflammatory
function especially in the acute phase of AD. Although there are several issues
to be addressed for human application, the present results implicated that the
gene manipulated skin transplantation is a potent therapeutic strategy to control
allergic reactions.

PMID: 23179586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Pathologe. 2013 Feb;34(1):74-6. doi: 10.1007/s00292-012-1711-8.

[Signet ring cell infiltrate in the colon and gastric mucosa].

[Article in German]

Grosse-Holz M(1), Schmidt KD, Seitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Sozialstiftung Bamberg, Buger Str. 80,
96049, Bamberg, Deutschland. michaela.grosse-holz@sozialstiftung-bamberg.de

A 49-year-old female patient presented with anemia of unclear origin (hemoglobin 
level 6 µg/dl). During coloscopy a circular wall edema in the right flexure of
the colon was observed and gastroduodenoscopy gave rise to the suspicion of
fundic gland polyps (Elster's cysts) of the mucosa. In the lamina propria of the 
gastric mucosa, infiltration of a poorly differentiated carcinoma with signet
ring cell morphology could be histologically identified resulting in the
suspected diagnosis of a primary gastric signet ring carcinoma. Using
immunohistochemistry it could be shown that the tumor cells expressed cytokeratin
7 (CK7), estrogen receptors and Gata 3 but not CK20 or Cdx2. The diagnosis of
metastases of lobular breast cancer in the gastric and colon mucosa could be
made.

PMID: 23179207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):981-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.044.

STATs shape the active enhancer landscape of T cell populations.

Vahedi G(1), Takahashi H, Nakayamada S, Sun HW, Sartorelli V, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1930, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):929-31.

Signaling pathways are intimately involved in cellular differentiation, allowing 
cells to respond to their environment by regulating gene expression. Although
enhancers are recognized as key elements that regulate selective gene expression,
the interplay between signaling pathways and actively used enhancer elements is
not clear. Here, we use CD4(+) T cells as a model of differentiation, mapping the
activity of cell-type-specific enhancer elements in T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2
cells. Our data establish that STAT proteins have a major impact on the
activation of lineage-specific enhancers and the suppression of enhancers
associated with alternative cell fates. Transcriptome analysis further supports a
functional role for enhancers regulated by STATs. Importantly, expression of
lineage-defining master regulators in STAT-deficient cells fails to fully recover
the chromatin signature of STAT-dependent enhancers. Thus, these findings point
to a critical role of STATs as environmental sensors in dynamically molding the
specialized enhancer architecture of differentiating cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3509201
PMID: 23178119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Int J Immunogenet. 2013 Jun;40(3):222-9. doi: 10.1111/iji.12018. Epub 2012 Nov
23.

Glucocorticoid receptor BclI polymorphism associates with immunomodulatory
response to stress hormone in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Xiang L(1), Marshall GD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology 
and Allergy, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS 39216, USA. lxiang@umc.edu

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) variants have been found to be associated with
stress-related disorders. Our previous in vivo study revealed that the CC allele 
of GR BclI single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was more common in the
high-stress group, which had lower levels of both regulatory T cells (Treg) and
Th1 cytokine. The current study was to investigate the associations between GR
BclI polymorphism and immunomodulatory response to stress hormone in vitro in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Blood samples were collected
from 18 normal volunteers including 9 subjects with BclI polymorphism GG allele
and 9 with wild-type (WT) CC allele. PBMC were cultured with 10(-8) m
dexamethasone (DEX), which mimics the plasma cortisol level observed during
periods of psychological stress for 24 h and 11 days. Gene expressions of
transcription factors, stress hormone and cytokine receptors were analysed by
real-time RT-PCR. FoxP3 mRNA was significantly altered in the BclI WT (decreased 
at 24 h and increased at 11 days) but not in the GG allele. GR mRNA was
up-regulated at 24 h and down-regulated at 11 days in CC alleles (P < 0.01 and P 
< 0.05), rather than in GG alleles. The expression of ß-2 adrenergic receptor
(ß2AR) was increased at 24 h in both CC and GG alleles (P < 0.01 and P < 0.001), 
but decreased significantly at 11 days in only GG alleles. Expression of T-bet
and GATA-3 was altered simultaneously in 24-h culture with DEX from both groups. 
The BclI polymorphism of GR identifies different immunomodulatory responses to
corticosteroids, which may explain, at least in part, the variability in
individual sensitivity to stressors.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3602222
PMID: 23176645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genome Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):12-22. doi: 10.1101/gr.139469.112. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

GATA3 acts upstream of FOXA1 in mediating ESR1 binding by shaping enhancer
accessibility.

Theodorou V(1), Stark R, Menon S, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Transcription Lab, Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research
Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.

Estrogen receptor (ESR1) drives growth in the majority of human breast cancers by
binding to regulatory elements and inducing transcription events that promote
tumor growth. Differences in enhancer occupancy by ESR1 contribute to the diverse
expression profiles and clinical outcome observed in breast cancer patients.
GATA3 is an ESR1-cooperating transcription factor mutated in breast tumors;
however, its genomic properties are not fully defined. In order to investigate
the composition of enhancers involved in estrogen-induced transcription and the
potential role of GATA3, we performed extensive ChIP-sequencing in unstimulated
breast cancer cells and following estrogen treatment. We find that GATA3 is
pivotal in mediating enhancer accessibility at regulatory regions involved in
ESR1-mediated transcription. GATA3 silencing resulted in a global redistribution 
of cofactors and active histone marks prior to estrogen stimulation. These global
genomic changes altered the ESR1-binding profile that subsequently occurred
following estrogen, with events exhibiting both loss and gain in binding
affinity, implying a GATA3-mediated redistribution of ESR1 binding. The
GATA3-mediated redistributed ESR1 profile correlated with changes in gene
expression, suggestive of its functionality. Chromatin loops at the TFF locus
involving ESR1-bound enhancers occurred independently of ESR1 when GATA3 was
silenced, indicating that GATA3, when present on the chromatin, may serve as a
licensing factor for estrogen-ESR1-mediated interactions between cis-regulatory
elements. Together, these experiments suggest that GATA3 directly impacts ESR1
enhancer accessibility, and may potentially explain the contribution of
mutant-GATA3 in the heterogeneity of ESR1+ breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3530671
PMID: 23172872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1230-7. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.10.014. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Regenerative neurogenesis from neural progenitor cells requires injury-induced
expression of Gata3.

Kizil C(1), Kyritsis N, Dudczig S, Kroehne V, Freudenreich D, Kaslin J, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 47/49, 01307
Dresden, Germany.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1123-4.

The adult zebrafish brain, unlike mammalian counterparts, can regenerate after
injury owing to the neurogenic capacity of stem cells with radial glial
character. We hypothesized that injury-induced regenerative programs might be
turned on after injury in zebrafish brain and enable regenerative neurogenesis.
Here we identify one such gene-the transcription factor gata3-which is expressed 
only after injury in different zebrafish organs. Gata3 is required for reactive
proliferation of radial glia cells, subsequent regenerative neurogenesis, and
migration of the newborn neurons. We found that these regeneration-specific roles
of Gata3 are dependent on the injury because Gata3 overexpression in the
unlesioned adult zebrafish brain is not sufficient to induce neurogenesis. Thus, 
gata3 acts as a specific injury-induced proregenerative factor that is essential 
for the regenerative capacity in vertebrates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23168169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Phytother Res. 2013 Sep;27(9):1381-91. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4862. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Glycyrrhiza uralensis flavonoids present in anti-asthma formula, ASHMI, inhibit 
memory Th2 responses in vitro and in vivo.

Yang N(1), Patil S, Zhuge J, Wen MC, Bolleddula J, Doddaga S, Goldfarb J, Sampson
HA, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Allergic asthma is associated with Th2-mediated inflammation. Several flavonoids 
were isolated from Glycyrrhiza uralensis, one of the herbs in the anti-asthma
herbal medicine intervention. The aim of this investigation was to determine
whether Glycyrrhiza uralensis flavonoids have inhibitory effects on memory Th2
responses in vitro and antigen-induced Th2 inflammation in vivo. The effects of
three Glycyrrhiza uralensis flavonoids on effector memory Th2 cells, D10.G4.1
(D10 cells), were determined by measuring Th2 cytokine production.
Isoliquiritigenin, 7, 4'-dihydroxyflavone (7, 4'-DHF) and liquiritigenin
significantly suppressed IL-4 and IL-5 production in a dose-dependent manner, 7, 
4'-DHF being most potent. It was also evaluated for effects on D10 cell
proliferation, GATA-3 expression and IL-4 mRNA expression, which were suppressed,
with no loss of cell viability. Chronic treatment with 7, 4'-DHF in a murine
model of allergic asthma not only significantly reduced eosinophilic pulmonary
inflammation, serum IgE levels, IL-4 and IL-13 levels, but also increased IFN-<U+03B3>
production in lung cell cultures in response to antigen stimulation.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3593755
PMID: 23165939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Regen Med. 2012 Nov;7(6):757-67. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.58.

Inner ear progenitor cells can be generated in vitro from human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

Boddy SL(1), Chen W, Romero-Guevara R, Kottam L, Bellantuono I, Rivolta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology & Department of Biomedical Sciences, University
of Sheffield, Alfred Denny Building, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

AIM: Mouse mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can generate sensory neurons and produce
inner ear hair cell-like cells. An equivalent source from humans is highly
desirable, given their potential application in patient-specific regenerative
therapies for deafness. In this study, we explored the ability of human MSCs
(hMSCs) to differentiate into otic lineages.
MATERIALS & METHODS: hMSCs were exposed to culture media conditioned by human
fetal auditory stem cells.
RESULTS: Conditioned media induced the expression of otic progenitor markers
PAX8, PAX2, GATA3 and SOX2. After 4 weeks, cells coexpressed ATOH1, MYO7A and
POU4F3 (indicators of hair cell lineage) or neuronal markers NEUROG1, POU4F1 and 
NEFH. Inhibition of WNT signaling prevented differentiation into otic
progenitors, while WNT activation partially phenocopied results seen with the
conditioned media.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that hMSCs can be driven to express key genes
found in the otic lineages and thereby promotes their status as candidates for
regenerative therapies for deafness.

PMID: 23164077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Exp Dermatol. 2012 Nov;21(11):859-64. doi: 10.1111/exd.12023.

GATA-3 regulates differentiation-specific loricrin gene expression in
keratinocytes.

Kawachi Y(1), Ishitsuka Y, Maruyama H, Fujisawa Y, Furuta J, Nakamura Y, Otsuka
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. kyasuhir@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Loricrin is a major component of the epidermal cornified cell envelope and is
expressed only in terminally differentiated keratinocytes. This cell
differentiation-specific expression pattern suggests specific regulatory
mechanisms for activation of loricrin gene transcription in differentiated
keratinocytes. Here, we identified a positive regulatory element in the proximal 
promoter region of the loricrin gene involved in activation of its expression in 
differentiated keratinocytes. A database search indicated that this sequence
contained a GATA-3 binding motif. Constructs with point mutations in the GATA-3
binding motif showed decreased reporter activity, indicating that GATA-3
positively regulates loricrin gene transcription. Western blotting analysis
indicated that GATA-3 is more abundant in differentiated than in undifferentiated
keratinocytes. Cotransfection experiments indicated that GATA-3 activates
transcription of the loricrin gene in a cooperative manner with c-Fos and Sp1.
These findings indicate that GATA-3 contributes to keratinocyte
differentiation-specific activation of loricrin gene transcription via
interaction with c-Fos and Sp1.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23163652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 Nov 1;8(11):1555-63. doi: 10.4161/hv.22142. Epub 2012
Nov 1.

IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> induced by human immunodeficiency virus vaccine in a schistosome
infection model.

Yin J(1), Dai A, Arango T, Kasinathan RS, Greenberg RM, Boyer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine; Philadelphia, PA USA.

The co-infection of HIV and helminth parasites, such as Schistosoma spp, has
increased in sub-Saharan Africa. Many HIV vaccine candidate studies have been
completed or are in ongoing clinical trials, but it is not clear how HIV vaccines
might affect the course of schistosome infections. In this study, we immunized S.
mansoni-infected mice with an efficient DNA vaccine that included HIV gag. Using 
this model, we found that Th2 cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-13, were highly
induced after schistosome infection. Treatment of infected mice with the HIV DNA 
vaccine resulted in a significant attenuation of this rise in IL-13 expression
and an increase in expression of the Th1 cytokine, TNF-a. However, vaccine
administration did not significantly influence the expression of IL-4, or IFN-<U+03B3>, 
and did not affect T cell proliferative capacity. Interestingly, the IL-4 (+)
IFN-<U+03B3> (+) phenotype appears in schistosome-infected mice that received HIV
vaccination, and is associated with the expression of transcription factors GATA3
(+) T-bet (+) in these mice. These studies indicate that DNA vaccination can have
an impact on ongoing chronic infection.

PMCID: PMC3601131
PMID: 23151453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Jan;5(1):64-79. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201544. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Regulatory T-lymphocytes mediate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression and
survival.

Henkel JS(1), Beers DR, Wen S, Rivera AL, Toennis KM, Appel JE, Zhao W, Moore DH,
Powell SZ, Appel SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston,
TX, USA. jhenkel@tmhs.org

Erratum in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Feb;5(2):326.

In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice, regulatory T-lymphocytes (Tregs) are
neuroprotective, slowing disease progression. To address whether Tregs and FoxP3,
a transcription factor required for Treg function, similarly influence
progression rates of ALS patients, T-lymphocytes from patients were assessed by
flow cytometry. Both numbers of Tregs and their FoxP3 protein expressions were
reduced in rapidly progressing ALS patients and inversely correlated with
progression rates. The mRNA levels of FoxP3, TGF-ß, IL4 and Gata3, a Th2
transcription factor, were reduced in rapidly progressing patients and inversely 
correlated with progression rates. Both FoxP3 and Gata3 were accurate indicators 
of progression rates. No differences in IL10, Tbx21, a Th1 transcription factor
or IFN-<U+03B3> expression were found between slow and rapidly progressing patients. A
3.5-year prospective study with a second larger cohort revealed that early
reduced FoxP3 levels were indicative of progression rates at collection and
predictive of future rapid progression and attenuated survival. Collectively,
these data suggest that Tregs and Th2 lymphocytes influence disease progression
rates. Importantly, early reduced FoxP3 levels could be used to identify rapidly 
progressing patients.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3569654
PMID: 23143995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell Rep. 2012 Nov 29;2(5):1197-206. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

DNA binding by GATA transcription factor suggests mechanisms of DNA looping and
long-range gene regulation.

Chen Y(1), Bates DL, Dey R, Chen PH, Machado AC, Laird-Offringa IA, Rohs R, Chen 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Departments of Biological
Sciences and Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089,
USA.

GATA transcription factors regulate transcription during development and
differentiation by recognizing distinct GATA sites with a tandem of two conserved
zinc fingers, and by mediating long-range DNA looping. However, the molecular
basis of these processes is not well understood. Here, we determined three
crystal structures of the full DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human GATA3 protein,
which contains both zinc fingers, in complex with different DNA sites. In one
structure, both zinc fingers wrap around a palindromic GATA site, cooperatively
enhancing the binding affinity and kinetic stability. Strikingly, in the other
two structures, the two fingers of GATA DBD bind GATA sites on different DNA
molecules, thereby bridging two separate DNA fragments. This was confirmed in
solution by an in-gel fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis. These
findings not only provide insights into the structure and function of GATA
proteins but also shed light on the molecular basis of long-range gene
regulation.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3978094
PMID: 23142663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 6;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-33.

Global gene expression of the inner cell mass and trophectoderm of the bovine
blastocyst.

Ozawa M(1), Sakatani M, Yao J, Shanker S, Yu F, Yamashita R, Wakabayashi S, Nakai
K, Dobbs KB, Sudano MJ, Farmerie WG, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and D,H, Barron Reproductive and Perinatal
Biology Research Program, PO Box 110910, Gainesville, FL 32611-0910, USA.

BACKGROUND: The first distinct differentiation event in mammals occurs at the
blastocyst stage when totipotent blastomeres differentiate into either
pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM) or multipotent trophectoderm (TE). Here we
determined, for the first time, global gene expression patterns in the ICM and TE
isolated from bovine blastocysts. The ICM and TE were isolated from blastocysts
harvested at day 8 after insemination by magnetic activated cell sorting, and
cDNA sequenced using the SOLiD 4.0 system.
RESULTS: A total of 870 genes were differentially expressed between ICM and TE.
Several genes characteristic of ICM (for example, NANOG, SOX2, and STAT3) and TE 
(ELF5, GATA3, and KRT18) in mouse and human showed similar patterns in bovine.
Other genes, however, showed differences in expression between ICM and TE that
deviates from the expected based on mouse and human.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of gene expression indicated that differentiation of
blastomeres of the morula-stage embryo into the ICM and TE of the blastocyst is
accompanied by differences between the two cell lineages in expression of genes
controlling metabolic processes, endocytosis, hatching from the zona pellucida,
paracrine and endocrine signaling with the mother, and genes supporting the
changes in cellular architecture, stemness, and hematopoiesis necessary for
development of the trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC3514149
PMID: 23126590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:495934. doi: 10.1155/2012/495934. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Altered AKT1 and MAPK1 gene expression on peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 
correlation with T-helper-transcription factors in systemic lupus erythematosus
patients.

Garcia-Rodriguez S(1), Callejas-Rubio JL, Ortego-Centeno N, Zumaquero E,
Ríos-Fernandez R, Arias-Santiago S, Navarro P, Sancho J, Zubiaur M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y
Biomedicina López-Neyra-IPBLN-CSIC, Parque Tecnológico Ciencias de la Salud,
Avenida Conocimiento s/n, Armilla, 18100 Granada, Spain.

Kinases have been implicated in the immunopathological mechanisms of Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus (SLE). v-akt murine-thymoma viral-oncogene-homolog 1 (AKT1)
and mitogen-activated-protein-kinase 1 (MAPK1) gene expressions in peripheral
mononuclear cells from thirteen SLE patients with inactive or mild disease were
evaluated using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase-chain-reaction and analyzed whether there was any correlation with
T-helper (Th) transcription factors (TF) gene expression, cytokines, and
S100A8/S100A9-(Calprotectin). Age- and gender-matched thirteen healthy controls
were examined. AKT1 and MAPK1 expressions were upregulated in SLE patients and
correlated with Th17-(Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR)-C),
T-regulatory-(Treg)-(Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGFB)-2), and
Th2-(interleukin (IL)-5)-related genes. MAPK1 expression correlated with
Th1-(IL-12A, T-box TF-(T-bet)), Th2-(GATA binding protein-(GATA)-3), and IL-10
expressions. IL-10 expression was increased and correlated with plasma Tumor
Necrosis Factor (TNF)-a and Th0-(IL-2), Th1-(IL-12A, T-bet), GATA3,
Treg-(Forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor- (FOXP)-3), and IL-6
expressions. FOXP3 expression, FOXP3/RORC, and FOXP3/GATA3 expression ratios were
increased. Plasma IL-1ß, IL-12(p70), Interferon-(IFN)-<U+03B3>, and IL-6 cytokines were 
augmented. Plasma IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-2, IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-10, and IL-13 correlated
with C-reactive protein, respectively. Increased Calprotectin correlated with
neutrophils. Conclusion, SLE patients presented a systemic immunoinflammatory
activity, augmented AKT1 and MAPK1 expressions, proinflammatory cytokines, and
Calprotectin, together with increased expression of Treg-related genes,
suggesting a regulatory feedback opposing the inflammatory activity.

PMCID: PMC3483815
PMID: 23125486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Inhal Toxicol. 2012 Nov;24(13):918-27. doi: 10.3109/08958378.2012.731093.

Involvement of TLR2 and TLR4 and Th1/Th2 shift in inflammatory responses induced 
by fine ambient particulate matter in mice.

Zhao C(1), Liao J, Chu W, Wang S, Yang T, Tao Y, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing,
China.

Erratum in
    Inhal Toxicol. 2013 Feb;25(3):178.

Epidemiologic studies have reported the association between fine particles
(aerodynamic diameter = 2.5 µm; PM2.5) and health effects, but the immunological 
mechanisms are not clear. To investigate the dose and time-dependent role of
toll-like receptor (TLR) and Th1/Th2 shift in local and systemic inflammation
induced by PM2.5, mice were subjected to intratracheal instillation of 2.5, 5, or
10<U+2009>mg/kg PM2.5 in this study. After 24<U+2009>h, 72<U+2009>h, 7 days, and 14 days, mice were
sacrificed to measure TLR2 and TLR4 expressions and Th1/Th2 related cytokines in 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and peripheral blood. Histopathological
changes in lung were also examined. Inflammatory infiltration and macrophages
with engulfed particles were found by lung histopathology after PM2.5 exposure.
TLR4 positive cells decreased in BALF but increased in blood at 24<U+2009>h after the
exposure. The low percentage of TLR4 positive cells continued to day 14 in BALF, 
but recovered at day 7 and decreased further to lower than the control value at
day 14 in blood. TLR2 positive cell changed similar to TLR4 in BALF on the dose
effects. In BALF at 24<U+2009>h after the exposure, the Th2 related cytokines IL-5 and
IL-10 increased dose-dependently; and in blood, the Th2 related cytokines IL-4,
IL-5, and IL-10 also increased. These results suggest that acute exposure of
PM2.5 leads to acute inflammatory responses locally and systemically in mice.
TLR2 and TLR4 are involved in this process and PM2.5 can drive a Th2-biased
immune response.

PMID: 23121301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2013 Aug;39(4):793-805. doi: 10.1007/s10695-012-9741-y.
Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Molecular cloning of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) T-bet and GATA-3, and 
their expression profiles with IFN-<U+03B3> in response to grass carp reovirus (GCRV)
infection.

Wang L(1), Shang N, Feng H, Guo Q, Dai H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

Both T-bet and GATA-3, Th1/Th2 lineage-specific transcription factors, play
important roles in the development of T cells and Th1/Th2 differentiation. In
this study, T-bet and GATA-3 genes were cloned from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon 
idellus). The putative primary structure of the polypeptide deduced from the cDNA
sequence of grass carp T-bet contained 608 aa, which possessed a T-box DNA
binding domain. The putative primary structure of the polypeptide deduced from
the cDNA sequence of grass carp GATA-3 contained 396 aa, which possessed two
consensus zinc finger domains (C-X(2)-C-X(17)-C-X(2)-C). The YxKxHxxxRP motif,
KRRLSA and LMEKs/n sequences were also conserved in this GATA-3. Phylogenetic
analysis indicated that grass carp T-bet and GATA-3 group with their known
counterparts with zebrafish T-bet and GATA-3 as the closest neighbor,
respectively. RT-qPCR results showed that grass carp T-bet gene was highly
expressed in head kidney, followed by spleen, and low expressed in gill, liver,
kidney, and intestine, while GATA-3 gene was highly expressed in intestine,
followed by spleen, and low expressed in gill, liver, kidney, and head kidney.
Grass carp is one of the "four important domestic fish" in China and often
infected by grass carp reovirus (GCRV). As yet, there is no evidence that T-bet
and GATA-3 (Th1/Th2 subsets) are involved in anti-virus immune of teleost fish.
In this study, by RT-qPCR, we analyzed the expression dynamics of grass carp
T-bet and GATA-3 genes with IFN-<U+03B3> gene in response to GCRV infection for the
first time. The expression dynamics showed that three genes might be crucially
modulated by in vivo GCRV infection: (1) GCRV mainly induced a T-bet expression
profile comparing to the GATA-3 expression, while the higher expression profiles 
of IFN-<U+03B3> correlated with the up-regulation of T-bet; (2) T-bet/IFN-<U+03B3> and GATA-3
expression changes suggest that in GCRV-infected grass carp, the common immune
state of head kidney further heightens, whereas the common physiological state of
intestine transforms to an anti-virus immune state. From this finding, we realize
that GCRV mainly induces a Th1 response, and Th1 cell-mediated recognition
mechanisms play very important roles in anti-virus cellular immune of grass carp.

PMID: 23108805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Nov;136(11):1339-46. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0575-OA.

Selective immunohistochemical markers to distinguish between metastatic
high-grade urothelial carcinoma and primary poorly differentiated invasive
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.

Gruver AM(1), Amin MB, Luthringer DJ, Westfall D, Arora K, Farver CF, Osunkoya
AO, McKenney JK, Hansel DE.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid
Ave, Desk L25, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

CONTEXT: Distinction between primary lung carcinomas and metastases from other
sites, especially the urinary tract, is a common diagnostic dilemma. As
urothelial carcinomas can demonstrate a broad range of morphology and frequently 
demonstrate squamous differentiation, discerning metastatic urothelial carcinoma 
to the lung from primary pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma can be challenging.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate immunostains that may aid in the distinction of
urothelial carcinoma metastatic to the lung.
DESIGN: Staining patterns of 14 markers in primary urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder and primary squamous cell carcinoma of the lung were examined to
establish a diagnostic panel. These antibodies were subsequently tested on tumors
taken from 30 patients with a paired urinary tract and metastatic lung lesion.
RESULTS: The best markers to distinguish poorly differentiated metastatic
urothelial carcinoma from primary pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma were CK7,
CK20, GATA-3, CK14, desmoglein-3, and uroplakin III, with the utility of the
latter dependent upon the quantity of tissue available for analysis. The observed
percentage positive staining in nonmetastatic urothelial carcinoma versus primary
pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma with these antibodies was as follows: CK7 (100%
versus 33%), CK20 (54% versus 7%), GATA-3 (78% versus 23%), CK14 (32% versus
77%), desmoglein-3 (11% versus 87%), and uroplakin III (14% versus 0%). Similar
expression patterns were observed among the paired cases.
CONCLUSION: When interpreted in correlation with clinical history and
histomorphology, a panel of immunostains including CK7, CK20, GATA-3, CK14,
desmoglein-3, and uroplakin III may be a useful adjunct in the distinction of
metastatic urothelial carcinoma to the lung.

PMID: 23106579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan 7;41(1):21-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks950. Epub 2012 Oct
22.

MuMoD: a Bayesian approach to detect multiple modes of protein-DNA binding from
genome-wide ChIP data.

Narlikar L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering and Process Development Division, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory, Pune 411008, India. l.narlikar@ncl.res.in

High-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation has become the method of choice for
identifying genomic regions bound by a protein. Such regions are then
investigated for overrepresented sequence motifs, the assumption being that they 
must correspond to the binding specificity of the profiled protein. However this 
approach often fails: many bound regions do not contain the 'expected' motif.
This is because binding DNA directly at its recognition site is not the only way 
the protein can cause the region to immunoprecipitate. Its binding specificity
can change through association with different co-factors, it can bind DNA
indirectly, through intermediaries, or even enforce its function through
long-range chromosomal interactions. Conventional motif discovery methods, though
largely capable of identifying overrepresented motifs from bound regions, lack
the ability to characterize such diverse modes of protein-DNA binding and binding
specificities. We present a novel Bayesian method that identifies distinct
protein-DNA binding mechanisms without relying on any motif database. The method 
successfully identifies co-factors of proteins that do not bind DNA directly,
such as mediator and p300. It also predicts literature-supported
enhancer-promoter interactions. Even for well-studied direct-binding proteins,
this method provides compelling evidence for previously uncharacterized
dependencies within positions of binding sites, long-range chromosomal
interactions and dimerization.

PMCID: PMC3592440
PMID: 23093591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046082. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

MicroRNA-155 modulates Treg and Th17 cells differentiation and Th17 cell function
by targeting SOCS1.

Yao R(1), Ma YL, Liang W, Li HH, Ma ZJ, Yu X, Liao YH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

MicroRNA (miR)-155 is a critical player in both innate and adaptive immune
responses. It can influence CD4(+) T cell lineage choice. To clarify the role of 
miR-155 in CD4(+) CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg)/T helper (Th)17 cell
differentiation and function, as well as the mechanism involved, we performed
gain-and loss-of-function analysis by transfection pre-miR-155 and anti-miR-155
into purified CD4(+) T cells. The results showed that miR-155 positively
regulated both Treg and Th17 cell differentiation. It also induced the release of
interleukin (IL)-17A by Th17 cells, but not the release of IL-10 and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß1 by Treg cells. Furthermore, we found that miR-155 reacted 
through regulating Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) rather than TGF-ß/mothers against decapentaplegic homolog (SMAD)
signaling pathway in the process of Treg and Th17 cells differentiation. This may
because suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1, the important negative
regulator of JAK/STAT signaling pathway, was the direct target of miR-155 in this
process, but SMAD2 and SMAD5 were not. Therefore, we demonstrated that miR-155
enhanced Treg and Th17 cells differentiation and IL-17A production by targeting
SOCS1.

PMCID: PMC3473054
PMID: 23091595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 1;373(1):107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Oct 16.

A gene network that coordinates preplacodal competence and neural crest
specification in zebrafish.

Bhat N(1), Kwon HJ, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Preplacodal ectoderm (PPE) and neural crest (NC) are specified at the interface
of neural and nonneural ectoderm and together contribute to the peripheral
nervous system in all vertebrates. Bmp activates early steps for both fates
during late blastula stage. Low Bmp activates expression of transcription factors
Tfap2a and Tfap2c in the lateral neural plate, thereby specifying neural crest
fate. Elevated Bmp establishes preplacodal competence throughout the ventral
ectoderm by coinducing Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1 and Gata3. PPE specification occurs 
later at the end of gastrulation and requires complete attenuation of Bmp, yet
expression of PPE competence factors continues well past gastrulation. Here we
show that competence factors positively regulate each other's expression during
gastrulation, forming a self-sustaining network that operates independently of
Bmp. Misexpression of Tfap2a in embryos blocked for Bmp from late blastula stage 
can restore development of both PPE and NC. However, Tfap2a alone is not
sufficient to activate any other competence factors nor does it rescue individual
placodes. On the other hand, misexpression of any two competence factors in
Bmp-blocked embryos can activate the entire transcription factor network and
support the development of NC, PPE and some individual placodes. We also show
that while these factors are partially redundant with respect to PPE
specification, they later provide non-redundant functions needed for development 
of specific placodes. Thus, we have identified a gene regulatory network that
coordinates development of NC, PPE and individual placodes in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3508392
PMID: 23078916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e45342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045342. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Notch signalling inhibits CD4 expression during initiation and differentiation of
human T cell lineage.

Carlin SM(1), Khoo ML, Ma DD, Moore JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Stem Cells and Cancer Research, St Vincent's Centre for Applied Medical 
Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

The Delta/Notch signal transduction pathway is central to T cell differentiation 
from haemopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Although T cell development is well
characterized using expression of cell surface markers, the detailed mechanisms
driving differentiation have not been established. This issue becomes central
with observations that adult HSCs exhibit poor differentiation towards the T cell
lineage relative to neonatal or embryonic precursors. This study investigates the
contribution of Notch signalling and stromal support cells to differentiation of 
adult and Cord Blood (CB) human HSCs, using the Notch signalling OP9Delta
co-culture system. Co-cultured cells were assayed at weekly intervals during
development for phenotype markers using flow cytometry. Cells were also assayed
for mRNA expression at critical developmental stages. Expression of the central
thymocyte marker CD4 was initiated independently of Notch signalling, while cells
grown with Notch signalling had reduced expression of CD4 mRNA and protein.
Interruption of Notch signalling in partially differentiated cells increased CD4 
mRNA and protein expression, and promoted differentiation to CD4(+) CD8(+) T
cells. We identified a set of genes related to T cell development that were
initiated by Notch signalling, and also a set of genes subsequently altered by
Notch signal interruption. These results demonstrate that while Notch signalling 
is essential for establishment of the T cell lineage, at later stages of
differentiation, its removal late in differentiation promotes more efficient DP
cell generation. Notch signalling adds to signals provided by stromal cells to
allow HSCs to differentiate to T cells via initiation of transcription factors
such as HES1, GATA3 and TCF7. We also identify gene expression profile
differences that may account for low generation of T cells from adult HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3470571
PMID: 23071513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;145(2):161-73. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.017. Epub 2012 
Aug 14.

The decidual stromal cells-secreted CCL2 induces and maintains decidual
leukocytes into Th2 bias in human early pregnancy.

He YY(1), He XJ, Guo PF, Du MR, Shao J, Li MQ, Li DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Reproductive Immunology, Hospital and Institute of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University Shanghai, 200011,
China.

The precise mechanism of characteristic Th2 predominance at maternal-fetal
interface remains unresolved. In the present study, we investigated roles of the 
decidua-derived CCL2 in Th2 predominance at maternal-fetal interface. FCM shows
that 55% CD56(+)CD16(-)CD3(-) decidual NK, 52% CD4(+) T cells and 75% CD14(+)
monocytes express CCR2. Recombinant human CCL2 (rhCCL2) and the decidual stromal 
cells (DSCs)-derived supernatant can enhance proliferation and inhibit apoptosis 
of these decidual leukocytes (DLCs), and promote Th2 cytokines production, IL-4
and IL-10, with an increase in GATA-3 transcription. They also inhibit the
secretion of Th1 cytokines, TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>, with a decrease in T-bet
transcription It is concluded that the secreted CCL2 by decidual stromal cells
increases GATA-3 transcription and decreases T-bet transcription in the decidual 
leukocytes, which contributes to Th2 polarization at maternal-fetal interface.
Furthermore, the Th2 cytokines, IL-4 and IL-10, rather than Th1 cytokines, was
shown to increase CCL2 secretion of DSC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23069648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):634-48. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.06.020. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

The transcription factor GATA-3 controls cell fate and maintenance of type 2
innate lymphoid cells.

Hoyler T(1), Klose CS, Souabni A, Turqueti-Neves A, Pfeifer D, Rawlins EL,
Voehringer D, Busslinger M, Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)IMMH, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg,
Germany.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):589-91.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) reside at mucosal surfaces and control immunity to
intestinal infections. Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) produce cytokines
such as IL-5 and IL-13, are required for immune defense against helminth
infections, and are involved in the pathogenesis of airway hyperreactivity. Here,
we have investigated the role of the transcription factor GATA-3 for ILC2
differentiation and maintenance. We showed that ILC2s and their lineage-specified
bone marrow precursors (ILC2Ps), as identified here, were characterized by
continuous high expression of GATA-3. Analysis of mice with temporary deletion of
GATA-3 in all ILCs showed that GATA-3 was required for the differentiation and
maintenance of ILC2s but not for ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs. Thus, our data demonstrate that
GATA-3 is essential for ILC2 fate decisions and reveal similarities between the
transcriptional programs controlling ILC and T helper cell fates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3662874
PMID: 23063333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):649-59. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.015. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

The transcription factor GATA3 is essential for the function of human type 2
innate lymphoid cells.

Mjösberg J(1), Bernink J, Golebski K, Karrich JJ, Peters CP, Blom B, te Velde AA,
Fokkens WJ, van Drunen CM, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):589-91.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) are part of a large family of ILCs that are 
important effectors in innate immunity, lymphoid organogenesis, and tissue
remodeling. ILC2s mediate parasite expulsion but also contribute to airway
inflammation, emphasizing the functional similarity between these cells and Th2
cells. Consistent with this, we report that the transcription factor GATA3 was
highly expressed by human ILC2s. CRTH2(+) ILC2s were enriched in nasal polyps of 
patients with chronic rhinosinusitis, a typical type 2-mediated disease. Nasal
polyp epithelial cells expressed TSLP, which enhanced STAT5 activation, GATA3
expression, and type 2 cytokine production in ILC2s. Ectopic expression of GATA3 
in Lin(-)CD127(+)CRTH2(-) cells resulted in induction of CRTH2 and the capacity
to produce high amounts of type 2 cytokines in response to TSLP plus IL-33.
Hence, we identify GATA3, potently regulated by TSLP, as an essential
transcription factor for the function of human ILC2s.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Nov;12(11):799-804. doi: 10.1038/nri3321. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Master regulators or lineage-specifying? Changing views on CD4+ T cell
transcription factors.

Oestreich KJ(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Box 357650, 1959 NE
Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

There is an emerging body of research demonstrating that the co-expression of key
lineage-specifying transcription factors, commonly referred to as 'master
regulators', affects the functional capabilities and flexibility of CD4(+) T cell
subsets. Here, we discuss how the natural co-expression of these
lineage-specifying transcription factors has challenged the concept that the
expression of a single 'master regulator' strictly establishes an absolute CD4(+)
T cell phenotype. Instead, it is becoming clear that the interplay between the
lineage-specifying (or lineage-defining) transcription factors, including T-bet, 
GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, BCL-6 and FOXP3, contributes to the fate and flexibility of CD4(+) 
T cell subtypes. This in turn has led to the realization that CD4(+) T cell
phenotypes are more diverse than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC3584691
PMID: 23059426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Iran J Pediatr. 2012 Mar;22(1):43-51.

T-Bet Mediated Anti-Neoplastic Effects of Dendritic Cell-Cytokine Induced Killer 
Cells in vitro.

Miao L(1), Run-Ming J, Yi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying T-bet mediated
anti-neoplastic effects of cytokine induced killer (CIK) cells.
METHODS: Lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood of leukemic children were
induced with <U+03B3>- interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>), CD3McAb and interluki-2 (IL-2), and
co-cultured with dendritic cells (DCs) to generate DC-CIK cells. The morphology
and immunophenotype of these cells were determined by a light microscopy and flow
cytometry, respectively. IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3> levels released by DC-CIK cells were
quantified by ELISA. Cytotoxicity of DC-CIK cells against leukemia cell lines was
measured by MTT assay. FCM was used to detect CD4(+)CD25(+)Treg cells, while
RT-PCR and Western blot were used to determine mRNA and protein expressions of
Foxp3 and GATA3 in DC-CIK cells treated with T-bet monoclonal antibody.
FINDINGS: Induced DC-CIK cells were regular, round and transparent with variable 
cell volume and cellular aggregation. The main effector cells in this population 
were CD3(+)CD8(+) cells and CD3(+)CD56(+) cells. We demonstrated a time dependent
increase in IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3> levels after induction. DC-CIK cells were cytotoxic to
B95 cells, Jhhan cells and M07e cells, with the highest cytotoxicity towards B95 
cells. Treatment with mouse anti-human T-bet monoclonal antibody resulted in an
increase in the proportion of CD4(+)CD25(+)Treg cells and elevation of Foxp3 and 
GATA3 mRNA and protein levels.
CONCLUSION: DC-CIK cells induced with cytokines were strongly cytotoxic towards a
number of cancer cell lines. Foxp3 and GATA3 were implicated in the T-bet
mediated anti-neoplastic effects of DC-CIK cells via activation of the Th1
pathway and suppression of the Th2 and Treg pathways.

PMCID: PMC3448214
PMID: 23056858  [PubMed]


247. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 15;189(10):4759-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201794. Epub 2012 
Oct 10.

Bcl6 controls the Th2 inflammatory activity of regulatory T cells by repressing
Gata3 function.

Sawant DV(1), Sehra S, Nguyen ET, Jadhav R, Englert K, Shinnakasu R, Hangoc G,
Broxmeyer HE, Nakayama T, Perumal NB, Kaplan MH, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. adent2@iupui.edu

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 is a critical arbiter of Th cell fate,
promoting the follicular Th lineage while repressing other Th cell lineages.
Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6(-/-)) mice develop a spontaneous and severe Th2-type
inflammatory disease, thus warranting assessment of Bcl6 in regulatory T cell
(Treg) function. Bcl6(-/-) Tregs were competent at suppressing T cell
proliferation in vitro and Th1-type colitogenic T cell responses in vivo. In
contrast, Bcl6(-/-) Tregs strongly exacerbated lung inflammation in a model of
allergic airway disease and promoted higher Th2 responses, including systemic
upregulation of microRNA-21. Further, Bcl6(-/-) Tregs were selectively impaired
at controlling Th2 responses, but not Th1 and Th17 responses, in mixed chimeras
of Bcl6(-/-) bone marrow with Foxp3(-/-) bone marrow. Bcl6(-/-) Tregs displayed
increased levels of the Th2 transcription factor Gata3 and other Th2 and Treg
genes. Bcl6 potently repressed Gata3 transcriptional transactivation, providing a
mechanism for the increased expression of Th2 genes by Bcl6(-/-) Tregs. Gata3 has
a critical role in regulating Foxp3 expression and functional fitness of Tregs;
however, the signal that regulates Gata3 and restricts its transactivation of Th2
cytokines in Tregs has remained unexplored. Our results identify Bcl6 as an
essential transcription factor regulating Gata3 activity in Tregs. Thus, Bcl6
represents a crucial regulatory layer in the Treg functional program that is
required for specific suppression of Gata3 and Th2 effector responses by Tregs.

PMCID: PMC3490013
PMID: 23053511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Eur J Pediatr. 2013 Jan;172(1):107-10. doi: 10.1007/s00431-012-1845-y. Epub 2012 
Oct 5.

Renal phenotypic variability in HDR syndrome: glomerular nephropathy as a novel
finding.

Chenouard A(1), Isidor B, Allain-Launay E, Moreau A, Le Bideau M, Roussey G.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Department, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.

HDR syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, renal abnormalities)
(OMIM #146265) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the
GATA-3 gene (OMIM 13120), a transcription factor coding for a protein involved in
vertebrate embryonic development. More than a hundred cases with variable renal
features have been described so far. Here, we report on a patient suffering from 
HDR syndrome with glomerular nephropathy. Hypoparathyroidism appeared early in
childhood but the subsequent features of HDR occurred later in the form of
bilateral sensorineural deafness and renal insufficiency associated with
nephrocalcinosis. HDR was not initially diagnosed due to the appearance of a
transitory cardiac involvement and atypical renal symptoms (diffuse proliferative
glomerulonephritis characterized by a self-limiting nephrotic
syndrome).CONCLUSION: HDR syndrome with glomerular nephropathy has not yet been
reported to our knowledge. Further studies of GATA-3 are needed to explore the
involvement of this transcription factor in the development of HDR in humans,
particularly in the kidneys.

PMID: 23052618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 15;189(10):4989-5000. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200068. Epub
2012 Oct 8.

Smad3-deficient CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid-derived suppressor cells prevent allograft
rejection via the nitric oxide pathway.

Wu T(1), Sun C, Chen Z, Zhen Y, Peng J, Qi Z, Yang X, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Immunosuppressive CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid-derived suppressor cells and TGF-ß have 
been shown to negatively regulate host immunity against allografts. Our results
demonstrated that Smad3-deficient mice or mice reconstituted with Smad3-deficient
hematopoietic cells rejected allogeneic skin or heart grafts in a significantly
slower manner compared with littermates or wild-type (WT) control mice.
Transplanted Smad3(-/-) recipients produced markedly less anti-donor IgG Abs,
especially IgG1 and IgG2b subclasses. T cells in alloskin-grafted Smad3-deficient
mice were more likely to participate in a Th2-type immune response, as evidenced 
by more Th2-specific transcription factor, GATA3 expression, and increased IL-4
and IL-10 production, as well as less Th1-specific transcription factor, T-bet
expression, and decreased IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3> production. More CD11b(+)Gr1(+)
neutrophil infiltration and less monocyte/macrophage and T cell infiltration in
allografts were observed in Smad3(-/-) recipients compared with WT recipients.
Increased CXCL1 and CXCL2 as well as decreased CCL3, MCP-1, and RANTES chemokines
in allografts of Smad3(-/-) recipients were consistently detected by real-time
PCR. Further studies indicated that the increased CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid cells in
Smad3-deficient mice were immunosuppressive and responsible for the delayed
allograft rejection mainly via an NO-dependent pathway. Thus, this study
identifies Smad3 as an intrinsic negative regulator that critically inhibits the 
differentiation and function of immunosuppressive CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells.

PMID: 23045614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):660-73. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.007. Epub 2012 
Oct 4.

The transcription factor T-bet is induced by multiple pathways and prevents an
endogenous Th2 cell program during Th1 cell responses.

Zhu J(1), Jankovic D, Oler AJ, Wei G, Sharma S, Hu G, Guo L, Yagi R, Yamane H,
Punkosdy G, Feigenbaum L, Zhao K, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):591-3.

T-bet is a critical transcription factor for T helper 1 (Th1) cell
differentiation. To study the regulation and functions of T-bet, we developed a
T-bet-ZsGreen reporter mouse strain. We determined that interleukin-12 (IL-12)
and interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) were redundant in inducing T-bet in mice infected with
Toxoplasma gondii and that T-bet did not contribute to its own expression when
induced by IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3>. By contrast, T-bet and the transcription factor Stat4
were critical for IFN-<U+03B3> production whereas IFN-<U+03B3> signaling was dispensable for
inducing IFN-<U+03B3>. Loss of T-bet resulted in activation of an endogenous program
driving Th2 cell differentiation in cells expressing T-bet-ZsGreen. Genome-wide
analyses indicated that T-bet directly induced many Th1 cell-related genes but
indirectly suppressed Th2 cell-related genes. Our study revealed redundancy and
synergy among several Th1 cell-inducing pathways in regulating the expression of 
T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>, and a critical role of T-bet in suppressing an endogenous Th2
cell-associated program.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3717271
PMID: 23041064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):554-66. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.002.

Signaling from the sympathetic nervous system regulates hematopoietic stem cell
emergence during embryogenesis.

Fitch SR(1), Kimber GM, Wilson NK, Parker A, Mirshekar-Syahkal B, Göttgens B,
Medvinsky A, Dzierzak E, Ottersbach K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome 
Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

The first adult-repopulating hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) emerge in the
aorta-gonads-mesonephros (AGM) region of the embryo. We have recently identified 
the transcription factor Gata3 as being upregulated in this tissue specifically
at the time of HSC emergence. We now demonstrate that the production of
functional and phenotypic HSCs in the AGM is impaired in the absence of Gata3.
Furthermore, we show that this effect on HSC generation is secondary to the role 
of Gata3 in the production of catecholamines, the mediators of the sympathetic
nervous system (SNS), thus making these molecules key components of the AGM HSC
niche. These findings demonstrate that the recently described functional
interplay between the hematopoietic system and the SNS extends to the earliest
stages of their codevelopment and highlight the fact that HSC development needs
to be viewed in the context of the development of other organs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3510442
PMID: 23040481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Dec;147(6):1020-6. doi:
10.1177/0194599812461999. Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Role of NOD1-mediated signals in a mouse model of allergic rhinitis.

Shin JH(1), Kim SW, Park YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine,
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of the present study was to investigate the effect of
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1), an innate immune sensor, on
allergic inflammation and induction of regulatory T cells in a mouse model of
allergic rhinitis. We also aimed to explore whether there were differences in the
effect of NOD1 ligand according to the timing of administration. Study Design An 
in vivo study using an animal model.
SETTING: Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Forty BALB/c mice were divided into 4 groups: control, OVA,
pre-NOD1, and post-NOD1. Ovalbumin (OVA) was used for sensitization and
challenge. The pre-NOD1 group received NOD1 ligand intranasally before
sensitization, whereas the post-NOD1 group received it after sensitization. The
effects of allergic inflammation and regulatory T cells were compared among the
groups.
RESULTS: In the post-NOD1 group, serum OVA-specific IgE, eosinophil counts,
interleukin (IL)-13 levels, and GATA-3 mRNA expression were significantly
increased and Foxp3(+) mRNA expression and CD4(+) Foxp3(+) T cells were decreased
compared with the OVA group. In the pre-NOD1 group, Foxp3 mRNA expression and
CD4(+) Foxp3(+) T cells were significantly decreased compared with the OVA group.
Although not significant, the pre-NOD1 group showed increases in serum
OVA-specific IgE, eosinophil counts, IL-13 levels, and GATA-3 mRNA expression
compared with the OVA group.
CONCLUSION: The innate immune response through NOD1 enhances allergen-specific
Th2 response and suppresses induction of regulatory T cells in a mouse model of
allergic rhinitis, and the effects are different depending on the timing of
exposure to NOD1 ligand.

PMID: 23032918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045224. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

A novel role of IGFBP7 in mouse uterus: regulating uterine receptivity through
Th1/Th2 lymphocyte balance and decidualization.

Liu ZK(1), Wang RC, Han BC, Yang Y, Peng JP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Previously we have screened out Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein 7
(IGFBP7) as a differentially expressed gene in post-implantation uterus versus
pre-implantation uterus by suppressive subtractive hybridation. However its
function in uterus was not clearly identified. In this research, the expression
and function of IGFBP7 during post-implantation were studied. We found that
IGFBP7 was mainly located in the glandular epithelium and the stroma, and was
upregulated after embryo implantation. The vector pCR3.1-IGFBP7-t expressing
partial IGFBP7 was constructed. Inhibition of IGFBP7 by specific DNA immunization
induced significant reduction of implanted embryos and pregnancy rate. The number
of implanted embryos (5.68 ± 0.46) was significantly reduced after immunization
with pCR3.1-IGFBP7-t, as compared with that of the mice immunized with the
control vector (12.29 ± 0.36) or saline (14.58 ± 0.40) (p<0.01). After specific
inhibition of IGFBP7, the T helper type 1 (Th1) cytokine IFN<U+03B3>, was significantly 
elevated (p<0.05) and the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10, were reduced in uteri
(p<0.05). The increase of Tbet and the decrease of Gata3 were found in mice
peripheral lymphocytes by flow cytometry. The expression of decidualization
marker IGFBP1 and angiogenesis regulator VEGF were declined in uteri (p<0.05).
The expression of apoptosis-associated proteins, caspase3 and Bcl-2, were also
declined (p<0.05). These results showed that inhibition of IGFBP7 induced
pregnancy failure by shifting uterine cytokines to Th1 type dominance and
repressing uterine decidualization.

PMCID: PMC3444470
PMID: 23028860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nature. 2012 Oct 4;490(7418):61-70. doi: 10.1038/nature11412. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours.

Cancer Genome Atlas Network.

Collaborators: Koboldt DC, Fulton RS, McLellan MD, Schmidt H, Kalicki-Veizer J,
McMichael JF, Fulton LL, Dooling DJ, Ding L, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Ally A,
Balasundaram M, Butterfield YS, Carlsen R, Carter C, Chu A, Chuah E, Chun HJ,
Coope RJ, Dhalla N, Guin R, Hirst C, Hirst M, Holt RA, Lee D, Li HI, Mayo M,
Moore RA, Mungall AJ, Pleasance E, Robertson A, Schein JE, Shafiei A,
Sipahimalani P, Slobodan JR, Stoll D, Tam A, Thiessen N, Varhol RJ, Wye N, Zeng
T, Zhao Y, Birol I, Jones SJ, Marra MA, Cherniack AD, Saksena G, Onofrio RC, Pho 
NH, Carter SL, Schumacher SE, Tabak B, Hernandez B, Gentry J, Nguyen H, Crenshaw 
A, Ardlie K, Beroukhim R, Winckler W, Getz G, Gabriel SB, Meyerson M, Chin L,
Park PJ, Kucherlapati R, Hoadley KA, Auman J, Fan C, Turman YJ, Shi Y, Li L,
Topal MD, He X, Chao HH, Prat A, Silva GO, Iglesia MD, Zhao W, Usary J, Berg JS, 
Adams M, Booker J, Wu J, Gulabani A, Bodenheimer T, Hoyle AP, Simons JV, Soloway 
MG, Mose LE, Jefferys SR, Balu S, Parker JS, Hayes D, Perou CM, Malik S, Mahurkar
S, Shen H, Weisenberger DJ, Triche T Jr, Lai PH, Bootwalla MS, Maglinte DT,
Berman BP, Van Den Berg DJ, Baylin SB, Laird PW, Creighton CJ, Donehower LA, Getz
G, Noble M, Voet D, Saksena G, Gehlenborg N, DiCara D, Zhang J, Zhang H, Wu CJ,
Liu SY, Lawrence MS, Zou L, Sivachenko A, Lin P, Stojanov P, Jing R, Cho J, Sinha
R, Park RW, Nazaire MD, Robinson J, Thorvaldsdottir H, Mesirov J, Park PJ, Chin
L, Reynolds S, Kreisberg RB, Bernard B, Bressler R, Erkkila T, Lin J, Thorsson V,
Zhang W, Shmulevich I, Ciriello G, Weinhold N, Schultz N, Gao J, Cerami E, Gross 
B, Jacobsen A, Sinha R, Aksoy B, Antipin Y, Reva B, Shen R, Taylor BS, Ladanyi M,
Sander C, Anur P, Spellman PT, Lu Y, Liu W, Verhaak RR, Mills GB, Akbani R, Zhang
N, Broom BM, Casasent TD, Wakefield C, Unruh AK, Baggerly K, Coombes K, Weinstein
JN, Haussler D, Benz CC, Stuart JM, Benz SC, Zhu J, Szeto CC, Scott GK, Yau C,
Paull EO, Carlin D, Wong C, Sokolov A, Thusberg J, Mooney S, Ng S, Goldstein TC, 
Ellrott K, Grifford M, Wilks C, Ma S, Craft B, Yan C, Hu Y, Meerzaman D,
Gastier-Foster JM, Bowen J, Ramirez NC, Black AD, Pyatt RE, White P, Zmuda EJ,
Frick J, Lichtenberg TM, Brookens R, George MM, Gerken MA, Harper HA, Leraas KM, 
Wise LJ, Tabler TR, McAllister C, Barr T, Hart-Kothari M, Tarvin K, Saller C,
Sandusky G, Mitchell C, Iacocca MV, Brown J, Rabeno B, Czerwinski C, Petrelli N, 
Dolzhansky O, Abramov M, Voronina O, Potapova O, Marks JR, Suchorska WM, Murawa
D, Kycler W, Ibbs M, Korski K, Spychala A, Murawa P, Brzezinski JJ, Perz H,
Lazniak R, Teresiak M, Tatka H, Leporowska E, Bogusz-Czerniewicz M, Malicki J,
Mackiewicz A, Wiznerowicz M, Le XV, Kohl B, Nguyen VT, Thorp R, Nguyen VB,
Sussman H, Bui DP, Hajek R, Nguyen PH, Tran VT, Huynh QT, Khan KZ, Penny R,
Mallery D, Curley E, Shelton C, Yena P, Ingle JN, Couch FJ, Lingle WL, King TA,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB, Dyer MD, Liu S, Meng X, Patangan M, Waldman F,
Stöppler H, Rathmell W, Thorne L, Huang M, Boice L, Hill A, Morrison C, Gaudioso 
C, Bshara W, Daily K, Egea SC, Pegram M, Gomez-Fernandez C, Dhir R, Bhargava R,
Brufsky A, Shriver CD, Hooke JA, Campbell JL, Mural RJ, Hu H, Somiari S, Larson
C, Deyarmin B, Kvecher L, Kovatich AJ, Ellis MJ, King TA, Hu H, Couch FJ, Mural
RJ, Stricker T, White K, Olopade O, Ingle JN, Luo C, Chen Y, Marks JR, Waldman F,
Wiznerowicz M, Bose R, Chang LW, Beck AH, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Pihl T, Jensen M,
Sfeir R, Kahn A, Chu A, Kothiyal P, Wang Z, Snyder E, Pontius J, Ayala B, Backus 
M, Walton J, Baboud J, Berton D, Nicholls M, Srinivasan D, Raman R, Girshik S,
Kigonya P, Alonso S, Sanbhadti R, Barletta S, Pot D, Sheth M, Demchok JA, Shaw
KR, Yang L, Eley G, Ferguson ML, Tarnuzzer RW, Zhang J, Dillon LA, Buetow K,
Fielding P, Ozenberger BA, Guyer MS, Sofia HJ, Palchik JD.

We analysed primary breast cancers by genomic DNA copy number arrays, DNA
methylation, exome sequencing, messenger RNA arrays, microRNA sequencing and
reverse-phase protein arrays. Our ability to integrate information across
platforms provided key insights into previously defined gene expression subtypes 
and demonstrated the existence of four main breast cancer classes when combining 
data from five platforms, each of which shows significant molecular
heterogeneity. Somatic mutations in only three genes (TP53, PIK3CA and GATA3)
occurred at >10% incidence across all breast cancers; however, there were
numerous subtype-associated and novel gene mutations including the enrichment of 
specific mutations in GATA3, PIK3CA and MAP3K1 with the luminal A subtype. We
identified two novel protein-expression-defined subgroups, possibly produced by
stromal/microenvironmental elements, and integrated analyses identified specific 
signalling pathways dominant in each molecular subtype including a
HER2/phosphorylated HER2/EGFR/phosphorylated EGFR signature within the
HER2-enriched expression subtype. Comparison of basal-like breast tumours with
high-grade serous ovarian tumours showed many molecular commonalities, indicating
a related aetiology and similar therapeutic opportunities. The biological finding
of the four main breast cancer subtypes caused by different subsets of genetic
and epigenetic abnormalities raises the hypothesis that much of the clinically
observable plasticity and heterogeneity occurs within, and not across, these
major biological subtypes of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3465532
PMID: 23000897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hum Pathol. 2013 Feb;44(2):164-72. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.05.018. Epub 2012 
Sep 17.

Immunohistochemical profile to distinguish urothelial from squamous
differentiation in carcinomas of urothelial tract.

Gulmann C(1), Paner GP, Parakh RS, Hansel DE, Shen SS, Ro JY, Annaiah C,
Lopez-Beltran A, Rao P, Arora K, Cho Y, Herrera-Hernandez L, Alsabeh R, Amin MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Urothelial neoplasms with squamous morphology raise the differential diagnosis
between pure primary squamous cell carcinoma, urothelial carcinoma with squamous 
differentiation and secondary involvement by squamous cell carcinoma, for
example, from uterine cervix. Accurate identification between these entities is
critical due to differing prognosis and therapeutic strategies. We evaluated the 
utility of an immunohistochemical panel of 3 urothelial-associated antibodies
(uroplakin III, S100P, and GATA3) and two squamous-associated antibodies (CK14
and desmoglein-3) in 50 primary urothelial neoplasms: 15 pure urothelial
carcinomas, 12 pure squamous cell carcinomas and 23 urothelial carcinomas with
squamous differentiation. Squamous differentiation was defined by intercellular
bridges or evidence of keratinization. Pure squamous cell carcinomas were
positive for CK14 (100%) and desmoglein-3 (75%), negative for GATA3 and uroplakin
III; one case was S100P positive (9%). Pure urothelial carcinomas had an opposite
pattern and were positive for S100P (93%), GATA3 (93%), and uroplakin III (67%)
and were negative for desmoglein-3; CK 14 was positive in 27% of cases; 74% of
urothelial carcinomas with squamous differentiation had expression of urothelial 
and squamous associated markers (S100P, 83%; GATA3, 35%; uroplakin III, 13%;
CK14, 87%; and desmoglein-3, 70%), although reactivity for individual markers
within some tumors did not always correspond with morphologic differentiation. Of
the remaining 26%, 4 showed an overall "squamous" immunoprofile, whereas 2 cases 
showed a "urothelial" immunoprofile. Our study showed that a panel of five
antibodies identifies squamous and urothelial differentiation in most instances
suggesting potential diagnostic utility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22995333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Jul;47(7):884-9.

[Immunoregulatory effect of artesunate on allergic contact dermatitis and its
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Li T(1), Chen H, Liu XG, Zhou YX, Bai SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Logistics University of the Chinese People's Armed
Police Force, Tianjin 300162, China.

This study is to elucidate the immunoregulation mechanisms of artesunate (AST) on
allergic contact dermatitis (ACD). Pharmacodynamics analyses, HE staining,
semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting were used to explore the effects of
AST on the related cytokines, transcription factor and signaling molecule of ACD 
respectively. The results indicated that topical administration of AST not only
reduced the increase of ear swelling, spleen index and inflammatory cells
infiltration in ACD mice, but also inhibited remarkably the expression of
IFN-gamma, T-bet and NF-kappaB p65. It's suggested that AST could exhibit
suppressive effects on inflammatory response and immune function of ACD, which
indicates the possibility of developing AST as a novel immunoregulatory agent in 
the treatment of ACD and other immune-related diseases.

PMID: 22993852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Development. 2012 Oct;139(20):3795-805.

Transcriptional regulatory mechanisms underlying the GABAergic neuron fate in
different diencephalic prosomeres.

Virolainen SM(1), Achim K, Peltopuro P, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, PO
Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Diverse mechanisms regulate development of GABAergic neurons in different regions
of the central nervous system. We have addressed the roles of a proneural gene,
Ascl1, and a postmitotic selector gene, Gata2, in the differentiation of
GABAergic neuron subpopulations in three diencephalic prosomeres: prethalamus
(P3), thalamus (P2) and pretectum (P1). Although the different proliferative
progenitor populations of GABAergic neurons commonly express Ascl1, they have
distinct requirements for it in promotion of cell-cycle exit and GABAergic neuron
identity. Subsequently, Gata2 is activated as postmitotic GABAergic precursors
are born. In P1, Gata2 regulates the neurotransmitter identity by promoting
GABAergic and inhibiting glutamatergic neuron differentiation. Interestingly,
Gata2 defines instead the subtype of GABAergic neurons in the rostral thalamus
(pTh-R), which is a subpopulation of P2. Without Gata2, the GABAergic precursors 
born in the pTh-R fail to activate subtype-specific markers, but start to express
genes typical of GABAergic precursors in the neighbouring P3 domain. Thus, our
results demonstrate diverse mechanisms regulating differentiation of GABAergic
neuron subpopulations and suggest a role for Gata2 as a selector gene of both
GABAergic neuron neurotransmitter and prosomere subtype identities in the
developing diencephalon. Our results demonstrate for the first time that neuronal
identities between distinct prosomeres can still be transformed in postmitotic
neuronal precursors.

PMID: 22991444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 15;32(33):3886-95.

EZH2 promotes a bi-lineage identity in basal-like breast cancer cells.

Granit RZ(1), Gabai Y, Hadar T, Karamansha Y, Liberman L, Waldhorn I, Gat-Viks I,
Regev A, Maly B, Darash-Yahana M, Peretz T, Ben-Porath I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research  Israel-Canada, Hadassah School of Medicine, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

The mechanisms regulating breast cancer differentiation state are poorly
understood. Of particular interest are molecular regulators controlling the
highly aggressive and poorly differentiated traits of basal-like breast
carcinomas. Here we show that the Polycomb factor EZH2 maintains the
differentiation state of basal-like breast cancer cells, and promotes the
expression of progenitor associated and basal-lineage genes. Specifically, EZH2
regulates the composition of basal-like breast cancer cell populations by
promoting a bi-lineage differentiation state, in which cells co-express basal- 
and luminal-lineage markers. We show that human basal-like breast cancers contain
a subpopulation of bi-lineage cells, and that EZH2-deficient cells give rise to
tumors with a decreased proportion of such cells. Bi-lineage cells express genes 
that are active in normal luminal progenitors, and possess increased
colony-formation capacity, consistent with a primitive differentiation state. We 
found that GATA3, a driver of luminal differentiation, performs a function
opposite to EZH2, acting to suppress bi-lineage identity and luminal-progenitor
gene expression. GATA3 levels increase upon EZH2 silencing, mediating a decrease 
in bi-lineage cell numbers. Our findings reveal a novel role for EZH2 in
controlling basal-like breast cancer differentiation state and intra-tumoral cell
composition.

PMID: 22986524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 1;372(1):68-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.002. Epub 2012
Sep 15.

TFE2 and GATA3 enhance induction of POU4F3 and myosin VIIa positive cells in
nonsensory cochlear epithelium by ATOH1.

Masuda M(1), Pak K, Chavez E, Ryan AF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery/Otolaryngology, La Jolla, CA 92093-0666, USA.

Transcription factors (TFs) can regulate different sets of genes to determine
specific cell types by means of combinatorial codes. We previously identified
closely-spaced TF binding motifs located 8.2-8.5 kb 5' to the ATG of the murine
Pou4f3 gene, a gene required for late hair cell (HC) differentiation and
survival. These motifs, 100% conserved among four mammalian species, include a
cluster of E-boxes preferred by TCF3/ATOH1 heterodimers as well as motifs for
GATA factors and SP1. We hypothesized that these factors might interact to
regulate the Pou4f3 gene and possibly induce a HC phenotype in non-sensory cells 
of the cochlea. Cochlear sensory epithelium explants were prepared from postnatal
day 1.5 transgenic mice in which expression of GFP is driven by 8.5 kb of Pou4f3 
5' genomic DNA (Pou4f3/GFP). Electroporation was used to transfect cells of the
greater epithelial ridge with multiple plasmids encoding human ATOH1 (hATOH1),
hTCF3 (also known as E2A or TEF2), hGATA3, and hSP1. hATOH1 or hTCF3 alone
induced Pou4f3/GFP cells but hGATA3 and hSP1 did not. hATOH1 but not hTCF3
induced conversion of greater epithelial ridge cells into Pou4f3/GFP and myosin
VIIa double-positive cells. Transfection of hATOH1 in combination with hTCF3 or
hGATA3 induced 2-3X more Pou4f3/GFP cells, and similarly enhanced Pou4f3/GFP and 
myosin VIIa double-positive cells, when compared to hATOH1 alone. Triple or
quadruple TF combinations were generally not more effective than double TF
combinations except in the middle turn, where co-transfection of hATOH1, hE2A,
and hGATA3 was more effective than hATOH1 plus either hTCF3 or hGATA3. The
results demonstrate that TFs can cooperate in regulation of the Pou4f3 gene and
in the induction of at least one other element of a HC phenotype. Our data
further indicate that combinations of TFs can be more effective than individual
TFs in the inner ear.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3483650
PMID: 22985730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Oct;36(10):1472-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318260cde7.

Utility of GATA3 immunohistochemistry in differentiating urothelial carcinoma
from prostate adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinomas of the uterine cervix, 
anus, and lung.

Chang A(1), Amin A, Gabrielson E, Illei P, Roden RB, Sharma R, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Distinguishing invasive high-grade urothelial carcinoma (UC) from other
carcinomas occurring in the genitourinary tract may be difficult. The
differential diagnosis includes high-grade prostatic adenocarcinoma, spread from 
an anal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), or spread from a uterine cervical SCC. In 
terms of metastatic UC, the most common problem is differentiating spread of UC
to the lung from a primary pulmonary SCC. Immunohistochemical analysis (IHC) for 
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), thrombomodulin (THROMBO), and uroplakin III was
performed on a tissue microarray (TMA) containing 35 cases of invasive high-grade
UC. GATA3 IHC was also performed on TMAs containing 38 high-grade (Gleason score 
=8) prostatic adenocarcinomas, representative tissue sections from 15 invasive
anal SCCs, representative tissue sections from 19 invasive cervical SCCs, and
TMAs with 12 invasive cervical carcinomas of the cervix [SCC (n=10), SCC with
neuroendocrine features (n=1), and adenosquamous carcinoma (n=1)]. In addition,
GATA3 IHC was performed on representative tissue sections from 15 pulmonary UC
metastases and a TMA with 25 SCCs of the lung and 5 pulmonary non-small cell
carcinomas with squamous features. GATA3, THROMBO, and uroplakin III were
positive in 28 (80%), 22 (63%), and 21 (60%) cases of high-grade UC,
respectively. All cases of GATA3-positive staining were nonfocal; 25 (89%) cases 
demonstrated moderate to strong staining, and 3 (11%) demonstrated weak staining.
Of the 7 cases that failed to express GATA3, 5 were positive for THROMBO and/or
uroplakin III, whereas 2 were negative for all 3 markers. None of the 38
high-grade prostatic adenocarcinomas was positive for GATA3. Weak GATA3 staining 
was present in occasional basal cells of benign prostate glands, in a few benign 
atrophic glands, and in urothelial metaplasia. Of the 15 cases of anal SCCs, 2
(7%) cases showed focal weak staining, and 1 (3%) showed focal moderate staining.
Weak staining was also rarely observed in the benign anal squamous epithelium. Of
the 31 uterine cervical carcinomas, 6 (19%) showed weak GATA3 staining (3
nonfocal and 3 focal), and 2 (6%) demonstrated focal moderate staining. Twelve
(80%) of the metastatic UCs to the lung were positive for GATA3, with 11 cases
showing diffuse moderate or strong staining and 1 case showing focal moderate
staining. None of the pulmonary SCCs or non-small cell carcinomas with squamous
features was GATA3 positive. GATA3 IHC is a sensitive marker for UC, and positive
staining in UC is typically nonfocal and moderate or strong in intensity. GATA3
is also highly specific in excluding high-grade prostate adenocarcinoma. Although
some cervical and anal SCCs can be GATA3 positive, unlike in UC, staining is more
commonly focal and weak. GATA3 is also a useful maker when diagnosing metastatic 
UC to the lung.

PMCID: PMC3444740
PMID: 22982890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44338. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044338. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Dietary resveratrol prevents the development of food allergy in mice.

Okada Y(1), Oh-oka K, Nakamura Y, Ishimaru K, Matsuoka S, Okumura K, Ogawa H,
Hisamoto M, Okuda T, Nakao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Yamanashi Faculty of Medicine Chuo,
Yamanashi, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol is a bioactive polyphenol enriched in red wine that
exhibits many beneficial health effects via multiple mechanisms. However, it is
unclear whether resveratrol is beneficial for the prevention of food allergy.
This study investigated whether resveratrol inhibited the development of food
allergy by using a mouse model of the disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice fed standard diet or standard diet plus
resveratrol were sensitized by intragastric administration of ovalbumin (OVA) and
mucosal adjuvant cholera toxin (CT). Several manifestations of food allergy were 
then compared between the mice. The effects of resveratrol on T cells or
dendritic cells were also examined by using splenocytes from OVA-specific T
cell-receptor (TCR) transgenic DO11.10 mice or mouse bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells (BMDCs) in vitro. We found that mice fed resveratrol showed
reduced OVA-specific serum IgE production, anaphylactic reaction, and OVA-induced
IL-13 and IFN-ã production from the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and spleens in 
comparison to the control mice, following oral sensitization with OVA plus CT. In
addition, resveratrol inhibited OVA plus CT-induced IL-4, IL-13, and IFN-ã
production in splenocytes from DO11.10 mice associated with inhibition of GATA-3 
and T-bet expression. Furthermore, resveratrol suppressed the OVA plus CT-induced
CD25 expression and IL-2 production in DO11.10 mice-splenocytes in association
with decreases in CD80 and CD86 expression levels. Finally, resveratrol
suppressed CT-induced cAMP elevation in association with decreases in CD80 and
CD86 expression levels in BMDCs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Ingestion of resveratrol prevented the development of a
food allergy model in mice. Given the in vitro findings, resveratrol might do so 
by inhibiting DC maturation and subsequent early T cell activation and
differentiation via downregulation of CT-induced cAMP activation in mice. These
results suggest that resveratrol may have potential for prophylaxis against food 
allergy.

PMCID: PMC3433457
PMID: 22962611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nat Med. 2012 Oct;18(10):1525-30. doi: 10.1038/nm.2896. Epub 2012 Sep 9.

Early infection with respiratory syncytial virus impairs regulatory T cell
function and increases susceptibility to allergic asthma.

Krishnamoorthy N(1), Khare A, Oriss TB, Raundhal M, Morse C, Yarlagadda M, Wenzel
SE, Moore ML, Peebles RS Jr, Ray A, Ray P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

Immune tolerance is instituted early in life, during which time regulatory T
(T(reg)) cells have an important role. Recurrent infections with respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) in early life increase the risk for asthma in adult life.
Repeated infection of infant mice tolerized to ovalbumin (OVA) through their
mother's milk with RSV induced allergic airway disease in response to OVA
sensitization and challenge, including airway inflammation, hyper-reactivity and 
higher OVA-specific IgE, as compared to uninfected tolerized control mice. Virus 
infection induced GATA-3 expression and T helper type 2 (T(H)2) cytokine
production in forkhead box P3 (FOXP3)(+) T(reg) cells and compromised the
suppressive function of pulmonary T(reg) cells in a manner that was dependent on 
interleukin-4 receptor a (IL-4Ra) expression in the host. Thus, by promoting a
T(H)2-type inflammatory response in the lung, RSV induced a T(H)2-like effector
phenotype in T(reg) cells and attenuated tolerance to an unrelated antigen
(allergen). Our findings highlight a mechanism by which viral infection targets a
host-protective mechanism in early life and increases susceptibility to allergic 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3641779
PMID: 22961107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. APMIS. 2012 Oct;120(10):808-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02906.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 11.

Modulation of FLT3 signaling targets conventional dendritic cells to attenuate
acute lung injury.

Dong L(1), He HL, Lu XM, Yang Y, Qiu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Zhong-Da Hospital, Southeast University,
Nanjing, China.

Conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) have been reported to participate in the
pathophysiology of acute lung injury (ALI). Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3)
signaling represents a highly specific pathway for the manipulation of cDCs in
vivo. The purpose of this study was to clarify the effect of FLT3 signaling on
the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, and whether inhibition of FLT3
signaling may attenuate acute lung inflammation and lung injury. C57BL/6 mice
were pretreated with FLT3-ligand (FLT3L) and lestaurtinib separately for five
consecutive days. A murine model of ALI was subsequently generated by
intra-tracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lung specimens were
harvested 24 h later. Flow cytometry was conducted to measure the accumulation
and maturation of pulmonary cDCs. IL-6, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, MPO activity and
transcription factor T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio were quantified to evaluate lung
inflammation. Lung injury was estimated by lung wet weight/body weight ratio
(LWW/BW) and histopathological analysis. LPS challenge resulted in rapid
accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs. FLT3L pretreatment further
stimulated the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading to a
markedly increased LWW/BW and aggravated lung histopathology. Meanwhile, lung MPO
activity, T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio and concentrations of IL-6 and IFN-<U+03B3> were
elevated by FLT3L administration. In contrast, lestaurtinib pretreatment
inhibited the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading to a
significantly decreased LWW/BW and improved lung histopathology. Lestaurtinib
administration also suppressed lung MPO activity, T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio and
production of IL-6 and IFN-<U+03B3>. Our findings show that FLT3 signaling ameliorates
ALI by regulating the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, suggesting
an innovative pharmacotherapy for ALI.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 22958289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043955. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Establishment of mouse teratocarcinomas stem cells line and screening genes
responsible for malignancy.

Liu T(1), Wang Y, Peng X, Zhang L, Cheng J, Jin H, Wu M, Qian Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Gene Therapy, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgical Hospital,
The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

The sequential transplantation of embryonal carcinoma cells in vivo can
accelerate the growth and malignancy of teratocarcinomas. However, the possible
molecular mechanisms in this process that reflect cancer formation in the early
stage are largely unknown and. To identify which genes are associated with the
changes of malignancy of teratocarcinomas, we established a tumorigenesis model
in which teratocarcinoma were induced via injecting embryonic stem cells into
immuno-deficiency mice, isolating teratocarcinoma stem cell from a
teratocarcinoma in serum-free culture medium and injecting teratocarcinoma stem
cells into immune-deficient mice continuously. By using high-throughput deep
sequence technology, we identified 26 differentially expressed genes related to
the changes of characteristics of teratocarcinoma stem cell in which 18 out of 26
genes were down-regulated and 8 genes were up-regulated. Among these genes,
several tumor-related genes such as Gata3, Arnt and Tdgf1, epigenetic associated 
genes such as PHC1 and Uty were identified. Pathway enrichment analysis result
revealed that Wnt signaling pathway, primary immunodeficiency pathway, antigen
processing and presentation pathway and allograft rejection pathway were involved
in the teratocarcinoma tumorigenesis (corrected p value<0.05). In summary, our
study established a tumorigenesis model and proposed some candidate genes and
signaling pathways that may play a key role in the early stage of cancer
occurrence.

PMCID: PMC3432059
PMID: 22952821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Jan;133(1):249-57. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.265. Epub 2012
Sep 6.

Impaired proteasome function activates GATA3 in T cells and upregulates CTLA-4:
relevance for Sézary syndrome.

Gibson HM(1), Mishra A, Chan DV, Hake TS, Porcu P, Wong HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Highly regulated expression of the negative costimulatory molecule cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) on T cells modulates T-cell activation and
proliferation. CTLA-4 is preferentially expressed in Th2 T cells, whose
differentiation depends on the transcriptional regulator GATA3. Sézary syndrome
(SS) is a T-cell malignancy characterized by Th2 cytokine skewing, impaired
T-cell responses, and overexpression of GATA3 and CTLA-4. GATA3 is regulated by
phosphorylation and ubiquitination. In SS cells, we detected increased
polyubiquitinated proteins and activated GATA3. We hypothesized that proteasome
dysfunction in SS T cells may lead to GATA3 and CTLA-4 overexpression. To test
this hypothesis, we blocked proteasome function with bortezomib in normal T
cells, and observed sustained GATA3 and CTLA-4 upregulation. The increased CTLA-4
was functionally inhibitory in a mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). GATA3 directly 
transactivated the CTLA-4 promoter, and knockdown of GATA3 messenger RNA and
protein inhibited CTLA-4 induction mediated by bortezomib. Finally, knockdown of 
GATA3 in patient's malignant T cells suppressed CTLA-4 expression. Here we
demonstrate a new T-cell regulatory pathway that directly links decreased
proteasome degradation of GATA3, CTLA-4 upregulation, and inhibition of T-cell
responses. We also demonstrate the requirement of the GATA3/CTLA-4 regulatory
pathway in fresh neoplastic CD4+ T cells. Targeting of this pathway may be
beneficial in SS and other CTLA-4-overexpressing T-cell neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4284066
PMID: 22951729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r52.

Cell type-specific binding patterns reveal that TCF7L2 can be tethered to the
genome by association with GATA3.

Frietze S(1), Wang R, Yao L, Tak YG, Ye Z, Gaddis M, Witt H, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TCF7L2 transcription factor is linked to a variety of human
diseases, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. One mechanism by which TCF7L2
could influence expression of genes involved in diverse diseases is by binding to
distinct regulatory regions in different tissues. To test this hypothesis, we
performed ChIP-seq for TCF7L2 in six human cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified 116,000 non-redundant TCF7L2 binding sites, with only
1,864 sites common to the six cell lines. Using ChIP-seq, we showed that many
genomic regions that are marked by both H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are also bound by
TCF7L2, suggesting that TCF7L2 plays a critical role in enhancer activity.
Bioinformatic analysis of the cell type-specific TCF7L2 binding sites revealed
enrichment for multiple transcription factors, including HNF4alpha and FOXA2
motifs in HepG2 cells and the GATA3 motif in MCF7 cells. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that TCF7L2 co-localizes with HNF4alpha and FOXA2 in HepG2 cells and
with GATA3 in MCF7 cells. Interestingly, in MCF7 cells the TCF7L2 motif is
enriched in most TCF7L2 sites but is not enriched in the sites bound by both
GATA3 and TCF7L2. This analysis suggested that GATA3 might tether TCF7L2 to the
genome at these sites. To test this hypothesis, we depleted GATA3 in MCF7 cells
and showed that TCF7L2 binding was lost at a subset of sites. RNA-seq analysis
suggested that TCF7L2 represses transcription when tethered to the genome via
GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate a novel relationship between GATA3 and
TCF7L2, and reveal important insights into TCF7L2-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3491396
PMID: 22951069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Toxicol Res. 2012 Sep;28(3):159-64. doi: 10.5487/TR.2012.28.3.159.

External Application of Fermented Olive Flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) Oil
Alleviates Inflammatory Responses in 2,4-Dinitrochlorobenzeneinduced Atopic
Dermatitis Mouse Model.

Han SC(1), Kang GJ, Ko YJ, Kang HK, Moon SW, Ann YS, Yoo ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Jeju National University, ,
Jeju 690-756, Korea.

Allergic skin inflammation such as atopic dermatitis (AD) is characterized by
edema and infiltration with various inflammatory cells such as mast cells,
basophils, eosinophils and T cells. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) is
produced mainly by epidermal keratinocytes, as well as dermal fibroblasts and
mast cells in the skin lesions of AD. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in fish
oil can reduce inflammation in allergic patients. Fermentation has a tremendous
capacity to transform chemical structures. The antiinflammatory effects of fish
oil have been described in many diseases, but the beneficial effects by which
fermented olive flounder oil (FOF) modulates the allergic response is poorly
understood. In this study, we produced FOF and tested its ability to suppress the
various allergic inflammatory responses. The ability of FOF to modulate the
immune system was investigated using a mouse model of AD. The FOF-treated group
showed significantly decreased immunoglobulin E (IgE) and histamine in serum.
Also, the increased TSLP expression was significantly inhibited in the FOF group;
the FOF-treated group was not appreciably different from the hydrocort cream
treatment group. In addition, FOF treatment resulted in a smaller spleen size
with reduced the thickness and length compared to the induction group.
Splenocytes from mice treated with FOF produced significantly less IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4,
T-box transcription factor (T-bet) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) expression 
compared with the induction group. These results suggest that FOF may be
effective in treating the allergic symptoms of AD. 5.

PMCID: PMC3834415
PMID: 24278605  [PubMed]


268. BioData Min. 2012 Aug 29;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1756-0381-5-12.

Finding biomarkers in non-model species: literature mining of transcription
factors involved in bovine embryo development.

Turenne N(1), Tiys E, Ivanisenko V, Yudin N, Ignatieva E, Valour D, Degrelle SA, 
Hue I.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, SenS, UR1326, IFRIS, Champs-sur-Marne, F-77420, France.
nturenne@jouy.inra.fr.

BACKGROUND: Since processes in well-known model organisms have specific features 
different from those in Bos taurus, the organism under study, a good way to
describe gene regulation in ruminant embryos would be a species-specific
consideration of closely related species to cattle, sheep and pig. However, as
highlighted by a recent report, gene dictionaries in pig are smaller than in
cattle, bringing a risk to reduce the gene resources to be mined (and so for
sheep dictionaries). Bioinformatics approaches that allow an integration of
available information on gene function in model organisms, taking into account
their specificity, are thus needed. Besides these closely related and
biologically relevant species, there is indeed much more knowledge of (i)
trophoblast proliferation and differentiation or (ii) embryogenesis in human and 
mouse species, which provides opportunities for reconstructing proliferation
and/or differentiation processes in other mammalian embryos, including ruminants.
The necessary knowledge can be obtained partly from (i) stem cell or cancer
research to supply useful information on molecular agents or molecular
interactions at work in cell proliferation and (ii) mouse embryogenesis to supply
useful information on embryo differentiation. However, the total number of
publications for all these topics and species is great and their manual
processing would be tedious and time consuming. This is why we used text mining
for automated text analysis and automated knowledge extraction. To evaluate the
quality of this "mining", we took advantage of studies that reported gene
expression profiles during the elongation of bovine embryos and defined a list of
transcription factors (or TF, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>64) that we used as biological "gold standard".
When successful, the "mining" approach would identify them all, as well as novel 
ones.
METHODS: To gain knowledge on molecular-genetic regulations in a non model
organism, we offer an approach based on literature-mining and score arrangement
of data from model organisms. This approach was applied to identify novel
transcription factors during bovine blastocyst elongation, a process that is not 
observed in rodents and primates. As a result, searching through human and mouse 
corpuses, we identified numerous bovine homologs, among which 11 to 14% of
transcription factors including the gold standard TF as well as novel TF
potentially important to gene regulation in ruminant embryo development. The
scripts of the workflow are written in Perl and available on demand. They require
data input coming from all various databases for any kind of biological issue
once the data has been prepared according to keywords for the studied topic and
species; we can provide data sample to illustrate the use and functionality of
the workflow.
RESULTS: To do so, we created a workflow that allowed the pipeline processing of 
literature data and biological data, extracted from Web of Science (WoS) or
PubMed but also from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), Gene Ontology (GO), Uniprot, 
HomoloGene, TcoF-DB and TFe (TF encyclopedia). First, the human and mouse
homologs of the bovine proteins were selected, filtered by text corpora and
arranged by score functions. The score functions were based on the gene name
frequencies in corpora. Then, transcription factors were identified using TcoF-DB
and double-checked using TFe to characterise TF groups and families. Thus, among 
a search space of 18,670 bovine homologs, 489 were identified as transcription
factors. Among them, 243 were absent from the high-throughput data available at
the time of the study. They thus stand so far for putative TF acting during
bovine embryo elongation, but might be retrieved from a recent RNA sequencing
dataset (Mamo et al. , 2012). Beyond the 246 TF that appeared expressed in bovine
elongating tissues, we restricted our interpretation to those occurring within a 
list of 50 top-ranked genes. Among the transcription factors identified therein, 
half belonged to the gold standard (ASCL2, c-FOS, ETS2, GATA3, HAND1) and half
did not (ESR1, HES1, ID2, NANOG, PHB2, TP53, STAT3).
CONCLUSIONS: A workflow providing search for transcription factors acting in
bovine elongation was developed. The model assumed that proteins sharing the same
protein domains in closely related species had the same protein functionalities, 
even if they were differently regulated among species or involved in somewhat
different pathways. Under this assumption, we merged the information on different
mammalian species from different databases (literature and biology) and proposed 
489 TF as potential participants of embryo proliferation and differentiation,
with (i) a recall of 95% with regard to a biological gold standard defined in
2011 and (ii) an extension of more than 3 times the gold standard of TF detected 
so far in elongating tissues. The working capacity of the workflow was supported 
by the manual expertise of the biologists on the results. The workflow can serve 
as a new kind of bioinformatics tool to work on fused data sources and can thus
be useful in studies of a wide range of biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3563503
PMID: 22931563  [PubMed]


269. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Dec;42(12):3202-11. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242659. Epub 2012 Oct
1.

Decreased STAT5 phosphorylation and GATA-3 expression in NOX2-deficient T cells: 
role in T helper development.

Shatynski KE(1), Chen H, Kwon J, Williams MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Vascular and
Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA.

Absence of phagocyte NADPH oxidase (NOX2) activity causes chronic granulomatous
disease (CGD), a primary immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent bacterial
infections. In contrast to this innate immune deficit, CGD patients and animal
models display a predisposition toward autoimmune disease and enhanced response
to Helicobacter pylori and influenza virus infection. These data imply an
altered, perhaps augmented, adaptive immune response in CGD. As previous data
demonstrated functional NOX2 expression in T cells, our goal here was to
determine if NOX2-deficient T cells are inherently altered in their responses.
Activation of purified naive CD4(+) T cells from NOX2-deficient mice led to
augmented IFN-<U+03B3> and diminished IL-4 production and an increased ratio of
expression of the T(H)1-specific transcription factor T-bet versus the
T(H)2-specfic transcription factor GATA-3, consistent with a T(H)1 skewing of
naïve T cells. Selective inhibition of TCR-induced STAT5 phosphorylation was
identified as a potential mechanism for skewed T helper differentiation. Exposure
to antioxidants inhibited, while pro-oxidants augmented T(H)2 cytokine secretion 
and STAT5 phosphorylation, supporting the redox dependence of these signaling
changes. These data suggest that TCR-induced ROS generation from NOX2 activation 
can regulate the adaptive immune response in a T-cell-inherent fashion, and
propose a possible role for redox signaling in T helper differentiation.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3691816
PMID: 22930452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):1010-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2402. Epub 2012 Aug 26.

Transcription factor Foxp3 and its protein partners form a complex regulatory
network.

Rudra D(1), deRoos P, Chaudhry A, Niec RE, Arvey A, Samstein RM, Leslie C,
Shaffer SA, Goodlett DR, Rudensky AY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Institute, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):943-5.

The transcription factor Foxp3 is indispensible for the differentiation and
function of regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells). To gain insights into the
molecular mechanisms of Foxp3-mediated gene expression, we purified Foxp3
complexes and explored their composition. Biochemical and mass-spectrometric
analyses revealed that Foxp3 forms multiprotein complexes of 400-800 kDa or
larger and identified 361 associated proteins, ~30% of which were transcription
related. Foxp3 directly regulated expression of a large proportion of the genes
encoding its cofactors. Some transcription factor partners of Foxp3 facilitated
its expression. Functional analysis of the cooperation of Foxp3 with one such
partner, GATA-3, provided additional evidence for a network of transcriptional
regulation afforded by Foxp3 and its associates to control distinct aspects of
T(reg) cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3448012
PMID: 22922362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 22;13:416. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-416.

Optimizing the GATA-3 position weight matrix to improve the identification of
novel binding sites.

Nandi S(1), Ioshikhes I.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
snandi@uottawa.ca

BACKGROUND: The identifying of binding sites for transcription factors is a key
component of gene regulatory network analysis. This is often done using
position-weight matrices (PWMs). Because of the importance of in silico mapping
of tentative binding sites, we previously developed an approach for PWM
optimization that substantially improves the accuracy of such mapping.
RESULTS: The present work implements the optimization algorithm applied to the
existing PWM for GATA-3 transcription factor and builds a new di-nucleotide PWM. 
The existing available PWM is based on experimental data adopted from Jaspar. The
optimized PWM substantially improves the sensitivity and specificity of the TF
mapping compared to the conventional applications. The refined PWM also
facilitates in silico identification of novel binding sites that are supported by
experimental data. We also describe uncommon positioning of binding motifs for
several T-cell lineage specific factors in human promoters.
CONCLUSION: Our proposed di-nucleotide PWM approach outperforms the conventional 
mono-nucleotide PWM approach with respect to GATA-3. Therefore our new
di-nucleotide PWM provides new insight into plausible transcriptional regulatory 
interactions in human promoters.

PMCID: PMC3481455
PMID: 22913572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Jun;42(6):891-900. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2012.04003.x.

Reduced T-bet in addition to enhanced STAT6 and GATA3 expressing T cells
contribute to human allergen-induced late responses.

Eifan AO(1), Furukido K, Dumitru A, Jacobson MR, Schmidt-Weber C, Banfield G,
Durham SR, Nouri-Aria KT.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: T-bet and GATA-3 are transcriptional factors involved in Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation, although their concomitant roles at protein levels in
target organs during human allergic disease have not been assessed.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in nasal and
cutaneous models of Th2 (grass-pollen allergen) and a cutaneous model of Th1
(PPD) responses in man.
METHODS: Nasal biopsies were obtained at 8 h and skin biopsies at 8 and 48 h
after allergen and PPD challenges, respectively, from 10 allergic rhinitics and 6
non-atopic controls. T cells were assessed using immunofluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: There were increases in CD3(+)STAT6(+)cells (P = 0.01 for nose and skin)
and CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.03 for skin) in response to allergen compared with
diluent in allergics. When compared with non-atopics after allergen challenge the
difference between the two groups was also significant for CD3(+)STAT6(+)
(P = 0.001 and 0.03) and for CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.04 and 0.001) for nose
and skin respectively. Following PPD challenge CD3(+)STAT4(+)cells and
CD3(+)T-bet(+)cells increased in both groups compared with diluent (P = 0.02 and 
0.03 for both TFs), whereas only CD3(+)T-bet(+) cells were significantly greater 
in non-atopics compared with allergics (P = 0.04). The ratio of GATA3(+):T-bet(+)
T cells in allergen-induced responses was significantly greater in the allergics 
(P = 0.008 and 0.01 nose and skin respectively), whereas the ratio of
T-bet:GATA3(+)T cells was significantly higher in the non-atopics during
PPD-induced responses (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Dysregulation of Th1 transcription may
contribute to heightened expression of STAT6 and GATA3 leading to exaggerated
Th2-driven manifestations of allergic disease.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22909160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Haematologica. 2013 Feb;98(2):247-54. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.054619. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

Histone acetylation and DNA demethylation of T cells result in an anaplastic
large cell lymphoma-like phenotype.

Joosten M(1), Seitz V, Zimmermann K, Sommerfeld A, Berg E, Lenze D, Leser U,
Stein H, Hummel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.

A characteristic feature of anaplastic large cell lymphoma is the significant
repression of the T-cell expression program despite its T-cell origin. The
reasons for this down-regulation of T-cell phenotype are still unknown. To
elucidate whether epigenetic mechanisms are responsible for the loss of the
T-cell phenotype, we treated anaplastic large cell lymphoma and T-cell
lymphoma/leukemia cell lines (n=4, each) with epigenetic modifiers to evoke DNA
demethylation and histone acetylation. Global gene expression data from treated
and untreated cell lines were generated and selected, and differentially
expressed genes were evaluated by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction and western blot analysis. Additionally, histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Combined DNA
demethylation and histone acetylation of anaplastic large cell lymphoma cells was
not able to reconstitute their T-cell phenotype. Instead, the same treatment
induced in T cells: (i) an up-regulation of anaplastic large cell
lymphoma-characteristic genes (e.g. ID2, LGALS1, c-JUN), and (ii) an almost
complete extinction of their T-cell phenotype including CD3, LCK and ZAP70. In
addition, suppressive trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 of important T-cell 
transcription factor genes (GATA3, LEF1, TCF1) was present in anaplastic large
cell lymphoma cells, which is in line with their absence in primary tumor
specimens as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. Our data suggest that
epigenetically activated suppressors (e.g. ID2) contribute to the down-regulation
of the T-cell expression program in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, which is
maintained by trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27.

PMCID: PMC3561432
PMID: 22899583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Cell. 2012 Aug 14;22(2):209-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.06.007.

Core transcriptional regulatory circuit controlled by the TAL1 complex in human T
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Sanda T(1), Lawton LN, Barrasa MI, Fan ZP, Kohlhammer H, Gutierrez A, Ma W,
Tatarek J, Ahn Y, Kelliher MA, Jamieson CH, Staudt LM, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor TAL1/SCL is aberrantly expressed in over 40%
of cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), emphasizing its
importance in the molecular pathogenesis of T-ALL. Here we identify the core
transcriptional regulatory circuit controlled by TAL1 and its regulatory partners
HEB, E2A, LMO1/2, GATA3, and RUNX1. We show that TAL1 forms a positive
interconnected autoregulatory loop with GATA3 and RUNX1 and that the TAL1 complex
directly activates the MYB oncogene, forming a positive feed-forward regulatory
loop that reinforces and stabilizes the TAL1-regulated oncogenic program. One of 
the critical downstream targets in this circuitry is the TRIB2 gene, which is
oppositely regulated by TAL1 and E2A/HEB and is essential for the survival of
T-ALL cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3422504
PMID: 22897851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Feb;54(2):310-4. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.710330. Epub 2012
Sep 8.

Gene expression pattern contributing to prognostic factors in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Silveira VS(1), Scrideli CA, Moreno DA, Yunes JA, Queiroz RG, Toledo SC, Lee ML, 
Petrilli AS, Brandalise SR, Tone LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University of
Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil. vssilveira@usp.br

The present study evaluated the expression profile of 19 genes previously
reported in microarray studies and associated with resistance or sensitivity to
vincristine (RPLP2, CD44, TCFL5, KCNN1, TRIM24), prednisolone (F8A, CDK2AP1,
BLVRB, CD69), daunorubicin (MAP3K12, SHOC2, PCDH9, EGR1, KCNN4) and
l-asparaginase (GPR56, MAN1A1, CLEC11A, IGFBP7, GATA3). We studied 140 bone
marrow samples at diagnosis from children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
treated according to the Brazilian Childhood Leukemia Treatment Group (GBTLI)
ALL-99 protocol. The expression profiles of the genes listed above were analyzed 
by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and then related to the
clinical and biological prognostic factors. The results showed significant
associations (p = 0.05) between the expression levels of genes GPR56, BLVRB,
IGFBP7 and white blood cell (WBC) count at diagnosis; GATA3, MAN1A1, CD44,
MAP3K12, CLEC11A, SHOC2 and CD10 B-lineage ALL; TCFL5 and bone marrow status at
day 14; MAP3K12 and TRIM24 and bone marrow status at day 28; and CD69, TCFL5 and 
TRIM24 genes and ETV6/RUNX1 positive ALL. The up-regulation of SHOC2 was also
associated with better 5-year event-free survival (EFS) in univariate and
multivariate analysis (p = 0.02 and p = 0.03, respectively). These findings
highlight genes that could be associated with clinical and biological prognostic 
factors in childhood ALL, suggesting that these genes may characterize and play a
role in the treatment outcome of some ALL subsets.

PMID: 22897724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2012 May;35(5):340-4.

[Characteristics of histone deacetylase 9 in peripheral blood of patients with
bronchial asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Hou XX(1), Shi GC, Wan HY, Ai XY, Shi YH, Ni YM, Tang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression pattern of histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9)
in peripheral blood of asthmatics and its effect on immune cells (Th2, Th17,
Tregs) involved in the pathogenesis of asthma.
METHODS: Forty-seven asthmatics from Ruijin Hospital were recruited and assigned 
to intermittent, mild and moderate-severe groups. Lung function test and Asthma
Control Questionnaire were performed to evaluate asthma control and severity.
Twenty healthy donors were enrolled as controls. GATA3, IL-4, and HDAC9 mRNA
expression levels were measured by SYRB Green Real-time PCR. The cytokine
IL-17-mainly produced by Th17 cells and TGF-ß-mainly produced by Treg cells, were
measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: The GATA3 and IL-4 mRNA expression levels (28.12 ± 7.57 and 743.6 ±
312.8) were up-regulated in asthmatics as compared to the healthy controls [0.56 
± 0.22, 0.7 ± 0.8 (U = 16.00, 37.00, P < 0.01)]. The HDAC9 mRNA expression levels
of intermittent, mild and moderate-severe groups were 3.20 ± 0.50, 89.6 ± 18.0,
323.0 ± 65.3, respectively, which were associated with the severity of disease (H
= 11.32, P < 0.05). The level of IL-17 in asthmatic group was (83 ± 55) ng/L,
which was up-regulated as compared to the healthy control [(34 ± 22) ng/L (U =
153.50, P < 0.01)]. The level of TGF-ß was decreased in the asthmatic groups as
compared to the healthy control, but the difference did not reach significance.
HDAC9 mRNA expression level was positively correlated with GATA3 mRNA expression 
level (r = 0.482, P < 0.05), and also with IL-4 mRNA expression (r = 0.432, P <
0.05) and IL-17 (r = 0.538, P < 0.05), but negatively correlated with TGF-ß (r = 
-0.417, P < 0.05). In patients with moderate-severe asthma, HDAC9 mRNA expression
level was negatively correlated with FEV(1)% (r = -0.657, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: HDAC9 mRNA expression was up-regulated in peripheral blood of
asthmatics, which was not only associate with the Th2 master transcriptional
factors GATA3, cytokine IL-4 mRNA, Th17 and Treg cell-related cytokines, but also
with FEV(1)% in moderate-severe asthma.

PMID: 22883992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Inflamm Res. 2012 Dec;61(12):1369-78. doi: 10.1007/s00011-012-0538-3. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Blockage of nerve growth factor modulates T cell responses and inhibits allergic 
inflammation in a mouse model of asthma.

Shi Y(1), Jin Y, Guo W, Chen L, Liu C, Lv X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy,
Jilin University, 130021 Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: Blockage of nerve growth factor (NGF) by anti-NGF antibodies can
inhibit allergic airway hyper-responsiveness in mice. This study was aimed at
determining the mechanisms underlying the action of anti-NGF in vivo.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were sensitized with ovalbumin (OVA) and treated with
anti-NGF. At 1 day after the last challenge, their airway responsiveness and
inflammation were examined and the levels of cytokine and transcription factor
mRNA transcripts in the lungs and cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
were determined. The frequency of different functional T cells and the levels of 
serum OVA-specific antibodies were measured.
RESULTS: OVA challenge induced severe airway resistance, inflammation, higher
levels of IL-4, TNFa, IL-17A, TGFß, GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>T expression and increased Th2
and Th17 cells and IgE responses, but decreased IFN<U+03B3> and IL-10 responses, T-bet
and Foxp3 expression and Th1 and Tregs. Treatment with anti-NGF significantly
reduced allergic airway resistance and inflammation, up-regulated IFN<U+03B3>, IL-10,
TGFß, T-bet, and Foxp3 expression, increased Th1 and Tregs, but down-regulated
IL-4, TNFa, IL-17A, ROR<U+03B3>T and GATA-3 expression and reduced Th2 and Th17 cells,
accompanied by increased serum IgG2a.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-NGF inhibits allergic airway inflammation by modulating the
balance of pro- and anti-asthmatic T cell responses in the lungs of mice.

PMID: 22871964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Aug;42(8):1916-23. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242639.

Transcriptional control of innate lymphoid cells.

Mjösberg J(1), Bernink J, Peters C, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, the Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Cells that belong to the family of innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) not only form a
first line of defense against invading microbes, but also play essential roles in
tissue remodeling and immune pathology. Ror<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs, producing the cytokines
IL-22 and IL-17, include lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells which are critical
for the formation of lymphoid structures. Recently another ILC subset has been
identified, which is dependent on RORa for its development and is dedicated to
the production of the Th2 cytokines IL-5 and IL-13. These ILCs have been termed
type 2 ILCs. All ILC subets are considered to belong to the same family that also
includes natural killer cells because they all rely on the common <U+03B3>-chain (<U+03B3>c) of
the IL-2 receptor for their development and function, share a lymphoid morphology
and depend on the transcriptional repressor Id2 for their development. Other
transcription factors, including Notch, and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
in ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs and GATA3 in type 2 ILCs, also play roles in the development,
survival, and function of these ILC subpopulations. Here we review the current
knowledge with regard to the transcription factors involved in the development
and functions of ILCs.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22865043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Oct;38(2):285-94. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.06.013. Epub
2012 Jul 31.

The bioactivity of teleost IL-6: IL-6 protein in orange-spotted grouper
(Epinephelus coioides) induces Th2 cell differentiation pathway and antibody
production.

Chen HH(1), Lin HT, Foung YF, Han-You Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Institute of Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan 701, Taiwan, ROC.

Interleukin 6 (IL-6) is a protein secreted by T cells and macrophages and plays
an important role in immune response. IL-6 regulates the proliferation and
differentiation of T cells, and elicits immunoglobulin production in B cells. In 
this study, the cDNA il-6 (gil-6) sequence of the orange spotted grouper
(Epinephelus coioides) was obtained. The deduced IL-6 (gIL-6) protein comprised
223 amino acids, the sequence shared approximately 30% similarity with mammalian 
IL-6, and between 47% and 69% similarity with other available teleost IL-6. The
protein comprises the signal peptide, the IL-6 family signature, and conserved
amino acid residues found in IL-6 sequences of other teleost. In order to
understand the bioactivity and influence of gIL-6 on humoral immune response,
recombinant gIL-6 (rgIL-6) synthesized by prokaryotes was injected into orange
spotted groupers, and the immune-related gene expression at various times in
various organs was observed. Our results revealed that the Th1 specific
transcription factor t-bet was down-regulated and Th2 specific transcription
factors gata3, and c-maf were up-regulated in immune organs, following IL-6
stimulation. Additionally, higher levels of igm mRNA and translated protein were 
detected in rgIL-6 stimulated fish. These results indicate that IL-6 in groupers 
regulates the differentiation of na<U+0457>ve T helper cells into Th2 cells and elicits 
the production of antibodies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22858412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 1;189(5):2393-403. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103371. Epub 2012
Jul 30.

ZBTB32 is an early repressor of the CIITA and MHC class II gene expression during
B cell differentiation to plasma cells.

Yoon HS(1), Scharer CD, Majumder P, Davis CW, Butler R, Zinzow-Kramer W,
Skountzou I, Koutsonanos DG, Ahmed R, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

CIITA and MHC class II expression is silenced during the differentiation of B
cells to plasma cells. When B cell differentiation is carried out ex vivo, CIITA 
silencing occurs rapidly, but the factors contributing to this event are not
known. ZBTB32, also known as repressor of GATA3, was identified as an early
repressor of CIITA in an ex vivo plasma cell differentiation model. ZBTB32
activity occurred at a time when B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1
(Blimp-1), the regulator of plasma cell fate and suppressor of CIITA, was
minimally induced. Ectopic expression of ZBTB32 suppressed CIITA and I-A gene
expression in B cells. Short hairpin RNA depletion of ZBTB32 in a plasma cell
line resulted in re-expression of CIITA and I-A. Compared with conditional
Blimp-1 knockout and wild-type B cells, B cells from ZBTB32/ROG-knockout mice
displayed delayed kinetics in silencing CIITA during ex vivo plasma cell
differentiation. ZBTB32 was found to bind to the CIITA gene, suggesting that
ZBTB32 directly regulates CIITA. Lastly, ZBTB32 and Blimp-1 coimmunoprecipitated,
suggesting that the two repressors may ultimately function together to silence
CIITA expression. These results introduce ZBTB32 as a novel regulator of MHC-II
gene expression and a potential regulatory partner of Blimp-1 in repressing gene 
expression.

PMCID: PMC3424359
PMID: 22851713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Jan;58(1):88-96. doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2327-9. Epub 2012 Aug 
1.

Balance of CD8+ CD28+ / CD8+ CD28- T lymphocytes is vital for patients with
ulcerative colitis.

Dai SX(1), Wu G, Zou Y, Feng YL, Liu HB, Feng JS, Chi HG, Lv RX, Zheng XB.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department of Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510515, China.

BACKGROUND: Immune balances are important for many diseases including ulcerative 
colitis (UC). This study aimed to explore the role of the balance between CD8+
CD28+ and CD8+ CD28- T lymphocytes for the immunological pathogenesis of UC.
METHODS: Sixteen patients with UC, 16 patients with irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS) and 15 healthy volunteers were enrolled. The frequencies of CD8+ CD28+ and 
CD8+CD28- T lymphocytes in peripheral blood and colon tissue were tested using
flow cytometry and immunofluorescent, respectively. The cytokines of the two
lymphocytes were detected by protein chips and ELISA. The expression of the
signal transducers, the JAK3 and STAT6, as well the transcription factors, the
NFATc2 and GATA3, was all detected by both western blot and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: For UC patients, the frequencies of CD8+ CD28+ T lymphocytes, together
with the ratios of CD8+ CD28+ / CD8+ CD28- T lymphocytes in blood and colon
tissue, were significantly lower than those in both IBS patients and healthy
volunteers. But the frequencies of CD8+ CD28- T lymphocytes in blood and colon
tissue of the UC patients were significantly higher than the other two groups.
The concentration of IL-7 and -13, and the expression of JAK3 and STAT6 in UC
patients, were significantly lower when compared with the other two groups.
Conversely, the concentration of IL-12p40 and -15, and the expression of GATA3
and NFATc2 in UC patients, were significantly higher than both IBS and control
group.
CONCLUSIONS: The balance of CD8+ CD28+ / CD8+ CD28- T lymphocytes plays a vital
role in UC, while the balance tilt towards CD8+ CD28+ T lymphocytes is beneficial
for patients with UC.

PMID: 22851040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040747. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Transcriptional activation of prostate specific homeobox gene NKX3-1 in subsets
of T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Tomasch J, Lienenklaus S, Schneider B, Geffers R, Meyer
C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors impacting key developmental processes
including embryogenesis, organogenesis, and cell differentiation. Reflecting
their tight transcriptional control, homeobox genes are often embedded in large
non-coding, cis-regulatory regions, containing tissue specific elements. In
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) homeobox genes are frequently
deregulated by chromosomal aberrations, notably translocations adding T-cell
specific activatory elements. NKX3-1 is a prostate specific homeobox gene
activated in T-ALL patients expressing oncogenic TAL1 or displaying immature
T-cell characteristics. After investigating regulation of NKX3-1 in primary cells
and cell lines, we report its ectopic expression in T-ALL cells independent of
chromosomal rearrangements. Using siRNAs and expression profiling, we exploited
NKX3-1 positive T-ALL cell lines as tools to investigate aberrant activatory
mechanisms. Our data confirmed NKX3-1 activation by TAL1/GATA3/LMO and identified
LYL1 as an alternative activator in immature T-ALL cells devoid of GATA3.
Moreover, we showed that NKX3-1 is directly activated by early T-cell homeodomain
factor MSX2. These activators were regulated by MLL and/or by IL7-, BMP4- and
IGF2-signalling. Finally, we demonstrated homeobox gene SIX6 as a direct leukemic
target of NKX3-1 in T-ALL. In conclusion, we identified three major mechanisms of
NKX3-1 regulation in T-ALL cell lines which are represented by activators TAL1,
LYL1 and MSX2, corresponding to particular T-ALL subtypes described in patients. 
These results may contribute to the understanding of leukemic transcriptional
networks underlying disturbed T-cell differentiation in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3407137
PMID: 22848398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Anesthesiology. 2012 Sep;117(3):580-91. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31826687d5.

Nebulized lidocaine prevents airway inflammation, peribronchial fibrosis, and
mucus production in a murine model of asthma.

Serra MF(1), Anjos-Valotta EA, Olsen PC, Couto GC, Jurgilas PB, Cotias AC, Pão
CR, Ferreira TP, Arantes AC, Pires AL, Cordeiro RS, Silva PM, Martins MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Inflammation, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation
(FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that nebulized lidocaine is beneficial in asthma
therapy, but to what extent and the mechanisms underlying this effect remain
poorly understood. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of lidocaine
treatment using a murine model of allergic asthma characterized by expression of 
pivotal features of the disease: inflammation, mucus production, and lung
remodeling.
METHODS: A/J mice sensitized with ovalbumin were treated with inhaled lidocaine
or vehicle immediately after ovalbumin intranasal challenges. Lung function,
total and differential leukocytes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, peribronchial 
eosinophil density, interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and eotaxin-1 levels, epithelial
mucus, collagen, extracellular-matrix deposition, matrix metalloproteinase-9
activity, and GATA-3 expression were evaluated. Between five and eight animals
per group were used.
RESULTS: Inhaled lidocaine inhibited ovalbumin-induced airway hyperreactivity to 
methacholine, and accumulation of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 24 h after the last allergen provocation. Lidocaine 
administration also prevented other pathophysiological changes triggered by
ovalbumin in lung tissue, including peribronchial eosinophil and neutrophil
infiltration, subepithelial fibrosis, increased content of collagen and mucus,
matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity, and increased levels of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13,
and eotaxin-1. Furthermore, inhaled lidocaine inhibited lung tissue GATA-3
expression in ovalbumin-challenged mice. We also demonstrated that lidocaine
inhibited the expression of GATA-3 in ovalbumin-stimulated T cells in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled lidocaine prevents eosinophilic inflammation, overproduction
of mucus, and peribronchial fibrosis in a murine model of asthma, and impaired
airway hyperreactivity, possibly by inhibiting allergen-evoked GATA-3 expression 
and the subsequent up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines.

PMID: 22846675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 24;425(2):340-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.093. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Cryptotanshinone and tanshinone IIA enhance IL-15-induced natural killer cell
differentiation.

Kim WS(1), Kim DO, Yoon SJ, Kim MJ, Yoon SR, Park YJ, Jung H, Kim TD, Kwon BM,
Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, 125 Gwahak-ro, Yoosunggu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells are a subset of lymphocytes crucial for innate and
adaptive immune responses. Here we show a stimulatory effect of cryptotanshinone 
(CTS) and tanshinone IIA (TS), isolated from Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, on the
differentiation of NK cells. In the presence of IL-15, tanshinones increased NK
cell maturation, NK cell differentiation and the expression of several
transcription factors, including Id2, GATA3, T-bet, and Ets-1. Additionally,
tanshinones increased p38 MAPK phosphorylation during NK cell differentiation.
Furthermore, the p38 inhibitor SB203580 blocked the developmental effects of the 
tanshinones and suppressed Id2, T-bet, and Ets-1 expression during NK cell
differentiation. These results suggest that tanshinones significantly increased
IL-15-induced NK cell differentiation via enhancing the p38 phosphorylation and
the expression of transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Feb;131(2):521-31.e1-12. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 14 and its enzyme activity regulates T(H)2
differentiation and allergic airway disease.

Mehrotra P(1), Hollenbeck A, Riley JP, Li F, Patel RJ, Akhtar N, Goenka S.

Author information: 
(1)HB Wells Center for Pediatric Research and the Department of Pediatrics,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind, USA.

BACKGROUND: IL-4 and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6)
play an important role in the progression of allergic airway disease (AAD) or
asthma. IL-4 and STAT6 mediate T(H)2 responses in T cells and immunoglobulin
class-switching to IgE in B cells. Both T(H)2 responses and IgE promote the
asthmatic condition. We have previously demonstrated that poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) 14, a member of the PARP family of proteins, regulates the
transcription function of STAT6. However, the role of PARP-14 in AAD is not
known.
OBJECTIVE: Here we investigate the role of PARP-14 and the enzyme activity
associated with it in a model of AAD dependent on airway hyperresponsiveness and 
lung inflammation. We also elucidate the mechanism by which PARP-14 regulates
AAD.
METHODS: The role of PARP-14 and its enzyme activity in AAD and T(H)2
differentiation were examined by using a murine model of AAD and in vitro T(H)
cell differentiation.
RESULTS: PARP-14-deficient animals show reduced lung pathology and IgE levels
when compared with control animals. Treating mice with a pharmacologic inhibitor 
for PARP activity reduced the severity of airway hyperresponsiveness and lung
inflammation. Mechanistically, our data indicate that PARP-14 and its enzyme
activity aid in the differentiation of T cells toward a T(H)2 phenotype by
regulating the binding of STAT6 to the Gata3 promoter.
CONCLUSION: PARP-14 and the catalytic activity associated with it promote T(H)2
differentiation and AAD in a murine model, and targeting PARP-14 might be a
potential new therapy for allergic asthma.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502685
PMID: 22841009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(3):552-62. doi: 10.1159/000341437. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

Intrauterine undernourishment alters TH1/TH2 cytokine balance and attenuates lung
allergic inflammation in wistar rats.

Landgraf MA(1), Landgraf RG, Silva RC, Semedo P, Câmara NO, Fortes ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Imunologia dos Transplantes, Departamento de Imunologia,
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

IL-4 produced by Th2 cells can block cytokine production by Th1 cells, and Th1
IFN-<U+03B3> is known to counterregulate Th2 immune response, inhibiting allergic
eosinophilia. As intrauterine undernutrition can attenuate lung inflammation, we 
investigated the influence of intrauterine undernourishment on the Th1/Th2
cytokine balance and allergic lung inflammation. Intrauterine undernourished
offspring were obtained from dams fed 50% of the nourished diet of their
counterparts and were immunized at 9 weeks of age. We evaluated the cell counts
and cytokine protein expression in the bronchoalveolar lavage, mucus production
and collagen deposition, and cytokine gene expression and transcription factors
in lung tissue 21 days after ovalbumin immunization. Intrauterine
undernourishment significantly reduced inflammatory cell airway infiltration,
mucus secretion and collagen deposition, in rats immunized and challenged.
Intrauterine undernourished rats also exhibited an altered cytokine expression
profile, including higher TNF-a and IL-1ß expression and lower IL-6 expression
than well-nourished rats following immunization and challenge. Furthermore, the
intrauterine undernourished group showed reduced ratios of the IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> and the
transcription factors GATA-3/T-Bet after immunization and challenge. We suggest
that the attenuated allergic lung inflammation observed in intrauterine
undernourished rats is related to an altered Th1/Th2 cytokine balance resulting
from a reduced GATA-3/T-bet ratio.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22832079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Nov;127(2):412-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.07.098. Epub 2012
Jul 22.

Th2 type inflammation promotes the gradual progression of HPV-infected cervical
cells to cervical carcinoma.

Feng Q(1), Wei H, Morihara J, Stern J, Yu M, Kiviat N, Hellstrom I, Hellstrom KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the role of immunological parameters in tumorigenesis 
of cervical cancer in women infected with high risk human papillomavirus
(hr-HPV), and determine whether key findings with human material can be
recapitulated in the mouse TC1 carcinoma model which expresses hr-HPV epitopes.
METHODS: Epithelial and lymphoid cells in cervical tissues were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry and serum IL10 levels were determined by ELISA. Tumor
draining lymph nodes were analyzed in the mouse TC1 model by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The mucosa was infiltrated by CD20+ and CD138+ cells already at cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN1) and infiltration increased in cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia 3 (CIN3)/carcinoma in situ (CIS) and invasive cervical 
cancer (ICC), where it strongly correlated with infiltration by CD32B+ and FoxP3+
lymphocytes. GATA3+ and T-bet+ lymphoid cells were increased in ICC compared to
normal, and expression in epithelial cells of the Th2 inflammation-promoting
cytokine TSLP and of IDO1 was higher in CIN3/CIS and ICC. As a corollary, serum
levels of IL10 were higher in women with CIN3/CIS or ICC than in normals. Finally
we demonstrated in the mouse TC1 carcinoma, which expresses hr-HPV epitopes, an
increase of cells expressing B cell or plasma cell markers or Fc receptors in
tumor-draining than distal lymph nodes or spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: hr-HPV initiates a local Th2 inflammation at an early stage,
involving antibody forming cells, and fosters an immunosuppressive
microenvironment that aids tumor progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3472044
PMID: 22828962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;90(10):974-7. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.39. Epub 2012 Jul
24.

Innate interferons inhibit allergen and microbial specific T(H)2 responses.

Pritchard AL(1), White OJ, Burel JG, Upham JW.

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Allergy Research Centre, School of Medicine, The University of
Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Buranda, Brisbane, Australia.
a.pritchard2@uq.edu.au

Several studies provided evidence of innate interferons (IFNs) regulating T(H)2
cytokine production using purified CD4(+) memory cells and T(H)2 polarisation via
interleukin-4 (IL-4). Vitally, none of these previous studies examined IFN
attenuation of T(H)2 responses to allergen or antigen. This study therefore
sought to investigate the abrogation of specific allergen- and antigen-stimulated
T(H)2 response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) derived from 12
sensitised individuals by IFN-ß and IFN-<U+03BB>. PBMC were cultured in the presence of 
house dust mite (HDM) allergen, rhinovirus (RV), influenza vaccine and tetanus
toxoid (TT)±either IFN-ß or IFN-<U+03BB> for 3 and 5 days. IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-5 and IL-13 protein
levels were measured by ELISA. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to investigate
induction of genes involved in control of T(H)2 cytokines. No alteration in T(H)1
IFN-<U+03B3> allergen/antigen response was observed with addition of IFN-ß or IFN-<U+03BB>.
Consistent abrogation of T(H)2 response to HDM and influenza was observed with
IFN-ß at both time points; attenuation was observed by day 5 with RV and TT.
IFN-<U+03BB> had no consistent effect on T(H)2 production except in the presence of RV
(multiplicity of infection=5); a decrease in IL-5 alone was observed in the
presence of trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine. GATA binding protein 3
(GATA3) and suppressors of cytokine signalling3 mRNA were differentially
regulated in HDM and influenza-stimulated cultures±IFN-ß. We concluded that IFN-ß
produced a strong and consistent abrogation of T(H)2 cytokine production in the
presence of a range of allergen and antigen stimulants.

PMID: 22825591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Jul 23;14(4):R171. doi: 10.1186/ar3924.

Analysis of IgG4 class switch-related molecules in IgG4-related disease.

Tsuboi H, Matsuo N, Iizuka M, Tsuzuki S, Kondo Y, Tanaka A, Moriyama M, Matsumoto
I, Nakamura S, Sumida T.

Comment in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2013;15(1):103.

INTRODUCTION: Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a new disease
entity characterized by high serum IgG4 levels, IgG4-positive plasmacytic
infiltration, and fibrosis in various organs. The purpose of this study was to
determine the mechanism of upregulation of IgG4 class switch recombination in
IgG4-RD.
METHODS: We extracted RNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of
patients with IgG4-RD (n = 6), Sjögren syndrome (SS) (n = 6), and healthy
controls (n = 8), from CD3-positive T cells and CD20-positive B cells sorted from
PBMCs of patients with IgG4-RD (n = 3), SS (n = 4), and healthy controls (n = 4),
as well as from labial salivary glands (LSGs) of patients with IgG4-RD (n = 11), 
SS (n = 13), and healthy controls (n = 3). The mRNA expression levels of
IgG4-specific class switch-related molecules, such as Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and
IL-13), Treg cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-ß), and transcriptional factors (GATA3 and 
Foxp3) were examined with quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
IgG4-nonspecific class switch-related molecules, such as CD40, CD154, BAFF,
APRIL, IRF4, and AID, were also examined.
RESULTS: The expression levels of Treg cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-ß) and AID were
significantly higher in LSGs of IgG4-RD than in SS and the controls (P < 0.05,
each). In contrast, those of CD40 and CD154 were significantly lower in PBMCs of 
IgG4-RD than in SS (P < 0.05, each), whereas CD40 in CD20-positive B cells and
CD154 in CD3-positive T cells were comparable in the three groups.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of IL-10, TGF-ß, and AID in LSGs might play important 
roles in the pathogenesis of IgG4-RD, such as IgG4-specific class-switch
recombination and fibrosis. IgG4 class-switch recombination seems to be mainly
upregulated in affected organs.

PMCID: PMC3580565
PMID: 22824292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Rep. 2012 Jun 28;1(6):715-29. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.05.005. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

FoxM1 regulates mammary luminal cell fate.

Carr JR(1), Kiefer MM, Park HJ, Li J, Wang Z, Fontanarosa J, DeWaal D, Kopanja D,
Benevolenskaya EV, Guzman G, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Elevated expression of FoxM1 in breast cancer correlates with an undifferentiated
tumor phenotype and a negative clinical outcome. However, a role for FoxM1 in
regulating mammary differentiation was not known. Here, we identify another
function of FoxM1, the ability to act as a transcriptional repressor, which plays
an important role in regulating the differentiation of luminal epithelial
progenitors. Regeneration of mammary glands with elevated levels of FoxM1 leads
to aberrant ductal morphology and expansion of the luminal progenitor pool.
Conversely, knockdown of FoxM1 results in a shift toward the differentiated
state. FoxM1 mediates these effects by repressing the key regulator of luminal
differentiation, GATA-3. Through association with DNMT3b, FoxM1 promotes
methylation of the GATA-3 promoter in an Rb-dependent manner. This study
identifies FoxM1 as a critical regulator of mammary differentiation with
significant implications for the development of aggressive breast cancers.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401379
PMID: 22813746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nat Genet. 2012 Jul 15;44(8):895-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2351.

Association analyses identify multiple new lung cancer susceptibility loci and
their interactions with smoking in the Chinese population.

Dong J(1), Hu Z, Wu C, Guo H, Zhou B, Lv J, Lu D, Chen K, Shi Y, Chu M, Wang C,
Zhang R, Dai J, Jiang Y, Cao S, Qin Z, Yu D, Ma H, Jin G, Gong J, Sun C, Zhao X, 
Yin Z, Yang L, Li Z, Deng Q, Wang J, Wu W, Zheng H, Zhou G, Chen H, Guan P, Peng 
Z, Chen Y, Shu Y, Xu L, Liu X, Liu L, Xu P, Han B, Bai C, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Yan Y,
Amos CI, Chen F, Tan W, Jin L, Wu T, Lin D, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education (MOE)
Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

To find additional susceptibility loci for lung cancer, we tested promising
associations from our previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) of lung
cancer in the Chinese population in an extended validation sample size of 7,436
individuals with lung cancer (cases) and 7,483 controls. We found genome-wide
significant (P < 5.0 × 10(-8)) evidence for three additional lung cancer
susceptibility loci at 10p14 (rs1663689, close to GATA3, P = 2.84 × 10(-10)),
5q32 (rs2895680 in PPP2R2B-STK32A-DPYSL3, P = 6.60 × 10(-9)) and 20q13.2
(rs4809957 in CYP24A1, P = 1.20 × 10(-8)). We also found consistent associations 
for rs247008 at 5q31.1 (IL3-CSF2-P4HA2, P = 7.68 × 10(-8)) and rs9439519 at
1p36.32 (AJAP1-NPHP4, P = 3.65 × 10(-6)). Four of these loci showed evidence for 
interactions with smoking dose (P = 1.72 × 10(-10), P = 5.07 × 10(-3), P = 6.77 ×
10(-3) and P = 4.49 × 10(-2) for rs2895680, rs4809957, rs247008 and rs9439519,
respectively). These results advance our understanding of lung cancer
susceptibility and highlight potential pathways that integrate genetic variants
and smoking in the development of lung cancer.

PMID: 22797725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Transl Med. 2012 Jul 12;10:146. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-146.

Biomarkers on melanoma patient T cells associated with ipilimumab treatment.

Wang W(1), Yu D, Sarnaik AA, Yu B, Hall M, Morelli D, Zhang Y, Zhao X, Weber JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cutaneous Oncology and the Donald A. Adam Comprehensive Melanoma
Research Center, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
Wenshi.wang@moffitt.org

BACKGROUND: Ipilimumab induces long-lasting clinical responses in a minority of
patients with metastatic melanoma. To better understand the mechanism(s) of
action and to identify novel biomarkers associated with the clinical benefit and 
toxicity of ipilimumab, baseline characteristics and changes in CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells from melanoma patients receiving ipilimumab were characterized by gene
profiling and flow cytometry.
METHODS: Microarray analysis of flow-cytometry purified CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
was employed to assess gene profiling changes induced by ipilimumab. Selected
molecules were further investigated by flow cytometry on pre, 3-month and 6-month
post-treatment specimens.
RESULTS: Ipilimumab up-regulated Ki67 and ICOS on CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells at both
3- and 6-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.001), decreased CCR7 and CD25 on CD8(+) at 
3-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.02), and increased Gata3 in CD4(+) and CD8(+)
cells at 6-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.001). Increased EOMES(+)CD8(+),
GranzymeB(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+) and decreased Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+) T cells at 6
months were significantly associated with relapse (all p = 0.03). Decreased
Ki67(+)CD8(+) T cells were significantly associated with the development of irAE 
(p = 0.02). At baseline, low Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+) T cells were associated with
relapse (p = 0.001), and low Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+) T cells were associated with
irAE (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Up-regulation of proliferation and activation signals in CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T cells were pharmacodynamic markers for ipilimumab. Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+)
and Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+)T cells at baseline merit further testing as biomarkers 
associated with outcome and irAEs, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3527361
PMID: 22788688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Front Immunol. 2012 May 7;3:101. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00101. eCollection 2012.

Role of innate lymphocytes in infection and inflammation.

Koyasu S(1), Moro K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Cooperation between the innate and adaptive immune responses is critical for
enabling protective immunity against various invading microbes. Distinct types of
effector T cells have different functions in adaptive immune responses. Th1 cells
play important roles in the control of intracellular bacteria by producing IFN-<U+03B3> 
to activate macrophages and in anti-viral immunity by producing IFN-<U+03B3> and
activating cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Th2 cell-derived cytokines are important in
activating mast cells, eosinophils, and goblet cells in anti-helminth immunity.
Th17 cells are pivotal for the inflammatory response mediated by neutrophils,
which resists extracellular bacterial infection. In all cases, it is critical
that the innate immune responses limit the growth and expansion of invading
microbes until antigen-specific adaptive immune responses are established. Recent
studies have identified multiple subsets in innate lymphocytes corresponding to
previously defined Th subsets. Classical natural killer cells, ROR<U+03B3>(+) lymphoid
tissue inducer-related cells, and Th2-type innate lymphocytes play distinct roles
in innate immune responses by producing Th1, Th17, and Th2 cytokines,
respectively. Cooperation between innate lymphocytes and antigen-specific T and B
cells are likely important in protective immunity against distinct types of
microbes. The most recently identified subset is the ROR<U+03B3>-independent
Lin(-)Thy-1(+)IL-7R(+)GATA3(+) innate lymphocyte subset such as natural helper
(NH) cell, which is Id2- and IL-7-dependent. This population produces Th2
cytokines, most notably IL-5 and IL-13, and plays a major role in innate immune
responses during anti-helminth immunity. In addition, these cells are likely
involved in the pathophysiology of some types of allergic diseases. We summarize 
here current knowledge regarding various innate lymphocyte subsets. In
particular, we focus on the Th2-type innate lymphocyte subset.

PMCID: PMC3346161
PMID: 22783250  [PubMed]


294. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Oct;51(10):1887-93. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Increased production of IL-5 and dominant Th2-type response in airways of
Churg-Strauss syndrome patients.

Jakiela B(1), Szczeklik W, Plutecka H, Sokolowska B, Mastalerz L, Sanak M,
Bazan-Socha S, Szczeklik A, Musial J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, ul. Skawinska
8, 31-066 Krakow, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) is a rare systemic vasculitis associated 
with eosinophilia and asthma. We assessed the local immune response in airways of
CSS patients with different activity of the disease.
METHODS: Concentration of IL-5, CCL17, CCL22 and CCL26 (ELISA) together with cell
expression of T-helper-related genes (real-time PCR array) were measured in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) sampled from 11 patients with active CSS, 11 
patients with CSS in remission and 9 control subjects with bronchial asthma.
RESULTS: In active CSS, both BALF and blood eosinophil counts were increased
(P<0.01). BALF cells in active disease were characterized by an increased
expression of Th2 and regulatory-type transcripts: STAT6, STAT3, GATA3, IL4, IL5 
and IL10 as compared with asthmatics, and STAT5A, CCR4, FOXP3, IL4, IL5 and IL10 
when compared with inactive CSS. There was significant increase in BALF
concentration of IL-5 and CCL26 in exacerbation of CSS. CCR4-active chemokines
were detected more frequently in active disease. We found a strong positive
correlation between clinical parameters of disease activity (BVAS, eosinophilia) 
and expression of IL4, IL5, IL10 and STAT5A.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that as compared with asthma, active-CSS
patients have much stronger local Th2 response in the airways. Airway cells may
contribute to lung eosinophilia in CSS by producing IL-5 and eosinophil active
chemokines.

PMID: 22772323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 3;424(3):512-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.146. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Aberrant expression of IFN-<U+03B3> in Th2 cells from Th2 LCR-deficient mice.

Hwang SS(1), Kim K, Lee W, Lee GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Republic of
Korea.

The Th2 locus control region (LCR) has been shown to be a crucial cis-acting
element for Th2 cytokine expression and Th2 cell differentiation. To study the
role of Th2 LCR in ifng locus regulation, we examined the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> in 
Th2 cells from Th2 LCR-deficient mice. We found IFN-<U+03B3> to be aberrantly
up-regulated. In addition, histone 3(H3)-acetylation and histone 3 lysine 4
(H3-K4)-methylation greatly increased at the ifng locus of the Th2 cells. GATA-3 
and STAT6 bound to the ifng promoter in Th2 cells from the wild type but not from
the Th2 LCR-deficient mice, and they directly repressed ifng expression in
transient reporter assay. Moreover, ectopic expression of GATA-3 and STAT6-VT
repressed the aberrant expression of the ifng gene and restored repressive
chromatin state at the ifng locus in Th2 cells from Th2 LCR-deficient mice. These
results suggest that expression of the ifng gene and chromatin remodeling of the 
ifng locus are under the control of a Th2 LCR-mediated Th2 differentiation
program.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. BMC Immunol. 2012 Jul 7;13:36.

Adjuvant effect of docetaxel on the immune responses to influenza A H1N1 vaccine 
in mice.

Chen J(1), Yuan L, Fan Q, Su F, Chen Y, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.

BACKGROUND: Vaccination remains one of the most effective approaches to prevent
the spread of infectious diseases. Immune responses to vaccination can be
enhanced by inclusion of adjuvant in a vaccine. Paclitaxel extracted from the
bark of the Pacific yew tree Taxus brevifola was previously demonstrated to have 
adjuvant property. Compared to paclitaxel, docetaxel is another member of taxane 
family, and is more soluble in water and easier to manipulate in medication. To
investigate the adjuvant effect of this compound, we measured the immune
responses induced by co-administration of a split inactivated influenza H1N1
vaccine antigen with docetaxel.
RESULTS: When co-administered with docetaxel, lower dose antigen (equivalent to
10 ng HA) induced similar levels of IgG and IgG isotypes as well as HI titers to 
those induced by higher dose antigen (equivalent to 100 ng HA). Docetaxel
promoted splenocyte responses to H1N1 antigen, ConA and LPS, mRNA expressions of 
cytokines (IFN-gamma, IL-12, IL-4 and IL-10) and T-bet/GATA-3 by splenocytes. The
enhanced immunity was associated with up-expressed microRNAs (miR-155, miR-150
and miR-146a) in docetaxel-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. Docetaxel promoted similar 
IgE level to but alum promoted significantly higher IgE level than the control.
CONCLUSION: Docetaxel has adjuvant effect on the influenza H1N1 vaccine by
up-regulation of Th1/Th2 immune responses. Considering its unique vaccine
adjuvant property as well as the safe record as an anti-neoplastic agent
clinically used in humans during a long period, docetaxel should be further
studied for its use in influenza vaccine production.

PMCID: PMC3447692
PMID: 22769233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Ann Oncol. 2012 Dec;23(12):3051-7. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds120. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Clinicopathological analysis of GATA3-positive breast cancers with special
reference to response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Tominaga N(1), Naoi Y, Shimazu K, Nakayama T, Maruyama N, Shimomura A, Kim SJ,
Tamaki Y, Noguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate the clinicopathological
characteristics of GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3)-positive breast cancers as well
as the association of GATA3 expression with response to chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor specimens obtained before neoadjuvant chemotherapy
[paclitaxel followed by 5-fluorouracil/epirubicin/cyclophosphamide)] from breast 
cancer patients (n = 130) were subjected to immunohistochemical and mutational
analysis of GATA3 and DNA microarray gene expression analysis for intrinsic
subtyping.
RESULTS: Seventy-four tumors (57%) were immunohistochemically positive for GATA3.
GATA3-positive tumors were significantly more likely to be lobular cancer,
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor (PgR)-positive,
Ki67-negative, and luminal A tumors. Somatic mutations were found in only three
tumors. Pathological complete response (pCR) was observed in 8 (11%)
GATA3-positive tumors and in 22 (39%) GATA3-negative tumors. multivariate
analysis showed that tumor size, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (her2),
and gata3 were independent predictors of pcr.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA3-positive breast cancers showed luminal differentiation
characterized by high ER expression and were mostly classified as luminal-type
tumors following intrinsic subtyping. Interestingly, GATA3 was an independent
predictor of response to chemotherapy, suggesting that GATA3 might be clinically 
useful as a predictor of a poor response to chemotherapy.

PMID: 22767585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Apr;37(2):125-30.

[Effect of moxibustion pretreatment of Guanyuan (CV 4), etc. on expression of
leukocytic T-box transcription factor expressed in T cells and GATA-3 mRNA in
athletes undergoing heavy load training].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao M(1), Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai University of Sports, Shanghai 200438, China. gaoming688@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of moxibustion pretreatment on the expression of
leukocytic T-box transcription factor expressed in T cells (T-bet) mRNA and
trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3 mRNA in athletes
undergoing heavy load training, so as to study its mechanism underlying
prevention of imbalance of immune function.
METHODS: Twelve male middle-long distance running athletes were equally
randomized into control group and treatment group. The althelets in the treatment
group accepted alternate moxibustion pretreatment of Guanyuan (CV 12) + bilateral
Zusanli (ST 36) or Guanyuan (CV 12) + bilateral Sanyinjiao (SP 6) for 30 min,
once a day for 4 weeks, and beginning from the 1st day of the heavy load training
on till the end of the modulatory training. The althletes of the control group
were asked to conduct simple heavy load running training. Leukocytes in the
collected venous blood samples were acquired following erythrocyte lysis,
centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. The expression levels of
leukocytic T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA were detected before, 3 weeks after the
heavy load running training and 1 week after the adjustment training.
RESULTS: In comparison with pre-training, the expression levels of leukocytic
T-bet mRNA were increased slightly after heavy load running training (7.24%,
16.84%) and after adjustment training (4.52%, 14.8%) in both control and
treatment groups (P > 0.05). After heavy load running training, the expression
levels of leukocytic GATA-3 mRNA were dow-regulated mildly (13.14%, 34.04%) in
both control and treatment groups (P > 0.05), but upregulated considerably in the
control group (59.12%, P < 0.05) rather than in the treatment group (-17.02%, P >
0.05). The GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the treatment group was significantly 
lower than that of the control group (P < 0.05). The ratios of leukocytic T-bet
mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA were increased by 13.58% and 75.16% after heavy load running
training and decreased by 29.63% and increased by 35.4%, respectively after
adjustment training in the control and treatment groups in comparison with
pre-training. No significant differences were found between two groups in the
expression levels of T-bet mRNA and the ratios of T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA at the 3
time-points, and in the expression levels of GATA-3 mRNA before and after heavy
load running training (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Moxibustion pretreatment can inhibit the expression of leukocytic
GATA-3 mRNA after adjustment training in the middle-long distance heavy load
running athletes, which may contribute to its effect in regulating imbalance of
Th 1/Th 2 after heavy load training.

PMID: 22764598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039306. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Transcriptome analysis during human trophectoderm specification suggests new
roles of metabolic and epigenetic genes.

Assou S(1), Boumela I, Haouzi D, Monzo C, Dechaud H, Kadoch IJ, Hamamah S.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Montpellier, Institute for Research in Biotherapy, Hôpital Saint-Eloi,
INSERM U1040, Montpellier, France.

In humans, successful pregnancy depends on a cascade of dynamic events during
early embryonic development. Unfortunately, molecular data on these critical
events is scarce. To improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
govern the specification/development of the trophoblast cell lineage, the
transcriptome of human trophectoderm (TE) cells from day 5 blastocysts was
compared to that of single day 3 embryos from our in vitro fertilization program 
by using Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. Some of the microarray data were
validated by quantitative RT-PCR. The TE molecular signature included 2,196
transcripts, among which were genes already known to be TE-specific (GATA2, GATA3
and GCM1) but also genes involved in trophoblast invasion (MUC15), chromatin
remodeling (specifically the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3L) and steroid metabolism
(HSD3B1, HSD17B1 and FDX1). In day 3 human embryos 1,714 transcripts were
specifically up-regulated. Besides stemness genes such as NANOG and DPPA2, this
signature included genes belonging to the NLR family (NALP4, 5, 9, 11 and 13),
Ret finger protein-like family (RFPL1, 2 and 3), Melanoma Antigen family (MAGEA1,
2, 3, 5, 6 and 12) and previously unreported transcripts, such as MBD3L2 and
ZSCAN4. This study provides a comprehensive outlook of the genes that are
expressed during the initial embryo-trophectoderm transition in humans. Further
understanding of the biological functions of the key genes involved in
steroidogenesis and epigenetic regulation of transcription that are up-regulated 
in TE cells may clarify their contribution to TE specification and might also
provide new biomarkers for the selection of viable and competent blastocysts.

PMCID: PMC3382239
PMID: 22761758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nat Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;13(8):778-86. doi: 10.1038/ni.2362.

The transcription factor Sox4 is a downstream target of signaling by the cytokine
TGF-ß and suppresses T(H)2 differentiation.

Kuwahara M(1), Yamashita M, Shinoda K, Tofukuji S, Onodera A, Shinnakasu R,
Motohashi S, Hosokawa H, Tumes D, Iwamura C, Lefebvre V, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

Sox4 is a transcription factor that regulates various developmental processes.
Here we show that Sox4 was induced by TGF-ß and negatively regulated the
transcription factor GATA-3, the master regulator of function of T helper type 2 
(T(H)2) cells, by two distinct mechanisms. First, Sox4 bound directly to GATA-3, 
preventing its binding to GATA-3 consensus DNA sequences. Second, Sox4 bound to
the promoter region of the gene encoding interleukin 5 (IL-5), a T(H)2 cytokine, 
and prevented binding of GATA-3 to this promoter. T(H)2 cell-driven airway
inflammation was modulated by alterations in Sox4 expression. Thus, Sox4 acted as
a downstream target of TGF-ß to inhibit GATA-3 function, T(H)2 differentiation
and T(H)2 cell-mediated inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3477402
PMID: 22751141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Acta Histochem. 2012 Dec;114(8):779-84. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2012.01.005. Epub
2012 Feb 20.

Expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription factors, T-bet and
GATA-3, in the eutopic endometrium of women with endometriosis.

Chen P(1), Zhang Z, Chen Q, Ren F, Li T, Zhang C, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The objective of the present study was to evaluate the expression of T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) in the eutopic
endometrium from women with endometriosis. Endometrial tissues were collected
from 20 women with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis and 20 women without 
endometriosis. T-bet and GATA-3 expression was measured by quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR), immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. Eutopic endometrial
tissues from patients with endometriosis expressed lower levels of T-bet mRNA and
high levels of GATA-3 mRNA, leading to a significant lower T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA
ratio (P<0.05). Western blot analysis showed that the T-bet/GATA-3 protein ratio 
in endometriosis group was also statistically lower than that in the control
group (P<0.05). These results suggested that T-bet and GATA-3 may act as cytokine
regulatory genes, and the Th2-specific transcription factor, GATA-3, probably
plays an essential role in the immune response and the development of
endometriosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22356900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Biochem Genet. 2012 Aug;50(7-8):538-48. doi: 10.1007/s10528-012-9498-0. Epub 2012
Feb 22.

Molecular characteristics of the porcine TIMD4 gene and its association analysis.

Yuan J(1), Tang ZL, Yang S, Cao JY, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Animal Nutrition, Key Laboratory for Domestic Animal 
Genetic Resources and Breeding of Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute of 
Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 2 Yuanmingyuan West
Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100193, China.

As a member of the T cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain (TIM) gene
family, TIMD4 plays an important role in the immune response. To understand its
function more precisely, we isolated it and analyzed its subcellular
localization, expression pattern, and associations. The porcine TIMD4 gene
included nine exons and eight introns with an open reading frame of 1086 bp
encoding 361 amino acids. It had relatively high levels in liver, lymph, and
spleen. The fusion protein was localized mainly in the cytoplasm of pig kidney
cells (PK15). The promoter region contained a TATA box and GATA3 consensus sites.
A single nucleotide polymorphism was identified in intron 3 of the porcine TIMD4 
gene, and analysis indicated that it had significant associations with the 17-day
red blood cell count (p = 0.0106), hemoglobin (p = 0.0149), and hematocrit (p =
0.0063) and with 32-day hemoglobin (p = 0.0140).

PMID: 22354463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Int J Cardiol. 2012 Apr 19;156(2):209-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.01.074. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Circulating leukocyte TBET and GATA3 mRNA in patients with acute coronary
syndrome.

Rainer TH, Chan RW, Graham CA, Chan CP, Tan PC, Yip GW, Yu CM.

PMID: 22336257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Sep 1;84(1):266-73. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.11.027. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Intestinal irradiation and fibrosis in a Th1-deficient environment.

Linard C(1), Billiard F, Benderitter M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France. christine.linard@irsn.fr

PURPOSE: Changes in the Th1/Th2 immune balance may play a role in increasing the 
incidence of radiation-induced toxicity. This study evaluates the consequences of
Th1 deficiency on intestinal response (fibrosis and T cell trafficking) to
abdominal irradiation and examines in mucosa and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) the
differential involvement of the two Th1 pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, in
controlling this balance in mice.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Using T-bet-deficient mice (T-bet-/-), we evaluated the
mRNA and protein expression of the Th1 pathways (IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet/STAT1, and
IL-12/STAT4) and the CD4+ and CD8+ populations in ileal mucosa and MLN during the
first 3 months after 10 Gy abdominal irradiation.
RESULTS: The T-bet-deficient mice showed an increased fibrotic response to
radiation, characterized by higher TGF-ß1, col3a1 expression, and collagen
deposition in mucosa compared with wild-type mice. This response was associated
with drastically lower expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, the hallmark Th1 cytokine. Analysis
of the Th1 expression pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, showed their equal
involvement in the failure of Th1 polarization. A minimal IFN-<U+03B3> level depended on
the IL-23-p19/STAT4 level. In addition, the radiation-induced deficiency in the
priming of Th1 by IFN-<U+03B3> was related to the defective homing capacity of CD8+
cells in the mucosa.
CONCLUSION: Irradiation induces Th2 polarization, and the Th2 immune response may
play a role in potentiating irradiation-induced intestinal collagen deposition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22336200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Immunol. 2012 Mar;50(3):142-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.01.005. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Expression of NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell population markers in adipose tissue 
are associated with insulin resistance and impaired glucose metabolism in humans.

Goossens GH(1), Blaak EE, Theunissen R, Duijvestijn AM, Clément K, Tervaert JW,
Thewissen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology &
Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
G.Goossens@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Recent studies in rodents indicate that the nucleotide-binding domain,
leucine-rich-containing family, pyrin domain-containing-3 (NLRP3) inflammasome
and a proinflammatory shift in the T cell population in adipose tissue (AT)
contribute to AT inflammation and insulin resistance. We investigated: (1) the
interplay between the NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell populations in abdominal
subcutaneous AT in obese and lean humans in relation to AT inflammatory
processes, and (2) involvement of the NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell populations
in insulin resistance. Abdominal subcutaneous AT biopsies were collected in 10
obese men with impaired glucose tolerance and 9 lean normal glucose tolerant
age-matched controls. AT gene expression of NLRP3 inflammasome-related genes and 
markers of T cell populations, chemoattraction, macrophage infiltration and other
aspects of inflammation were examined. Furthermore, we examined systemic adaptive
immune activation and insulin sensitivity (hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp).
CASPASE-1 mRNA and the proportion of T(h)1 transcripts (TBX21/CD3<U+025B>) were
significantly higher in AT from obese compared with lean subjects. CASPASE-1
expression and a relative increase in T(h)1 transcripts in AT were strongly
associated with insulin resistance and impairments in glucose homeostasis. Gene
expression of NLRP3, CASPASE-1, CD3<U+025B> (pan T cells), TBX21 (T(h)1 cells) and RORC 
(T(h)17 cells) was positively, whereas GATA3 (T(h)2 cells) was inversely
correlated with AT inflammation. Our data suggest that NLRP3 inflammasome
activation and a T(h)1 shift in the T cell population in AT of obese subjects is 
related to insulin resistance and impaired glucose metabolism, which may be
explained by AT inflammatory processes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22325453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Hum Pathol. 2012 Mar;43(3):313-24. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.11.005.

Immunohistochemical pitfalls in prostate pathology.

Brimo F(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada
H3A 2B4.

The diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma relies on a constellation of
architectural, cytological, and immunohistochemical features. Although the
diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma is straightforward in most cases, due to
earlier detection of the disease in the modern era, pathologists have become
increasingly challenged in diagnosing small foci of cancer when only a few
atypical glands are present in needle biopsies. Immunohistochemistry has
therefore become an essential tool in the evaluation of such foci to confirm the 
absence of basal cells. In this context, the 2 most commonly used basal cell
markers are anti-keratin 34BE12 and p63. Furthermore, a-methylacyl-CoA racemase, 
a marker found to be overexpressed in the cytoplasm of prostatic adenocarcinoma
glands, is also commonly used in routine practice. Another diagnostic role of
immunohistochemistry is to confirm the prostatic origin of the tumor in the
primary or metastatic setting of high-grade prostatic adenocarcinoma, which may
be confused with nonprostatic carcinomas. We herein review the utility as well as
the limitations of immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of prostatic
adenocarcinoma, and we describe the most important pitfalls in the interpretation
of various immunostains that pathologists should be aware of to minimize
misdiagnoses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22325142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Feb;18(2):137-45. doi: 10.1007/s11655-012-0995-0. Epub
2012 Feb 5.

Xiaoyin recipe ( ) for psoriasis induces a Th1/Th2 balance drift toward Th2 in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis rats.

Xu XG(1), Zhang H, Bi XL, Gu J, Shi YL, Hou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the regulatory mechanism of Xiaoyin Recipe () on the T
helper 1/T helper 2 (Th1/Th2) immune balance.
METHODS: Thirty-six experimental animals were divided into three groups, 12 rats 
in each group: blank control group (B group), negative control group (N group),
and Xiaoyin Recipe treatment group (T group). The latter two groups received
immunization of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT), and T group were
treated with Xiaoyin Recipe for a month. Then, the expression of Th1-Th2-related 
genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were screened with Oligo
GEArray Rat Th1-Th2-Th3 Microarray. The expressions of tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNF-a), interleukin-10 (IL-10), T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet), and
GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3) were detected by real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Gene array screening showed that compared to N group, in T group after
Xiaoyin Recipe treatment, 3 genes were upregulated in EAT rats, including
interleukin-27 receptor alpha (IL-27ra), glomulin (Glmn), and GATA-3, while 38
genes were downregulated, such as CD28, IL-18, signal transducer, and activator
of transcription 1 (STAT1), T-bet, TNF receptor superfamily member 4 (TNFRSF4),
TNF ligand superfamily member 5 (TNFSF5), and TNF receptor superfamily member 5
(TNFRSF5). While RT-PCR showed that there was an increased level of TNF-a mRNA
(P<0.01), an elevated ratio of T-bet/GATA-3, and a decreased level of IL-10 mRNA 
in PBMC of N and T group compared to B group (P <0.01); and after treatment with 
Xiaoyin Recipe, IL-10 mRNA level increased (P <0.01), while TNF-a mRNA level and 
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio decreased in T group compared to N group (P <0.01).
CONCLUSION: Xiaoyin Recipe for psoriasis could induce a Th1/Th2 balance drift
toward Th2 in PBMC of EAT rats and thus improve the conditions.

PMID: 22311410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Infect Immun. 2012 Apr;80(4):1437-44. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05680-11. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

Toxoplasma gondii infection inhibits Th17-mediated spontaneous development of
arthritis in interleukin-1 receptor antagonist-deficient mice.

Washino T(1), Moroda M, Iwakura Y, Aosai F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Host Defense, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra)-deficient BALB/c mice develop
spontaneous arthritis resembling human rheumatoid arthritis. We herein report
that infection with Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular protozoan, is capable of 
ameliorating the spontaneous development of arthritis in IL-1Ra-deficient mice.
The onset of arthritis development was delayed and the severity score of
arthritis was significantly suppressed in T. gondii-infected mice. Expression of 
IL-12p40 mRNA from CD11c(+) cells of mesenteric lymph nodes (mLN) and spleen
markedly increased at 1 week after peroral infection. While CD11c(+) cells also
produced IL-10, IL-1ß, and IL-6, CD4(+) T cells from T. gondii-infected mice
expressed significantly high levels of T-bet and gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) mRNA in
both mLN and spleen. Levels of GATA-3/IL-4 mRNA or ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17 mRNA decreased in 
the infected mice, indicating Th1 cell polarization and the reduction of Th2 and 
Th17 cell polarization. The severity of arthritis was related to Th1 cell
polarization accompanied by Th17 cell reduction, demonstrating the protective
role of the T. gondii-derived Th1 response against Th17 cell-mediated arthritis
in IL-1Ra-deficient mice.

PMCID: PMC3318428
PMID: 22290145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2011 Dec;22(6):587-93.

siRNA-mediated knockdown of FoxP3 promotes the ratio of T-helper 1 (Th1) to Th2
in chronic hepatitis B patients.

Yongsheng Y(1), Xiaoliang L, Zhenghao T, Guoqing Z.

Author information: 
(1)Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Department of
Infectious Diseases, Shanghai, China. yuyongsheng@medmail.com.cn

To determine the effect of regulatory T cells on the ratio of Th1/Th2
differentiation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of chronic hepatitis B
patients, FoxP3, the essential transcription factor for Tcells differentiation
and function, was knocked down by FoxP3 siRNA, which was affirmed by real-time
polymerase chain reaction for decreased expression of FoxP3. Then, at different
time points, comparing with control groups, we detected enhanced lymphocyte
proliferation and up-regulated Th1-type cytokines, but down-regulated Th2-type
cytokines by ELISA. Finally, to research the involved mechanisms, an increased
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression was found by real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Our results suggest that siRNA-mediated knockdown of FoxP3 could
regulate the immune balance of Th1/Th2 in chronic hepatitis B patients, which may
be mediated partly by regulating transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 22287403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 6;31(49):5073-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.657. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Estrogenic regulation of S6K1 expression creates a positive regulatory loop in
control of breast cancer cell proliferation.

Maruani DM(1), Spiegel TN, Harris EN, Shachter AS, Unger HA, Herrero-González S, 
Holz MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stern College for Women of Yeshiva University, New
York, NY, USA.

The 40S ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) is an important regulator of cell growth.
Expression of S6K1 is often elevated in breast cancer cells. However, the
transcriptional mechanism of S6K1 overexpression is not understood. In this
report, we demonstrate that estrogen activates expression of S6K1 via estrogen
receptor (ER)a in ER-positive breast cancer cells. We also show that estrogen
acts on the proximal promoter of the S6K1 gene in a mechanism involving the
transcriptional factor GATA-3. Finally, we provide data that support the
importance of estrogenic regulation of S6K1 expression in breast cancer cell
proliferation. S6K1 directly phosphorylates and regulates ligand-independent
activity of ERa, while ERa upregulates S6K1 expression. This S6K1-ERa
relationship creates a positive feed-forward loop in control of breast cancer
cell proliferation. Furthermore, the co-dependent association between S6K1 and
ERa may be exploited in the development of targeted breast cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3342462
PMID: 22286763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2012 Aug;34(4):686-94. doi:
10.3109/08923973.2011.651535. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Clozapine inhibits Th1 cell differentiation and causes the suppression of IFN-<U+03B3>
production in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Chen ML(1), Tsai TC, Wang LK, Lin YY, Tsai YM, Lee MC, Tsai FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Taipei Branch, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.

Antipsychotic drugs (APDs) are widely used to alleviate a number of psychic
disorders and may have immunomodulatory effects. However, the previous studies of
cytokine and immune regulation in APDs are quite inconsistent. The aim of this
study was to examine the in vitro effects of different ADPs on cytokine
production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We examined the effects
of risperidone, clozapine, and haloperidol on the production of phorbol myristate
acetate and ionomycin-induced interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>)/interleukin (IL)-4 in PBMCs by
using intracellular staining. Real-time quantitative PCR and Western blot were
used to further examine the expression changes of some critical transcription
factors related to T-cell differentiation in antipsychotic-treated PBMCs. Our
results indicated that clozapine can suppress the stimulated production of IFN-<U+03B3> 
by 30.62%, whereas haloperidol weakly enhances the expression of IFN-<U+03B3>.
Differences in IL-4 production or in the number of CD4+ T cells were not observed
in cells treated with different APDs. Furthermore, clozapine and risperidone
inhibited the T-bet mRNA and protein expression, which are critical to Th1
differentiation. Also, clozapine can enhance the expression of Signal Transducer 
and Activator of Transcription 6 and GATA3, which are critical for the
differentiation of Th2 cells. The results suggested that clozapine and
haloperidol may induce different immunomodulatory effects on the immune system.

PMID: 22268679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2242-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-366070. Epub 2012
Jan 20.

GATA-3 regulates hematopoietic stem cell maintenance and cell-cycle entry.

Ku CJ(1), Hosoya T, Maillard I, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, USA.

Maintaining hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) quiescence is a critical property for
the life-long generation of blood cells. Approximately 75% of cells in a highly
enriched long-term repopulating HSC (LT-HSC) pool
(Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-Kit(hi)CD150(+)CD48(-)) are quiescent, with only a small
percentage of the LT-HSCs in cycle. Transcription factor GATA-3 is known to be
vital for the development of T cells at multiple stages in the thymus and for Th2
differentiation in the peripheral organs. Although it is well documented that
GATA-3 is expressed in HSCs, a role for GATA-3 in any prethymic progenitor cell
has not been established. In the present study, we show that Gata3-null mutant
mice generate fewer LT-HSCs and that fewer Gata3-null LT-HSCs are in cycle.
Furthermore, Gata3 mutant hematopoietic progenitor cells fail to be recruited
into an increased cycling state after 5-fluorouracil-induced myelosuppression.
Therefore, GATA-3 is required for the maintenance of a normal number of LT-HSCs
and for their entry into the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3311255
PMID: 22267605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Immunobiology. 2012 Sep;217(9):831-41. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.12.003. Epub
2011 Dec 16.

The polysaccharide fraction of Propionibacterium acnes modulates the development 
of experimental focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

Reis VO(1), Silva JC, Souza GT, Semedo P, Buscariollo B, Pereira RL, Cenedeze MA,
Pacheco-Silva A, Longo-Maugéri IM, Câmara NO, Keller AC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The pathogenesis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) appears to be
associated with type-2 cytokines and podocyte dysfunction. In this study, we
tested the hypothesis that immunization with the polysaccharide fraction of
Propionibacterium acnes (PS), a pro-Th1 agonist, may subvert the type-2 profile
and protect podocytes from adriamycin-induced glomerulosclerosis. Adriamycin
injection resulted in albuminuria and increased serum creatinine in association
with loss of glomerular podocin and podoplanin expression, which is consistent
with podocyte dysfunction. Renal tissue analysis revealed the expression of
transcripts for GATA3 and fibrogenic-related proteins, such as TGF-ß, tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) and metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9). In
association with the expression of fibrogenic transcripts, we observed
peri-glomerular expression of a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), indicating
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and increased expression of proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in tubular cells, suggesting intense proliferative
activity. Previous immunization with PS inhibited albuminuria and serum
creatinine in association with the preservation of podocyte proteins and
inhibition of fibrogenic transcripts and the expression of a-SMA and PCNA
proteins. Tissue analysis also revealed that PS treatment induced expression of
mRNA for GD3 synthase, which is a glycosiltransferase related to the synthesis of
GD3, a ganglioside associated with podocyte physiology. In addition, PS treatment
inhibited the influx of inflammatory CD8(pos) and CD11b(pos) cells to kidney
tissue. Finally, PS treatment on day 4 post-ADM, a period when proteinuria was
already established, was able to improve renal function. Thus, we demonstrate
that the PS fraction of P. acnes can inhibit FSGS pathogenesis, suggesting that
immunomodulation can represent an alternative approach for disease management.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22257707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 2012 Feb 15;188(4):1630-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101712. Epub 2012
Jan 16.

Th2 skewing by activation of Nrf2 in CD4(+) T cells.

Rockwell CE(1), Zhang M, Fields PE, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

NF erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a transcription factor that mediates
the upregulation of a battery of cytoprotective genes in response to cell stress.
Recent studies showed that Nrf2 also modulates immune responses and exhibits
anti-inflammatory activity. In this article, we demonstrate that a common food
preservative, tert-butylhydroquinone, can activate Nrf2 in T cells, as evidenced 
by Nrf2 binding to the antioxidant response element and the subsequent
upregulation of Nrf2 target genes. The activation of Nrf2 suppresses IFN-<U+03B3>
production, while inducing the production of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and
IL-13. Nrf2 activation also suppresses T-bet DNA binding and promotes
GATA-binding protein 3 DNA binding. Collectively, the present studies suggested
that Nrf2 activation skews CD4(+) T cells toward Th2 differentiation and, thus,
represents a novel regulatory mechanism in CD4(+) T cells. Further studies are
needed to determine whether the commercial use of Nrf2 activators as food
preservatives promotes food allergies in humans.

PMCID: PMC3273574
PMID: 22250088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nature. 2012 Jan 11;481(7380):157-63. doi: 10.1038/nature10725.

The genetic basis of early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Zhang J(1), Ding L, Holmfeldt L, Wu G, Heatley SL, Payne-Turner D, Easton J, Chen
X, Wang J, Rusch M, Lu C, Chen SC, Wei L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Roberts KG,
Pounds SB, Ulyanov A, Becksfort J, Gupta P, Huether R, Kriwacki RW, Parker M,
McGoldrick DJ, Zhao D, Alford D, Espy S, Bobba KC, Song G, Pei D, Cheng C,
Roberts S, Barbato MI, Campana D, Coustan-Smith E, Shurtleff SA, Raimondi SC,
Kleppe M, Cools J, Shimano KA, Hermiston ML, Doulatov S, Eppert K, Laurenti E,
Notta F, Dick JE, Basso G, Hunger SP, Loh ML, Devidas M, Wood B, Winter S,
Dunsmore KP, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Hong X, Harris CC, Dooling DJ, Ochoa K,
Johnson KJ, Obenauer JC, Evans WE, Pui CH, Naeve CW, Ley TJ, Mardis ER, Wilson
RK, Downing JR, Mullighan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ETP ALL) is an aggressive
malignancy of unknown genetic basis. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 12
ETP ALL cases and assessed the frequency of the identified somatic mutations in
94 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases. ETP ALL was characterized by
activating mutations in genes regulating cytokine receptor and RAS signalling
(67% of cases; NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, IL7R, JAK3, JAK1, SH2B3 and BRAF), inactivating 
lesions disrupting haematopoietic development (58%; GATA3, ETV6, RUNX1, IKZF1 and
EP300) and histone-modifying genes (48%; EZH2, EED, SUZ12, SETD2 and EP300). We
also identified new targets of recurrent mutation including DNM2, ECT2L and RELN.
The mutational spectrum is similar to myeloid tumours, and moreover, the global
transcriptional profile of ETP ALL was similar to that of normal and myeloid
leukaemia haematopoietic stem cells. These findings suggest that addition of
myeloid-directed therapies might improve the poor outcome of ETP ALL.

PMCID: PMC3267575
PMID: 22237106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 20;417(3):996-1001. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.069. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Coordinated regulation of IL-4 and IL-13 expression in human T cells: 3C analysis
for DNA looping.

Yao X(1), Zha W, Song W, He H, Huang M, Jazrawi E, Lavender P, Barnes PJ, Adcock 
IM, Durham AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, China.

Asthma is a chronic allergic disorder characterised by chronic inflammation. The 
balance of type I and type II (CD4+) T helper cells is of critical importance. In
asthma there is an overexpression of T(H)2 cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-5 and
IL-13. The genes encoding these cytokines are located together the same
chromosomal region, 5q31.1 in humans. Here we confirm a central role for the
transcription factors NFAT and GATA3 in the regulation of human IL-4 and IL-13.
Chromatin Conformation Capture (3C) demonstrated the formation of specific
ligation products containing spliced IL-4 and IL-13 DNA sequences in human T(H)2 
polarised HuT-78 cells. This suggests that co-ordinate expression of T(H)2
cytokines, under the control of GATA3 and NFAT1 is due to the formation of a
chromatin hub by DNA looping.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22226971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Mar 5;678(1-3):71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.12.025.
Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Pirfenidone restricts Th2 differentiation in vitro and limits Th2 response in
experimental liver fibrosis.

Navarro-Partida J(1), Martinez-Rizo AB, Gonzalez-Cuevas J, Arrevillaga-Boni G,
Ortiz-Navarrete V, Armendariz-Borunda J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology in Medicine and Gene Therapy, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genomics, CUCS, University of Guadalajara, Mexico.
josenavapa@hotmail.com

Polarized T helper type 2 (Th2) response is linked with fibrosis. Here, we
evaluated the effect of the anti-fibrotic agent pirfenidone on Th type 1 (Th1)
and Th2 responses. For in vivo testing; Wistar rats were made cirrhotic by
intraperitoneal administration of thioacetamide. Once hepatic damage was
established, pirfenidone was administered intragastrically on a daily basis
during three weeks. Gene expression of Th marks was evaluated by RT-PCR and
Western blot assays from liver homogenates. Pirfenidone therapy induced
down-regulation of Th2 transcripts and proteins (GATA3 and IL-4), without
affecting significantly Th1 genes expression (T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>). We found that the
activated form of p38 MAPK (identified by Western blot) was reduced by
pirfenidone treatment, which is consistent with the anti-Th2 activity observed.
Pirfenidone reduced GATA3 nuclear localization without modifying its DNA binding 
activity (evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay). For in vitro
testing; human naive CD4+ T cells were cultured in either Th1 or Th2 polarizing
conditions in the presence of pirfenidone and flow cytometric analysis of
intracellular synthesis of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 was conducted. Pirfenidone impaired
development of Th2 subpopulation. In conclusion, pirfenidone is capable of
impairing Th2 differentiation and limits Th2 profibrogenic response. The
mechanism involves p38 inhibition and regulation of GATA3 expression and
translocation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22222821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Development. 2012 Feb;139(4):709-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.073197. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Bmp signaling regulates a dose-dependent transcriptional program to control
facial skeletal development.

Bonilla-Claudio M(1), Wang J, Bai Y, Klysik E, Selever J, Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We performed an in depth analysis of Bmp4, a critical regulator of development,
disease, and evolution, in cranial neural crest (CNC). Conditional Bmp4
overexpression, using a tetracycline-regulated Bmp4 gain-of-function allele,
resulted in facial skeletal changes that were most dramatic after an E10.5 Bmp4
induction. Expression profiling uncovered a signature of Bmp4-induced genes (BIG)
composed predominantly of transcriptional regulators that control self-renewal,
osteoblast differentiation and negative Bmp autoregulation. The complimentary
experiment, CNC inactivation of Bmp2, Bmp4 and Bmp7, resulted in complete or
partial loss of multiple CNC-derived skeletal elements, revealing a crucial
requirement for Bmp signaling in membranous bone and cartilage development.
Importantly, the BIG signature was reduced in Bmp loss-of-function mutants,
indicating Bmp-regulated target genes are modulated by Bmp dose. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed a subset of the BIG signature, including
Satb2, Smad6, Hand1, Gadd45<U+03B3> and Gata3, that was bound by Smad1/5 in the
developing mandible, revealing direct Smad-mediated regulation. These data
support the hypothesis that Bmp signaling regulates craniofacial skeletal
development by balancing self-renewal and differentiation pathways in CNC
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3265059
PMID: 22219353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Am J Cancer Res. 2012;2(1):104-15. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Expression of FOXO1 is associated with GATA3 and Annexin-1 and predicts
disease-free survival in breast cancer.

Wu Y, Elshimali Y, Sarkissyan M, Mohamed H, Clayton S, Vadgama JV.

PURPOSE: To determine the prognostic value of FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1
expression in breast cancer.
METHODS: Tissue microarray and individual paraffin tissue slides from 131
patients were used for the study. The association of FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1
expression with clinicopathological features of breast cancer and disease outcome
was examined in retrospective samples. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox
regression with multivariate analysis were used for assessing the relative risk
(RR) and disease-free survival (DFS). The expression of FOXO1, GATA3 and
Annexin-1 were determined by immunohistochemistry and the association among the
three proteins was analyzed by Logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: The nuclear expression of FOXO1 was observed in most of the normal
breast tissues and 51.3% of the malignant breast tissues. GATA3 and Annexin-1
were expressed at 73% and 24.6% respectively in breast cancer tissues. The
expression of FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1 were all inversely correlated with lymph
node-positive tumors. Both FOXO1 and Annexin-1 expression were also inversely
associated with HER2-overexpressing tumors. FOXO1 expression was significantly
associated with both GATA3 and Annexin-1 expression. In addition, Multivariate
analyses confirm that only FOXO1 levels independently predict DFS.
CONCLUSION: FOXO1 expression in breast cancer is regulated by the PI3K/Akt
pathway. The expression of FOXO1 is also associated with GATA3 and/or Annexin-1. 
Restoring or targeting FOXO1 to the cell nucleus in breast cancer tissues may
improve response to therapy and disease outcome. Further clinical studies are
warranted to test this hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC3236574
PMID: 22206049  [PubMed]


380. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 May;39(5):5953-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1407-9. Epub 2011
Dec 27.

Genome-wide pathway analysis of a genome-wide association study on psoriasis and 
Behcet's disease.

Lee YH(1), Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
College of Medicine, Korea University Medical Center, 126-1, Anam-dong 5-ga,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to identify candidate causal single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and candidate causal mechanisms of psoriasis and Behcets's
disease (BD) and to generate an SNP <U+2192> gene <U+2192> pathway hypothesis. A psoriasis
genome-wide association study (GWAS) dataset that included 436,192 SNPs in 1,409 
psoriasis cases and 1,436 controls of European descent and a BD GWAS dataset that
contained 310,324 SNPs in 1,215 BD cases and 1,278 controls were used in this
study. Identify candidate causal SNPs and pathways (ICSNPathway) analysis was
applied to the GWAS datasets. ICSNPathway analysis identified 15 candidate causal
SNPs and 28 candidate causal pathways. The top five candidate causal SNPs were
rs1063478 (P = 1.45E-10), rs8084 (P = 2.20E-08), rs7192 (P = 5.18E-08), rs20541
(P = 5.30E-06), and rs1130838 (P = 5.65E-06), which with the exception of rs20541
[interleukin (IL)-13] are at human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci. These candidate 
causal SNPs and pathways provided ten hypothetical biological mechanisms. The
most strongly associated pathway concerned HLA. When HLA loci were excluded,
ICSNPathway analysis provided one hypothetical biological mechanism. rs20541
(non_synonymous_coding) <U+2192> IL-13 <U+2192> dendritic cell involvement in the regulation of
Th1 and Th2 development, and the GATA3 pathway. ICSNPathway analysis identified
four candidate causal SNPs, eleven candidate causal pathways, and three
hypothetical biological mechanisms. One of them was as follows: rs2072895
(non_synonymous_coding & splice-site) and rs2735059
(non_synonymous_coding) <U+2192> HLA-F <U+2192> type I diabetes mellitus, antigen processing
and presentation, and autoimmune thyroid disease. The application of ICSNPathway 
analysis to GWAS dataset of psoriasis and BD resulted in the identification of
candidate causal SNPs and candidate pathways that might contribute to psoriasis
susceptibility.

PMID: 22201026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Int J Otolaryngol. 2011;2011:259867. doi: 10.1155/2011/259867. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Correlation of Local FOXP3-Expressing T Cells and Th1-Th2 Balance in Perennial
Allergic Nasal Mucosa.

Shirasaki H(1), Kanaizumi E, Seki N, Himi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, 
S-1 W-16, Chu-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

Regulatory T cells (Treg) play some important roles in allergic rhinitis. The
most specific marker for Treg is FOXP3, a recently identified transcription
factor that is essential for Treg development. In order to clarify the levels of 
Treg in allergic nasal mucosa, we studied the relationship between
FOXP3-expressing cells and Th1-Th2 balance in nasal mucosa by means of
immunohistochemistry. Human turbinates were obtained after turbinectomy from 26
patients (14 patients with perennial allergic rhinitis and 12 patients with
nonallergic rhinitis). To identify the cells expressing the FOXP3 protein, double
immunostaining was performed by using anti-FOXP3 antibody and anti-CD3 antibody. 
There was no significant difference in the percentage of FOXP3+CD3+ cells among
CD3+ cells in the nasal mucosa of two groups. The proportion of FOXP3+CD3+ cells 
tend to be correlated positively with GATA3+CD3+ cells/T-bet+CD3+ cells ratio (R 
= 0.56, P = 0.04). A positive correlation with GATA3+CD3+/T-bet+CD3+ ratio and
FOXP3+CD3+/CD3+ ratio suggests the role of local regulatory T cells as a minimal 
control of the chronic allergen exposure in nasal mucosa.

PMCID: PMC3227500
PMID: 22164170  [PubMed]


382. Inflammation. 2012 Jun;35(3):1069-77. doi: 10.1007/s10753-011-9413-6.

Morphine, but not ketamine, decreases the ratio of Th1/Th2 in CD4-positive cells 
through T-bet and GATA3.

Gao M(1), Sun J, Jin W, Qian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.

This study was conducted to investigate the effect of morphine on CD4-positive T 
cells differentiation and the transcriptional factors induced by phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. CD4-positive lymphocytes separated from
healthy volunteers were incubated by PMA (25 ng/ml)<U+2009>+<U+2009>ionomycin (1 µg/ml) with or
without the presence of morphine, ketamine, or naloxone. Th subsets, supernatant 
cytokines, and transcriptional factors were detected 4 h later. Th1 and Th2
cells, levels of INF-<U+03B3>, IL-2, IL-4 and the activities of T-bet and GATA3 were
significantly increased after incubation with PMA and ionomycin. However, the
number of Th1 cells, Th1/ Th2, the levels of INF-<U+03B3> and INF-<U+03B3>/IL-4, and the
activities and protein levels of T-bet and GATA3 were decreased after incubation 
with PMA and ionomycin in the presence of morphine. Naloxone can abolish
morphine's suppressive effect on Th cell differentiation. Morphine has a negative
effect on Th cell balance induced by PMA and ionomycin, the mechanism is related 
to T-bet and GATA3.

PMID: 22160839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Feb 15;302(4):L399-409. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00261.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Pulmonary T cell activation in response to chronic particulate air pollution.

Deiuliis JA(1), Kampfrath T, Zhong J, Oghumu S, Maiseyeu A, Chen LC, Sun Q,
Satoskar AR, Rajagopalan S.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, USA.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of chronically inhaled
particulate matter <2.5 µm (PM(2.5)) on inflammatory cell populations in the lung
and systemic circulation. A prominent component of air pollution exposure is a
systemic inflammatory response that may exaggerate chronic diseases such as
atherosclerosis and insulin resistance. T cell response was measured in wild-type
C57B/L6, Foxp3-green fluorescent protein (GFP) "knockin," and chemokine receptor 
3 knockout (CXCR3(-/-)) mice following 24-28 wk of PM(2.5) or filtered air.
Chronic PM(2.5) exposure resulted in increased CXCR3-expressing CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells in the lungs, spleen, and blood with elevation in CD11c(+) macrophages in
the lung and oxidized derivatives of
1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine in wild-type mice. CXCR3
deficiency decreased T cells in the lung. GFP(+) regulatory T cells increased
with PM(2.5) exposure in the spleen and blood of Foxp3-GFP mice but were present 
at very low levels in the lung irrespective of PM(2.5) exposure. Mixed lymphocyte
cultures using primary, PM(2.5)-treated macrophages demonstrated enhanced T cell 
proliferation. Our experiments indicate that PM(2.5) potentiates a
proinflammatory Th1 response involving increased homing of CXCR3(+) T effector
cells to the lung and modulation of systemic T cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3289266
PMID: 22160305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nat Immunol. 2011 Dec 4;13(1):58-66. doi: 10.1038/ni.2182.

Divergent expression patterns of IL-4 and IL-13 define unique functions in
allergic immunity.

Liang HE(1), Reinhardt RL, Bando JK, Sullivan BM, Ho IC, Locksley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Interleukin 4 (IL-4) and IL-13 are critical for responses to parasitic
helminthes. We used genetically engineered reporter mice to assess the temporal
and spatial production of these cytokines in vivo. In lymph nodes, IL-4, but not 
IL-13, was made by follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells). In contrast, tissue
type 2 helper T cells (T(H)2 cells) produced both cytokines. There was also
divergent production of IL-4 and IL-13 among cells of the innate immune system,
whereby basophils produced IL-4, whereas innate helper type 2 cells (Ih2 cells)
produced IL-13. IL-13 production by T(H)2 and Ih2 cells was dependent on the
transcription factor GATA-3, which was present in large amounts in these cells,
and in contrast to the small amount of GATA-3 in T(FH) cells and basophils. The
distinct localization and cellular expression of IL-4 and IL-13 explains their
unique roles during allergic immunity.

PMCID: PMC3242938
PMID: 22138715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Feb 5;208(3):225-31. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.11.012. Epub
2011 Nov 23.

Imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cells in cardiac injury induced by ambient fine
particles.

Zhao J(1), Xie Y, Qian C, Li L, Jiang R, Kan H, Chen R, Song W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment Health, School of Public Health, Fudan University,
the Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
200032, China.

The study was to explore the potential immunoregulatory mechanisms linking fine
particles and cardiac injury. Wistar kyoto (WKY) rats were exposed by
intratracheal instillation to fine particles with the doses of 0.0, 1.6, 8.0 and 
40.0mg/kg b.w., respectively. The exposure was conducted once a day, for three
consecutive days. Twenty-four hours after the last exposure, the rats were
sacrificed. Th1- and Th2-related transcription factors and cytokines were
assessed in left ventricle of rats. The mRNA expressions of Th1- and Th2-related 
transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcriptionl 1
(STAT1), signal transducer and activator of transcriptional 6 (STAT6), GATA-3 and
T-bet were assessed in left ventricle of rats using real-time PCR. Meanwhile, the
levels of Th1- and Th2-related cytokines IL-4, IL-13 and interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>)
were determined by ELISA kits in cardiac homogenate supernatant of rats.
Furthermore, the protein expression of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> were detected in myocardium
by Western blot. The results of cardiac histology demonstrated exacerbated
cardiac lesions and histological characterization of inflammation and
degeneration in rats after exposure to fine particles. Moreover, fine particles
induced significant increase of IL-4 and IL-13 and decrease of IFN-<U+03B3> in
myocardium of rats. The mRNA expression of STAT1, STAT6 and GATA-3 were
up-regulated in left ventricle of rats in a dose-dependent manner, whereas T-bet 
was significantly down-regulated. The variations of these cytokines demonstrated 
the imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cytokines existed in cardiac injuries induced by
fine particle. The imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokines might be one of the mechanisms 
of immunotoxicity of cardiovascular system induced by ambient fine particles.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22134058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;157(4):349-53. doi: 10.1159/000329159. Epub 2011
Nov 24.

Regulatory-T, T-helper 1, and T-helper 2 cell differentiation in nasal mucosa of 
allergic rhinitis with olive pollen sensitivity.

Sogut A(1), Yilmaz O, Kirmaz C, Ozbilgin K, Onur E, Celik O, Pinar E, Vatansever 
S, Dinc G, Yuksel H.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Allergy and Pulmonology Unit, Celal Bayar University School of
Medicine, Manisa, Turkey. ayhansogut29@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a disease in which T-helper (Th)2 response 
is predominant and its pathogenic mechanism is still poorly understood.
AIM: To evaluate the possible role of Th1, Th2 and regulatory-T (Treg) cells in
the pathogenesis of AR.
METHODS: This case-control study enrolled 41 patients with seasonal AR (10-62
years old), sensitive to olive pollens, and 15 healthy controls (18-60 years
old). Nasal biopsy was performed and specimens of nasal lavage fluid were
obtained from all participants. The levels of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10,
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) were measured in
nasal lavage fluid specimens. The expression of FOXP3, GATA-3 and T-bet was
measured by immunohistochemical methods in the nasal biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: The levels of IFN-<U+03B3> in the group with AR were significantly lower than
those in the control group (p = 0.008). The levels of IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-ß did
not differ between the two groups. The expression of FOXP3 and T-bet in patients 
with AR was significantly lower than that in the control group (both p = 0.001). 
Expression of GATA-3 in the nasal mucosa was similar between the groups (p =
0.2). The ratios of T-bet/GATA-3 and FOXP3/GATA-3 in the AR group were
significantly lower than those in the control group (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Insufficient Treg and Th1 cells may be associated with the allergic
inflammation that may be attributed to the Th2 immune response in patients
suffering from AR who are sensitive to olive pollen.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22123238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Feb 18;413(3-4):448-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.10.030. Epub
2011 Nov 19.

Monitoring of urinary messenger RNA levels for the prediction of flare in
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Szeto CC(1), Tam LS, Kwan BC, Lai KB, Wang G, Li EK, Chow KM, Lai FM, Li PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. ccszeto@cuhk.edu.hk

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by disease flares
and remission. We hypothesize that in clinically quiescent SLE patients, the mRNA
level of target genes in the urinary sediment is an early indicator of disease
flare.
METHODS: From a cohort of 134 adult SLE patients prospectively followed for 56
weeks, we identified 19 patients with a single disease flare. The mRNA level of
eight pre-defined target genes in their urinary sediment before disease flare was
compared to 19 matched controls with no disease flare during the same period.
RESULTS: Urinary mRNA level remained static in the control group during the study
period. Before disease flare, there was a significant increase in the mRNA level 
of monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 and forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), and decrease
in interleukin (IL)-17 and GATA-3, in the urinary sediment. The mRNA level of
FOXP3 in urinary sediment increases 8 weeks prior to a flare, which precedes the 
corresponding change in serum complement and anti-DNA antibody titer, while that 
of MCP-1, IL-17, and GATA3 began to change 4 weeks prior to a flare. The same
pattern of change in urinary mRNA level was observed in patients with
mild-to-moderate or severe flare, and those with renal or non-renal flare. The
SLE Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI) score at the time of flare significantly
correlated with the change in urinary level of IL-17 (r=-0.462, p=0.046) and
GATA-3 (r=-0.455, p=0.05), but not MCP-1 or FOXP3, prior to the flare.
CONCLUSION: Monitoring of MCP-1, IL-17, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA level in urinary
sediment may provide an early clue for detecting disease flare in SLE patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22120729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 9;31(32):3667-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.531. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

BRCA1 and GATA3 corepress FOXC1 to inhibit the pathogenesis of basal-like breast 
cancers.

Tkocz D(1), Crawford NT, Buckley NE, Berry FB, Kennedy RD, Gorski JJ, Harkin DP, 
Mullan PB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, UK.

In this study we describe a novel interaction between the breast/ovarian tumor
suppressor gene BRCA1 and the transcription factor GATA3, an interaction, which
is important for normal breast differentiation. We show that the BRCA1-GATA3
interaction is important for the repression of genes associated with
triple-negative and basal-like breast cancer (BLBCs) including FOXC1, and that
GATA3 interacts with a C-terminal region of BRCA1. We demonstrate that FOXC1 is
an essential survival factor maintaining the proliferation of BLBCs cell lines.
We define the mechanistic basis of this corepression and identify the
GATA3-binding site within the FOXC1 distal promoter region. We show that BRCA1
and GATA3 interact on the FOXC1 promoter and that BRCA1 requires GATA3 for
recruitment to this region. This interaction requires fully functional BRCA1 as a
mutant BRCA1 protein is unable to localize to the FOXC1 promoter or repress FOXC1
expression. We demonstrate that this BRCA1-GATA3 repression complex is not a
FOXC1-specific phenomenon as a number of other genes associated with BLBCs such
as FOXC2, CXCL1 and p-cadherin were also repressed in a similar manner. Finally, 
we demonstrate the importance of our findings by showing that loss of GATA3
expression or aberrant FOXC1 expression contributes to the drug resistance and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-like phenotypes associated with aggressive
BLBCs.

PMID: 22120723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):733-45. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.017.

Eomesodermin controls interleukin-5 production in memory T helper 2 cells through
inhibition of activity of the transcription factor GATA3.

Endo Y(1), Iwamura C, Kuwahara M, Suzuki A, Sugaya K, Tumes DJ, Tokoyoda K,
Hosokawa H, Yamashita M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The regulation of memory CD4(+) helper T (Th) cell function, such as polarized
cytokine production, remains unclear. Here we show that memory T helper 2 (Th2)
cells are divided into four subpopulations by CD62L and CXCR3 expression. All
four subpopulations produced interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13, whereas only the
CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population produced IL-5 accompanied by increased H3-K4
methylation at the Il5 gene locus. The transcription factor Eomesodermin (encoded
by Eomes) was highly expressed in memory Th2 cells, whereas its expression was
selectively downregulated in the IL-5-producing cells. Il5 expression was
enhanced in Eomes-deficient cells, and Eomesodermin was shown to interact with
the transcription factor GATA3, preventing GATA3 binding to the Il5 promoter.
Memory Th2 cell-dependent airway inflammation was attenuated in the absence of
the CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population but was enhanced by Eomes-deficient memory Th2 
cells. Thus, IL-5 production in memory Th2 cells is regulated by Eomesodermin via
the inhibition of GATA3 activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Immunobiology. 2012 Apr;217(4):446-54. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Nov 6.

GATA-3 regulates contact hyperresponsiveness in a murine model of allergic
dermatitis.

Tamauchi H(1), Amoh Y, Itoh M, Terashima M, Masuzawa M, Habu S, Katsuoka K,
Iwabuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan. hidetama@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Contact hypersensitivity (CHS) is thought to be associated mainly with the
activation of T helper (Th) type 1 cells. However, evidence also suggests that Th
type 2 cells (Th2) and cytokines play roles in the development of CHS in humans. 
The present study examines the Th2 response during the development of CHS in
response to 2,4,6-trinitrochlorobenzene (TNCB) in GATA-3-transgenic (GATA-3 Tg)
mice. GATA-3 Tg mice were immunized with 7% TNCB applied to abdominal shaved
skin. Seven days later, the mice were challenged with 1% TNCB applied to the left
ear. Ear swelling, cytokine production in the skin of the ear, and the levels of 
IgE, IgG1 and IgG2a were measured. Furthermore, we examined the effects of
medical treatment on TNCB-induced contact dermatitis using this model. The
ear-swelling responses of TNCB-sensitized/challenged GATA-3 Tg mice were
significantly greater than those of similarly treated wild-type (WT) mice. The
expression of both IL-5 and IL-13 in TNCB sensitized/challenged skin tissues and 
the IgE response after challenge were obviously increased in the GATA-3 Tg mice, 
whereas the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> was identical in the challenged skin tissues of
GATA-3-Tg and WT mice. When TNCB-sensitized GATA-3 Tg mice were treated with a
high dose of tacrolimus, ear swelling was not significantly decreased, compared
with the results in WT mice. These results suggest that GATA-3-induced
Th2-dominant responses play a critical role in the pathogenesis of allergic types
of dermatitis, such as atopic dermatitis, and may lead to useful new drug
development in the future.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22112437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Nov;34(10):1563-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07860.x.

Transcriptional control of differentiation and neurogenesis in autonomic ganglia.

Rohrer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. hermann.rohrer@brain.mpg.de

Autonomic neuron development is controlled by a network of transcription factors,
which is induced by bone morphogenetic protein signalling in neural crest
progenitor cells. This network intersects with a transcriptional program in
migratory neural crest cells that pre-specifies autonomic neuron precursor cells.
Recent findings demonstrate that the transcription factors acting in the initial 
specification and differentiation of sympathetic neurons are also important for
the proliferation of progenitors and immature neurons during neurogenesis.
Elimination of Phox2b, Hand2 and Gata3 in differentiated neurons affects the
expression of subtype-specific and/or generic neuronal properties or neuron
survival. Taken together, transcription factors previously shown to act in
initial neuron specification and differentiation display a much broader spectrum 
of functions, including control of neurogenesis and the maintenance of subtype
characteristics and survival of mature neurons.

© 2011 The Author. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of European
Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22103414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jan;79(1):64-73. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21409. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Expression of GATA1 in the ovine conceptus and endometrium during the
peri-attachment period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA1 is known to play an essential role in
hematopoiesis, but its other roles have not been well characterized. The purpose 
of this study was to determine relationships between GATA1 and GATA2 and/or
GATA3, and to identify their possible functions in ovine development. GATA1 mRNA 
was found in ovine conceptuses and endometrial epithelial regions of Day 15 (Day 
0=day of estrus) cyclic and Days 15, 17, and 21 pregnant ovine uteri. GATA1 mRNA 
was strongly expressed in conceptuses on Day 21, when trophoblast attachment to
the maternal endometrium progressed. Similarly, GATA1 protein expression was
relatively high on Day 21. To localize GATA1 mRNA, ovine conceptuses and pregnant
uteri were subjected to in situ hybridization on Days 15, 17, and 21, confirming 
that GATA1 mRNA was expressed in trophoblasts and uterine endometrial epithelial 
cells in these gestation days. The presence of GATA1 protein was further
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Because high GATA1 expression appeared to
coincide with reduced GATA2/3 expression, a potential role of GATA1 was examined 
through transfection of a mouse Gata1 expression plasmid into bovine trophoblast 
F3 cells. This over-expression resulted in the down-regulation of endogenous
GATA2 transcripts. These observations indicate that GATA1 exists in the ovine
conceptus and uterus during the peri-attachment period, and suggest that GATA1 is
integral to conceptus and endometrial development through the regulation of GATA2
and possibly other developmentally important genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22102538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Feb;42(2):489-99. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141758. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Role of Hedgehog signalling at the transition from double-positive to
single-positive thymocyte.

Furmanski AL(1), Saldana JI, Rowbotham NJ, Ross SE, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK. a.furmanski@ucl.ac.uk

In the thymus, developing T cells receive signals that determine lineage choice, 
specificity, MHC restriction and tolerance to self-antigen. One way in which
thymocytes receive instruction is by secretion of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) from
thymic epithelial cells. We have previously shown that Hedgehog (Hh) signalling
in the thymus decreases the CD4:CD8 single-positive (SP) thymocyte ratio. Here,
we present data indicating that double-positive (DP) thymocytes are Hh-responsive
and that thymocyte-intrinsic Hh signalling plays a role in modulating the
production of CD4(+) (SP4), CD8(+) (SP8) and unconventional T-cell subsets.
Repression of physiological Hh signalling in thymocytes altered the proportions
of DP and SP4 cells. Thymocyte-intrinsic Hh-dependent transcription also
attenuated both the production of mature SP4 and SP8 cells, and the establishment
of peripheral T-cell compartments in TCR-transgenic mice. Additionally,
stimulation or withdrawal of Hh signals in the WT foetal thymus impaired or
enhanced upregulation of the CD4 lineage-specific transcription factor Gata3
respectively. These data together suggest that Hh signalling may play a role in
influencing the later stages of thymocyte development.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3378705
PMID: 22101858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Hear Res. 2012 Jan;283(1-2):151-61. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.10.010. Epub 2011 
Nov 7.

Defects in sensory organ morphogenesis and generation of cochlear hair cells in
Gata3-deficient mouse embryos.

Haugas M(1), Lilleväli K, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Agnes Sjobergin 
katu 2, 00790 Helsinki, Finland. maarja.haugas@helsinki.fi

The development of the inner ear sensory epithelia involves a complex network of 
transcription factors and signaling pathways and the whole process is not yet
entirely understood. GATA3 is a DNA-binding factor that is necessary for otic
morphogenesis and without GATA3 variable defects have been observed already at
early stages in mouse embryos. In the less severe phenotypes, one small oval
shaped vesicle is formed whereas in the more severe cases, the otic epithelium
becomes disrupted and the endolymphatic domain becomes separated from the rest of
the otic epithelium. Despite these defects, the early sensory fate specification 
occurs in Gata3-/- otic epithelium. However, due to the early lethality of
Gata3-deficient embryos, the later morphogenesis and sensory development have
remained unclear. To gain information of these later processes we produced
drug-rescued Gata3-/- embryos that survived up to late gestation. In these older 
Gata3-/- embryos, a similar variability was observed as earlier. In the more
severely affected ears, the development of the separate endolymphatic domain
arrested completely whereas the remaining vesicle formed an empty cavity with
variable forms, but without any distinguishable otic compartments or
morphologically distinct sensory organs. However, the dorsal part of this vesicle
was able to adopt a sensory fate and to produce some hair cells. In the less
severe cases of Gata3-/- ears, distinct utricular, saccular and cochlear
compartments were present and hair cells could be detected in the vestibular
sensory epithelia. Although clear cristae and maculae formed, the morphology and 
size of these sensory areas were abnormal and they remained often un-separated.
In contrast to the vestibule, the cochlear sensory compartment remained more
immature and no hair or supporting cells could be detected. Our results suggest
that GATA3 is critical for normal vestibular and cochlear morphogenesis and that 
it is especially important for cochlear sensory differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22094003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Brain. 2011 Dec;134(Pt 12):3578-89. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr262. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Micro-RNA dysregulation in multiple sclerosis favours pro-inflammatory
T-cell-mediated autoimmunity.

Guerau-de-Arellano M(1), Smith KM, Godlewski J, Liu Y, Winger R, Lawler SE,
Whitacre CC, Racke MK, Lovett-Racke AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University, 395 West 12th Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Pro-inflammatory T cells mediate autoimmune demyelination in multiple sclerosis. 
However, the factors driving their development and multiple sclerosis
susceptibility are incompletely understood. We investigated how micro-RNAs, newly
described as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression, contribute to
pathogenic T-cell differentiation in multiple sclerosis. miR-128 and miR-27b were
increased in naïve and miR-340 in memory CD4(+) T cells from patients with
multiple sclerosis, inhibiting Th2 cell development and favouring
pro-inflammatory Th1 responses. These effects were mediated by direct suppression
of B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (BMI1) and interleukin-4 (IL4)
expression, resulting in decreased GATA3 levels, and a Th2 to Th1 cytokine shift.
Gain-of-function experiments with these micro-RNAs enhanced the encephalitogenic 
potential of myelin-specific T cells in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. In addition, treatment of multiple sclerosis patient T cells
with oligonucleotide micro-RNA inhibitors led to the restoration of Th2
responses. These data illustrate the biological significance and therapeutic
potential of these micro-RNAs in regulating T-cell phenotypes in multiple
sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3235556
PMID: 22088562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026795. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

A focused in situ hybridization screen identifies candidate transcriptional
regulators of thymic epithelial cell development and function.

Wei Q(1), Condie BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States 
of America.

BACKGROUND: Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are necessary for normal T cell
development. Currently, one transcription factor, Foxn1 is known to be necessary 
for the progression of fetal TEC differentiation. However, some aspects of fetal 
TEC differentiation occur in Foxn1 mutants, suggesting the existence of
additional transcriptional regulators of TEC differentiation. The goal of this
study was to identify some of the additional candidate transcription factors that
may be involved in the specification and/or differentiation of TECs during fetal 
development.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified candidate fetal TEC transcriptional
regulators via data and text mining. From our data mining we selected the
transcription factors Foxg1, Isl1, Gata3, Nkx2-5, Nkx2-6 and Sox2 for further
studies. Whole mount in situ hybridizations confirmed the expression of these
transcription factors within subdomains of the third pharyngeal pouch from
E9.5-E10.5. By E11.5 days Foxg1 and Isl1 transcripts were the only mRNAs from
this group of genes detected exclusively within the thymus domain of the third
pouch. Based on this initial in situ hybridization analysis, we focused on
defining the expression of Foxg1 and Isl1 during multiple stages of thymus
development and TEC differentiation. We found that Foxg1 and Isl1 are
specifically expressed in differentiating TECs during fetal and postnatal stages 
of thymus development. In addition, we found differential expression of Islet1
and Foxn1 within the fetal and postnatal TEC population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our studies have identified two developmental
transcription factors that are excellent candidate regulators of thymic
epithelial cell specification and differentiation during fetal development. Our
results suggest that Foxg1 and Isl1 may play a role in the regulation of TEC
differentiation during fetal and postnatal stages. Our results also demonstrate
heterogeneity of TECs marked by the differential expression of transcription
factors, potentially providing new insights into the regulation of TEC
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3210126
PMID: 22087235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Nov;1237:24-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06221.x.

Transcription factors in parathyroid development: lessons from hypoparathyroid
disorders.

Grigorieva IV(1), Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital,
University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Parathyroid developmental anomalies, which result in hypoparathyroidism, are
common and may occur in one in 4,000 live births. Parathyroids, in man, develop
from the endodermal cells of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, whereas, in
the mouse they develop solely from the endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouches. 
In addition, neural crest cells that arise from the embryonic mid- and hindbrain 
also contribute to parathyroid gland development. The molecular signaling
pathways that are involved in determining the differentiation of the pharyngeal
pouch endoderm into parathyroid cells are being elucidated by studies of patients
with hypoparathyroidism and appropriate mouse models. These studies have revealed
important roles for a number of transcription factors, which include Tbx1, Gata3,
Gcm2, Sox3, Aire1 and members of the homeobox (Hox) and paired box (Pax)
families.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22082362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Sep;25(17):791-5.

[Kinetic expression of T-bet and GATA-3 genes in rat allergic rhinitis models].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Chen D, Li T, Wen W, Shi J, He X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical College, Kunming, 650031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate kinetic expression of genes T-bet and GATA-3 in blood
mononuclear cells (BMCs) in allergic rhinitis rats model at different stages of
development of allergic rhinitis.
METHOD: Twenty SD rats (including 10 male and 10 female) were divided into 2
groups, experimental group and control group, randomly, 10 rats for each group.
Ten rats in experimental group were sensitized and intranasally challenged by
OVA, aluminium hydroxide hydrate gel and Bordelella pertussis inactive
microorganism suspension (B. pertussis) adjuvants, as allergic rhinitis models,
Ten rats in control group were investigated using physiological saline only. BMCs
were separated from 2 ml blood which was extracted from rat heart at the end of
sensitization, 10- hour after the first challenge and 10-hour after the final
challenge, respectively. RT-PCR was utilized to detect the expression of T-bet
and GATA-3.
RESULT: At the end of sensitization, 10-hour after the first challenge and
10-hour after the final challenge, in experimental group, Relative quantitation
of expression of T-bet was 0.404 +/- 0.187, 1.676 +/- 0.708, 0.503 +/- 0.514 and 
that of GATA-3 was 0.434 +/- 0.147, 0.600 +/- 0.480, 1.029 +/- 0.690,
respectively. While, In control group, Relative quantitation of expression of
T-bet was 0.487 +/- 0.212, 0.486 +/- 0.148, 0.495 +/- 0.103 and and its of GATA-3
was 0.596 +/- 0.249, 0.474 +/- 0.101, 0.550 +/- 0.119, respectively. At 10-hour
after the first challenge, relative quantitation of expression of T-bet in
experimental group was increased markedly and there was significant difference
compared with contol group (t=4.18, P<0.01). In experimental group, The amount of
expression of T-bet at 10-hour after first challenge was higher than it at
10-hour after the final challenge and there was markedly difference (t=5.14,
P<0.01). The amount of expression of T-bet at 10-hour after first challenge was
increased significantly compared with it at the end of sensitization (t= 5.27,
P<0.01). while, the expression of GATA-3 at 10-hour after final challenge was
markedly increased compared with it at the end of sensitization (t= 3.51, P<0.05)
and was higher than it at 10-hour after first challenge (t=2.53, P<0.05). At
10-hour after final challenge, The amount of expression of GATA-3 in experimental
group was significantly higher than it in control group (t=2.71, P<0.05).
However, both the expression of GATA-3 and T-bet had not markedly changed in
control group.
CONCLUSION: It is thought that the development of allergic rhinitis is a
successive and sequencing kinetic course, and imbalance of expression of GATA-3
and T-bet may be genetic base on allergic rhinitis, both GATA-3 and T-bet were
involved in allergic rhinitis only in different phase of development of allergic 
rhinitis.

PMID: 22070074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 May;76(5):625-33. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04256.x.

Identification and characterization of C106R, a novel mutation in the DNA-binding
domain of GCMB, in a family with autosomal-dominant hypoparathyroidism.

Yi HS(1), Eom YS, Park IeB, Lee S, Hong S, Jüppner H, Mannstadt M, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology,
Gachon University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

OVERVIEW: Glial cells missing B (GCMB) is a transcription factor that is
expressed in the parathyroid hormone (PTH)-secreting cells of the parathyroid
glands. Several mutations in GCMB have been reported to cause hypoparathyroidism 
(HP). We identified a family with two individuals in two generations (mother and 
son), who are affected by autosomal-dominant hypoparathyroidism (AD-HP). A novel 
heterozygous mutation in exon 2 of GCMB was identified in both affected
individuals that changes cysteine at position 106 of the putative DNA-binding
domain of GCMB to arginine (C106R).
METHODS: We performed mutational analysis of the genes encoding GCMB, pre-pro
PTH, GATA3 and CaSR using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA. 
The identified GCMB mutant was characterized by functional studies including
nuclear localization, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and luciferase
reporter assays, and homology modelling was performed to generate a
three-dimensional structural model for the DNA-binding domain of GCMB to predict 
the structural consequences of the identified mutation.
RESULTS: The C106R mutant of GCMB failed to interact with the DNA consensus
recognition motif, as determined by EMSA. Furthermore, in comparison with
wild-type GCMB, the C106R mutant demonstrated reduced transactivation in
luciferase reporter assays; however, the mutant GCMB failed to reduce the
activity of the wild-type protein. Consistent with the EMSA findings, homology
modelling analysis suggested that replacement of cysteine 106 with arginine would
interfere with DNA binding.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel GCMB mutation that may explain AD-HP in
our family. However, the exact mechanism by which this heterozygous mutation
leads to the disease in the described family remains to be elucidated.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3701386
PMID: 22066718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Blood. 2011 Dec 22;118(26):6881-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-354654. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

miR-135b mediates NPM-ALK-driven oncogenicity and renders IL-17-producing
immunophenotype to anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Matsuyama H(1), Suzuki HI, Nishimori H, Noguchi M, Yao T, Komatsu N, Mano H,
Sugimoto K, Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Many transformed lymphoma cells show immune-phenotypes resembling the
corresponding normal lymphocytes; thus, they provide a guide for proper diagnosis
and present promising routes to improve their pathophysiologic understanding and 
to identify novel therapeutic targets. However, the underlying molecular
mechanism(s) of these aberrant immune-phenotypes is largely unknown. Here, we
report that microRNA-135b (miR-135b) mediates nucleophosmin-anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (NPM-ALK)-driven oncogenicity and empowers IL-17-producing immunophenotype
in anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). NPM-ALK oncogene strongly promoted the 
expression of miR-135b and its host gene LEMD1 through activation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 3. In turn, elevated miR-135b
targeted FOXO1 in ALCL cells. miR-135b introduction also decreased
chemosensitivity in Jurkat cells, suggesting its contribution to oncogenic
activities of NPM-ALK. Interestingly, miR-135b suppressed T-helper (Th) 2 master 
regulators STAT6 and GATA3, and miR-135b blockade attenuated IL-17 production and
paracrine inflammatory response by ALCL cells, indicating that miR-135b-mediated 
Th2 suppression may lead to the skewing to ALCL immunophenotype overlapping with 
Th17 cells. Furthermore, antisense-based miR-135b inhibition reduced tumor
angiogenesis and growth in vivo, demonstrating significance of this "Th17 mimic" 
pathway as a therapeutic target. These results collectively illuminated unique
contribution of oncogenic kinase-linked microRNA to tumorigenesis through
modulation of tumor immune-phenotype and microenvironment.

PMID: 22042699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Sep;124(18):2899-906.

Molecular mechanism of icariin on rat asthmatic model.

Xu CQ(1), LE JJ, Duan XH, DU WJ, Liu BJ, Wu JF, Cao YX, Dong JC.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Department, Huashan Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China.

BACKGROUND: Effects of icariin on airway inflammation in asthmatic rats and the
intervention of LPS induced inflammation are interfered with the machanism of
icariin. Our study aimed to observe the effect of icariin on ovalbumin-induced
imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokine expression and its mechanism.
METHODS: Sixty male SD rats were randomly divided into control group (PBS),
asthma group (ovalbumin (OVA)-induced), dexamethasone group, and OVA+icariin low,
medium and high dose groups (5, 10, 20 mg/kg, respectively). Each group had ten
rats. The model of OVA sensitization was a rat asthma model. Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method was used to observe the effects of icariin on 
interleukin-4 (IL-4) and inerferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) in rats' lung tissue.
Immunohistochemical staining was applied to detect the intervention effects of
icariin on T cells (T-bet) and gatabinding protein 3 (GATA-3) in rat pulmonary
tissue. Realtime RT-PCR was used to observe the intervention effects of icariin
on T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression in rat pulmonary tissue and spleen
lymphocytes. Western blotting was used to observe the icariin intervention
effects on T-bet, GATA-3 and nuclear factor-Kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65 protein
expressions in rat pulmonary tissue.
RESULTS: The ELISA results from pulmonary tissue showed that IL-4 expression was 
significantly reduced (P < 0.05), while the IFN-<U+03B3> expression increased but not
significantly when we compared OVA+icariin medium and high dose groups with the
asthma group. Immunohistochemical staining of pulmonary tissue showed that the
GATA-3 decreased significantly while the T-bet staining did not change in the
OVA+icariin high dose group. In pulmonary tissue and spleen lymphocytes T-bet and
GATA-3 mRNA expressions were significantly reduced (P < 0.05) in icariin
treatment groups compared with the asthma model group. GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA in
rat spleen lymphocytes in the asthma group were higher than in the control group.
GATA-3 mRNA expression in pulmonary tissue significantly decreased (P < 0.05)
while T-bet mRNA expression decreased but not significantly in the icariin
treatment group compared with the asthma group. T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expressions in pulmonary tissue increased significantly compared with the asthma 
group, which meant that icariin could inhibit the increase of GATA-3 protein, but
not of T-bet. The bronchus, blood vessels and periphery pulmonary tissue had
infiltration of inflammatory cells in the OVA+icariin high dose group while NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 cells were reduced, and expression of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 in this group was less than
in the asthma group. The expression of total p65 protein decreased with icariin
treatment while the expression of cytoplasmic p65 protein increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Icariin could regulate the imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokines in
asthmatic rat pulmonary tissue. Icariin could regulate the imbalance of Th1/Th2
associated transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in asthmatic rat pulmonary
tissue and spleen lymphocytes. Icariin could inhibit the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 
protein in asthmatic rat pulmonary tissue.

PMID: 22040500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5974-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100550. Epub 2011
Oct 28.

c-Myb and GATA-3 cooperatively regulate IL-13 expression via conserved GATA-3
response element and recruit mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) for histone
modification of the IL-13 locus.

Kozuka T(1), Sugita M, Shetzline S, Gewirtz AM, Nakata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The c-Myb and GATA-3 transcription factors play important roles in T cell
development. We recently reported that c-Myb, GATA-3, and Menin form a core
transcription complex that regulates GATA-3 expression and ultimately Th2 cell
development in human peripheral blood T cells. However, c-Myb roles for Th2
cytokine expression were not demonstrated. In this article, we report that c-Myb 
and GATA-3 cooperatively play an essential role in IL-13 expression though direct
binding to a conserved GATA-3 response element (CGRE), an enhancer for IL-13
expression. c-Myb and GATA-3 were shown to activate the CGRE-IL-13 promoter by
~160-fold, and mutation of the canonical Myb binding site completely abrogated
CGRE enhancer activity. In contrast, mutation of the GATA binding site partially 
decreased CGRE enhancer activity. GATA-3 did not bind to CGRE when c-myb
expression was silenced. c-Myb, GATA-3, Menin, and mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)
bound to CGRE in human primary CD4(+) effector/memory cells. Moreover, c-myb
silencing significantly decreased both methylation of histone H3K4 and
acetylation of histone H3K9 at the IL-13 locus in CD4(+) effector/memory cells.
Therefore, in addition to the strong enhancer effect for the transcription of
IL-13, the c-Myb/GATA-3 complex recruits MLL to the CGRE for histone modification
of the IL-13 locus during the differentiation of memory Th2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3221810
PMID: 22039304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Int Immunol. 2011 Dec;23(12):761-72. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr087. Epub 2011 Oct
29.

Requirement of GATA-binding protein 3 for II13 gene expression in
IL-18-stimulated Th1 cells.

Nakahira M(1), Nakanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medical Zoology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Recent reports have revealed that CD4(+) T(h) cell subsets have the ability to
alter their gene expression pattern in response to extracellular stimuli. We
previously highlighted the plasticity of T(h)1 cells by demonstrating that T(h)1 
cells gain the capacity to produce IL-3, IL-9, IL-13 and granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor in response to antigen, IL-2 and IL-18, and based on
their unique function, we designated these activated T(h)1 cells as 'super T(h)1 
cells'. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying IL-13 production by
super T(h)1 cells has not been elucidated. Here, we show that the GATA-binding
protein 3 (Gata3) is essentially required for II13 gene expression in super T(h)1
cells. Gata3 is synergistically induced in T-box expressed in T-cells
(T-bet)-expressing T(h)1 cells when co-stimulated with anti-CD3, IL-18 and IL-4
through the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells, nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6, respectively. However, Gata3 induction is not
satisfactory, and additional TCR or anti-CD3 signaling is prerequisite for
triggering IL-13 production by Gata3 plus T-bet-expressing T(h)1 cells. These
findings suggest that Gata3, which is not originally expressed in T(h)1 cells,
alters the cytokine production profile by T(h)1 cells.

PMID: 22039015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mult Scler. 2012 Mar;18(3):305-13. doi: 10.1177/1352458511420268. Epub 2011 Oct
21.

Glatiramer acetate antibodies, gene expression and disease activity in multiple
sclerosis.

Sellebjerg F(1), Hedegaard CJ, Krakauer M, Hesse D, Lund H, Nielsen CH,
Søndergaard HB, Sørensen PS.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Multiple Sclerosis Center, Department of Neurology, Copenhagen
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Denmark. sellebjerg@dadlnet.dk

BACKGROUND: Glatiramer acetate (GA) treatment suppresses disease activity in
multiple sclerosis (MS). The immunological response to treatment may differ in
patients who are stable on GA therapy and patients with breakthrough disease
activity, but the results of previous studies are inconsistent.
OBJECTIVES: We studied the immunological response to GA and its relationship with
disease activity.
METHODS: Anti-GA antibodies in plasma and the expression of genes encoding
cytokines and T-cell-polarizing transcription factors in blood cells were
analysed by flow cytometric bead array and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analysis in 39 untreated and 29 GA-treated relapsing-remitting MS patients.
Definition of breakthrough disease was based on the occurrence of relapses,
disability progression, or gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced MRI.
RESULTS: The expression of T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th17 cytokines and
transcription factors was reduced during long-term treatment, but there was no
relationship between the expression of cytokines and transcription factors and
anti-GA antibodies. High expression of mRNA encoding GATA3 and lymphotoxin-ß
(LT-ß) was associated with low disease activity in Gd-enhanced MRI studies. None 
of the variables studied were associated with clinical disease activity. GA
treatment resulted in the development of IgG and IgG4 anti-GA antibodies during
the first months of treatment, persisting during long-term treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed relationship between the expression of mRNA encoding
GATA3 and LT-ß expression and MRI disease activity deserves further analysis in
future studies. The development of anti-GA antibodies was observed in all
patients treated with GA, but this was not related with measures of cellular
immunity, clinical or MRI disease activity.

PMID: 22020419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Clin Immunol. 2012 Feb;142(2):117-26. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2011.08.015. Epub 2011 
Sep 16.

GATA3 and a dominant regulatory gene expression profile discriminate operational 
tolerance in human transplantation.

Moraes-Vieira PM(1), Takenaka MC, Silva HM, Monteiro SM, Agena F, Lemos F,
Saitovitch D, Kalil J, Coelho V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Heart Institute (InCor), School of Medicine,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Some organ-transplanted patients achieve a state of "operational tolerance" (OT) 
in which graft function is maintained after the complete withdrawal of
immunosuppressive drugs. We used a gene panel of regulatory/inflammatory
molecules (FOXP3, GATA3, IL10, TGFB1, TGFBR1/ TBX21, TNF and IFNG) to investigate
the gene expression profile in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
renal-transplanted individuals experiencing OT compared to transplanted
individuals not displaying OT and healthy individuals (HI). OT subjects showed a 
predominant regulatory (REG) profile with higher gene expression of GATA3, FOXP3,
TGFB1 and TGFB receptor 1 compared to the other groups. This predominant REG gene
expression profile displayed stability over time. The significant GATA3 gene and 
protein expressions in OT individuals suggest that a Th2 deviation may be a
relevant pathway to OT. Moreover, the capacity of the REG/INFLAMMA gene panel to 
discriminate OT by peripheral blood analysis indicates that this state has
systemic repercussions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):622-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.015. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Functional and epigenetic studies reveal multistep differentiation and plasticity
of in vitro-generated and in vivo-derived follicular T helper cells.

Lu KT(1), Kanno Y, Cannons JL, Handon R, Bible P, Elkahloun AG, Anderson SM, Wei 
L, Sun H, O'Shea JJ, Schwartzberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells provide critical help to B cells for germinal
center (GC) formation. Mutations affecting SLAM-associated protein (SAP) prevent 
GC formation because of defective T cell-B cell interactions, yet effects on Tfh 
cell differentiation remain unclear. We describe the in vitro differentiation of 
functionally competent "Tfh-like" cells that expressed interleukin-21, Tfh cell
markers, and Bcl6 and rescued GC formation in SAP-deficient hosts better than
other T helper (Th) cells. SAP-deficient Tfh-like cells appeared virtually
indistinguishable from wild-type, yet failed to support GCs in vivo.
Interestingly, both Tfh-like and in vivo-derived Tfh cells could produce effector
cytokines in response to polarizing conditions. Moreover, Th1, Th2, and Th17
cells could be reprogrammed to obtain Tfh cell characteristics. ChIP-Seq analyses
revealed positive epigenetic markings on Tbx21, Gata3, and Rorc in Tfh-like and
ex vivo Tfh cells and on Bcl6 in non-Tfh cells, supporting the concept of
plasticity between Tfh and other Th cell populations.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3235706
PMID: 22018472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Autoimmunity. 2012 Mar;45(2):129-36. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2011.622013. Epub 2011
Oct 21.

Functional polymorphisms in TBX21 and HLX are associated with development and
prognosis of Graves' disease.

Morita M(1), Watanabe M, Inoue N, Inaoka C, Akamizu T, Tatsumi KI, Hidaka Y,
Iwatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Division of Health Sciences, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It has been indicated that T-box 21 (TBX21) and H 2.0-like homeobox
(HLX) are transcription factors related to the differentiation of T helper 1
cells, whereas GATA-binding protein 3 is the master transcription factor of T
helper 2 cells.
METHODS: We genotyped -1514T/C (rs17250932) and -1993T/C (rs4794067)
polymorphisms of TBX21, - 742C/G polymorphism (rs2184658) of HLX and -1420G/A
polymorphism (rs1269486) of GATA3 in genomic DNA samples from Japanese patients; 
51 patients with severe Hashimoto's disease (HD), 39 with mild HD, 66 with
intractable Graves' disease (GD), in whom remission was difficult to induce, 47
with GD in remission and 79 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: The T alleles of the TBX21-1514T/C and -1993T/C polymorphisms were more 
frequent in patients with intractable GD than in those with GD in remission.
Among individuals with the TBX21-1993TT genotype, the G allele of HLX-742C/G
polymorphism, which correlates with low HLX expression, was more frequent in
patients with intractable GD than in those with GD in remission.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional polymorphisms in TBX21 are associated with the
development of autoimmune thyroid diseases and prognosis of GD, and a functional 
polymorphism in HLX in combination with the TBX21 polymorphism is also associated
with the prognosis of GD.

PMID: 22014209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Endocrinol. 2012 Jan;212(1):71-84. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0289. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Testosterone protects from metabolic syndrome-associated prostate inflammation:
an experimental study in rabbit.

Vignozzi L(1), Morelli A, Sarchielli E, Comeglio P, Filippi S, Cellai I, Maneschi
E, Serni S, Gacci M, Carini M, Piccinni MP, Saad F, Adorini L, Vannelli GB, Maggi
M.

Author information: 
(1)Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Clinical Physiopathology,
University of Florence, Viale Pieraccini 6, Florence 50139, Italy.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)/lower urinary
tract symptoms (LUTS) are often associated. One of their common denominators is
hypogonadism. However, testosterone supplementation is limited by concerns for
potential prostatic side effects. The objective was to determine whether
MetS-associated prostate alterations are prevented by testosterone
supplementation. We used a previously described animal model of MetS, obtained by
feeding male rabbits a high-fat diet (HFD) for 12 weeks. Subsets of HFD rabbits
were treated with testosterone or with the farnesoid X receptor agonist INT-747. 
Rabbits fed a standard diet were used as controls. HFD-animals develop
hypogonadism and all the MetS features: hyperglycemia, glucose intolerance,
dyslipidemia, hypertension, and visceral obesity. In addition, HFD-animals show a
prostate inflammation. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that HFD-induced
prostate fibrosis, hypoxia, and inflammation. The mRNA expression of several
proinflammatory (IL8, IL6, IL1ß, and TNFa), T lymphocyte (CD4, CD8, Tbet, Gata3, 
and ROR <U+03B3>t), macrophage (TLR2, TLR4, and STAMP2), neutrophil (lactoferrin),
inflammation (COX2 and RAGE), and fibrosis/myofibroblast activation (TGFß, SM22a,
aSMA, RhoA, and ROCK1/ROCK2) markers was significantly increased in HFD prostate.
Testosterone, as well as INT-747, treatment prevented some MetS features,
although only testosterone normalized all the HFD-induced prostate alterations.
Interestingly, the ratio between testosterone and estradiol plasma level retains 
a significant, negative, association with all the fibrosis and the majority of
inflammatory markers analyzed. These data highlight that testosterone protects
rabbit prostate from MetS-induced prostatic hypoxia, fibrosis, and inflammation, 
which can play a role toward the development/progression of BPH/LUTS.

PMID: 22010203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Mar;36(3):491-501. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.09.004. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Molecular characterizations and functional assessments of GATA-3 and its splice
variant in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua L.).

Chi H(1), Zhang Z, Inami M, Bøgwald J, Zhan W, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø,
Norway.

GATA-3 is a master transcription factor of the Th2 cells. We have identified
GATA-3 cDNA and its splice variant in Atlantic cod. Cod GATA-3 (GmGATA-3) has a
1320 b p open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 440 amino acids with two
zinc finger domains that are well conserved within teleosts and higher
vertebrates. The GATA-3 cDNA splice variant without zinc finger domains was shown
to contain an 828 b p open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 276 amino
acids. Both GATA-3 proteins fused with RFP-tag were identified in or close to the
nuclei 48 h after the plasmids were transfected in CHSE-214 cells. The full
length GATA-3 with two zinc finger domains has a transcriptional function
confirmed by transfection with GATA-3 reporter vector along with expression
constructs of GATA-3 plasmids in CHSE-214 cells, whereas the GATA-3 splice
variant without zinc finger domain did not enhance the activity of the GATA-3
reporter vector, and no interference was found between these two GATA-3 variants.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that the two Atlantic cod GATA-3 variants were strongly 
expressed in the gills and infection with live Vibrio anguillarum induced the
spleen expression of both GmGATA-3L and GmGATA-3S. Unexpectedly, PMA increased
the expression of the GATA-3 splice variant in vivo and especially in vitro, with
an increase of more than 100,000-fold in head kidney leukocytes at 24 and 48 h.
On the other hand, there were no significant increases at the transcript level of
full length GATA-3 between Poly I:C and ß-glucan treatment groups compared to
controls.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21978454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Clin Invest. 2011 Nov;121(11):4503-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI57456. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

GATA3 controls Foxp3<U+207A> regulatory T cell fate during inflammation in mice.

Wohlfert EA(1), Grainger JR, Bouladoux N, Konkel JE, Oldenhove G, Ribeiro CH,
Hall JA, Yagi R, Naik S, Bhairavabhotla R, Paul WE, Bosselut R, Wei G, Zhao K,
Oukka M, Zhu J, Belkaid Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Unit, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Tregs not only keep immune responses to autoantigens in check, but also restrain 
those directed toward pathogens and the commensal microbiota. Control of
peripheral immune homeostasis by Tregs relies on their capacity to accumulate at 
inflamed sites and appropriately adapt to their local environment. To date, the
factors involved in the control of these aspects of Treg physiology remain poorly
understood. Here, we show that the canonical Th2 transcription factor GATA3 is
selectively expressed in Tregs residing in barrier sites including the
gastrointestinal tract and the skin. GATA3 expression in both murine and human
Tregs was induced upon TCR and IL-2 stimulation. Although GATA3 was not required 
to sustain Treg homeostasis and function at steady state, GATA3 played a cardinal
role in Treg physiology during inflammation. Indeed, the intrinsic expression of 
GATA3 by Tregs was required for their ability to accumulate at inflamed sites and
to maintain high levels of Foxp3 expression in various polarized or inflammatory 
settings. Furthermore, our data indicate that GATA3 limits Treg polarization
toward an effector T cell phenotype and acquisition of effector cytokines in
inflamed tissues. Overall, our work reveals what we believe to be a new facet in 
the complex role of GATA3 in T cells and highlights what may be a fundamental
role in controlling Treg physiology during inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3204837
PMID: 21965331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4440-50. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002860. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

Sensitivity and resistance to regulation by IL-4 during Th17 maturation.

Cooney LA(1), Towery K, Endres J, Fox DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatic
Disease Research Core Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Th17 cells are highly pathogenic in a variety of immune-mediated diseases, and a 
thorough understanding of the mechanisms of cytokine-mediated suppression of Th17
cells has great therapeutic potential. In this article, we characterize the
regulation of both in vitro- and in vivo-derived Th17 cells by IL-4. We
demonstrate that IL-4 suppresses reactivation of committed Th17 cells, even in
the presence of TGF-ß, IL-6, and IL-23. Downregulation of IL-17 by IL-4 is
dependent on STAT6 and mediated by inhibition of STAT3 binding at the Il17a
promoter. Although Th1 cytokines were shown to induce IFN-<U+03B3> expression by Th17
cells, IL-4 does not induce a Th2 phenotype in Th17 cells. Suppression by IL-4 is
stable and long-lived when applied to immature Th17 cells, but cells that have
undergone multiple rounds of stimulation, either in vivo during a Th17-mediated
inflammatory disease, or in vitro, become resistant to suppression by IL-4 and
lose the ability to signal through IL-4R. Thus, although IL-4 is a potent
suppressor of the Th17 genetic program at early stages after differentiation,
prolonged stimulation renders Th17 cells impervious to regulatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3197869
PMID: 21949021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int Immunol. 2011 Nov;23(11):661-8. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr078. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Transcriptional control of T-cell development.

Naito T(1), Tanaka H, Naoe Y, Taniuchi I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN Research Institute for Allergy
and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan.

T lymphocytes, which are central players in orchestrating immune responses,
consist of several subtypes with distinct functions. The thymus is an organ where
hematopoietic progenitors undergo sequential developmental processes to give rise
to this variety of T-cell subsets with diverse antigen specificity. In the
periphery, naive T cells further differentiate into effector cells upon
encountering antigens. There are several developmental checkpoints during T-cell 
development, where regulation by a combination of transcription factors imprints 
specific functional properties on precursors. The transcription factors E2A,
GATA-binding protein 3 (Gata3) and RUNT-related transcription factor (Runx) are
involved at various stages in the differentiation of double-negative thymocytes
and in ß-selection, as are transcription factors from the Notch signaling
pathway; other transcription factors such as B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11b
(Bcl11b), myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (Myb) and inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (Id3) are involved at specific stages. Differentiation of T cells into 
helper versus cytotoxic cells involves not only antagonistic interplay between
Runx and T(h) inducing POZ-Kruppel factor (ThPOK) but also complex interactions
between MAZR, Gata3 and Myb in the activation and silencing of genes such as Cd4 
and Cd8 as well as the gene that encodes ThPOK itself. A wide range of
well-defined transcription factors, including signal transducer and activator of 
transcriptions (STATs), T-bet, Gata3, nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT), 
adaptor-related protein complex 1 (AP-1) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), are known
to shape T(h)1/T(h)2 differentiation. Runx and Gata3 also operate in this
process, as do c-Maf and recombining binding protein for immunoglobulin J<U+03BA> region
(RBP-J) and the chromatin-reorganizing protein special AT-rich sequence-binding
protein 1 (SATB1). In this review, we briefly discuss how T-cell characteristics 
are acquired and become divergent from the point of view of transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 21948191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Immunol Lett. 2011 Dec 30;141(1):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.09.002. Epub
2011 Sep 17.

CCR4 dependent migration of Foxp3+ Treg cells to skin grafts and draining lymph
nodes is implicated in enhanced graft survival in CD200tg recipients.

Yu K(1), Chen Z, Khatri I, Gorczynski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Research Division, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.

We have previously reported that transgenic overexpression of CD200 in either
mouse skin graft donors or recipients significantly enhances skin allograft
survival. By focused microarray analysis we showed this enhanced graft survival
is associated with increased expression of Foxp3, GITR, CTLA-4 and CCR4 mRNA, all
genes related to T(reg) cell induction/function, and of Gata3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13,
and somewhat surprisingly, of T-bet, INF-<U+03B3> and granzyme b. Gene-specific
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed an increase in Foxp3(+)
T(reg) cells in both the skin grafts and draining lymph nodes (DLNs) of CD200(tg)
recipient mice at both 7/14 days post engraftment, as well as providing evidence 
for increased expression of the ligands for CCR4, CCL17 and CCL22 in both
locations. Following lentivirus-mediated shRNA treatment of Dox-treated CD200(tg)
mice to attenuate expression of CCR4 mRNA, the increased localization of T(reg)
cells in skin/DLN of CD200(tg) recipients was abolished, and the enhanced graft
survival similarly reversed. We conclude that enhanced CCR4 dependent migration
of Foxp3(+) T(reg) to grafted tissue and DLNs is an essential step in the graft
prolongation afforded by overexpression of CD200.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Br J Cancer. 2011 Oct 11;105(8):1203-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.347. Epub 2011 Sep 
20.

Breast cancer expression of YKL-40 correlates with tumour grade, poor
differentiation, and other cancer markers.

Shao R(1), Cao QJ, Arenas RB, Bigelow C, Bentley B, Yan W.

Author information: 
(1)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, 3601 Main Street, Springfield, MA
01199, USA. rong.shao@bhs.org

BACKGROUND: Serum levels of a secreted glycoprotein YKL-40 are elevated in
patients with a wide range of cancers including breast, colorectal, and ovarian
cancers. Furthermore, these increased levels correlate with poorer survival of
cancer patients, suggesting that serum levels of YKL-40 might be a prognostic
biomarker. However, the tissue expression of YKL-40 and its relationship with
clinical outcomes and other potential markers are poorly understood.
METHODS: Tissue samples from invasive breast cancers, breast ductal carcinoma in 
situ (DCIS), and cancer-free reduction mammoplasty were enrolled. YKL-40
expression was measured using immunohistochemistry and evaluated by a
semi-quantification assay. Statistical analyses explored the relationship of
YKL-40 with clinical outcome and other breast cancer biomarkers.
RESULTS: Breast ductal carcinoma in situ expressed low and moderate levels of
YKL-40. In the subset of 203 patients with invasive cancer, YKL-40 levels were
positively correlated with tumour grade (P<0.0001) and Her2/neu (P<0.01), but
negatively correlated with oestrogen (P<0.0001) and progesterone receptor
(P<0.0001). YKL-40 levels were inversely correlated with expressions of GATA3
(P=0.0137) and E-cadherin (P=0.0417).
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that expression levels of YKL-40 are
associated with tumour grade, poor differentiation, and other breast cancer
markers, highlighting that tissue levels of YKL-40 serve as a valuable biomarker 
for breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3208489
PMID: 21934681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4542-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101567. Epub 2011
Sep 19.

Prenatal secondhand cigarette smoke promotes Th2 polarization and impairs goblet 
cell differentiation and airway mucus formation.

Singh SP(1), Gundavarapu S, Peña-Philippides JC, Rir-Sima-ah J, Mishra NC, Wilder
JA, Langley RJ, Smith KR, Sopori ML.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Immunology Division, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute,
Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Parental, particularly maternal, smoking increases the risk for childhood
allergic asthma and infection. Similarly, in a murine allergic asthma model,
prenatal plus early postnatal exposure to secondhand cigarette smoke (SS)
exacerbates airways hyperreactivity and Th2 responses in the lung. However, the
mechanism and contribution of prenatal versus early postnatal SS exposure on
allergic asthma remain unresolved. To identify the effects of prenatal and/or
early postnatal SS on allergic asthma, BALB/c dams and their offspring were
exposed gestationally and/or 8-10 wk postbirth to filtered air or SS. Prenatal,
but not postnatal, SS strongly increased methacholine and allergen
(Aspergillus)-induced airway resistance, Th2 cytokine levels, and atopy and
activated the Th2-polarizing pathway GATA3/Lck/ERK1/2/STAT6. Either prenatal
and/or early postnatal SS downregulated the Th1-specific transcription factor
T-bet and, surprisingly, despite high levels of IL-4/IL-13, dramatically blocked 
the allergen-induced mucous cell metaplasia, airway mucus formation, and the
expression of mucus-related genes/proteins: Muc5ac, <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid A
receptors, and SAM pointed domain-containing Ets-like factor. Given that
SS/nicotine exposure of normal adult mice promotes mucus formation, the results
suggested that fetal and neonatal lung are highly sensitive to cigarette smoke.
Thus, although the gestational SS promotes Th2 polarization/allergic asthma, it
may also impair and/or delay the development of fetal and neonatal lung,
affecting mucociliary clearance and Th1 responses. Together, this may explain the
increased susceptibility of children from smoking parents to allergic asthma and 
childhood respiratory infections.

PMCID: PMC3197944
PMID: 21930963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;31(22):4609-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05766-11. Epub 2011 Sep 
19.

Gata-3 negatively regulates the tumor-initiating capacity of mammary luminal
progenitor cells and targets the putative tumor suppressor caspase-14.

Asselin-Labat ML(1), Sutherland KD, Vaillant F, Gyorki DE, Wu D, Holroyd S,
Breslin K, Ward T, Shi W, Bath ML, Deb S, Fox SB, Smyth GK, Lindeman GJ, Visvader
JE.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

The transcription factor Gata-3 is a definitive marker of luminal breast cancers 
and a key regulator of mammary morphogenesis. Here we have explored a role for
Gata-3 in tumor initiation and the underlying cellular mechanisms using a mouse
model of "luminal-like" cancer. Loss of a single Gata-3 allele markedly
accelerated tumor progression in mice carrying the mouse mammary tumor virus
promoter-driven polyomavirus middle T antigen (MMTV-PyMT mice), while
overexpression of Gata-3 curtailed tumorigenesis. Through the identification of
two distinct luminal progenitor cells in the mammary gland, we demonstrate that
Gata-3 haplo-insufficiency increases the tumor-initiating capacity of these
progenitors but not the stem cell-enriched population. Overexpression of a
conditional Gata-3 transgene in the PyMT model promoted cellular differentiation 
and led to reduced tumor-initiating capacity as well as diminished angiogenesis. 
Transcript profiling studies identified caspase-14 as a novel downstream target
of Gata-3, in keeping with its roles in differentiation and tumorigenesis. A
strong association was evident between GATA-3 and caspase-14 expression in
preinvasive ductal carcinoma in situ samples, where GATA-3 also displayed
prognostic significance. Overall, these studies identify GATA-3 as an important
regulator of tumor initiation through its ability to promote the differentiation 
of committed luminal progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3209243
PMID: 21930782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Immunity. 2011 Sep 23;35(3):337-48. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.012. Epub 2011 
Sep 15.

An essential role of the transcription factor GATA-3 for the function of
regulatory T cells.

Wang Y(1), Su MA, Wan YY.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Sep 23;35(3):313-5.

Forkhead Box P3 (Foxp3)-expressing regulatory T (Treg) cells are central to
maintaining self-tolerance and immune homeostasis. How Treg cell function and
Foxp3 expression are regulated is an important question under intensive
investigation. Here, we have demonstrated an essential role for the transcription
factor GATA-3, a previously recognized Th2 cell master regulator, in controlling 
Treg cell function. Treg cell-specific GATA-3 deletion led to a spontaneous
inflammatory disorder in mice. GATA-3-null Treg cells were defective in
peripheral homeostasis and suppressive function, gained Th17 cell phenotypes, and
expressed reduced amounts of Foxp3. In addition, GATA-3 controlled Foxp3
expression by binding to and promoting the activity of cis-acting elements of
Foxp3. Furthermore, the combined function of GATA-3 and Foxp3 was essential for
Foxp3 expression. These findings provide insights into immune regulatory
mechanisms and uncover a critical function of GATA-3 in Treg cells and immune
tolerance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3182399
PMID: 21924928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Dec;26(12):2253-8. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-1996-5. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Imbalance towards Th1 pathway predominance in purpura nephritis with proteinuria.

Tsuruga K(1), Watanabe S, Oki E, Aizawa-Yashiro T, Yoshida H, Imaizumi T, Ito E, 
Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, Hirosaki, Japan.

Although recent reports suggest a possible role for an imbalance in Th1 and Th2
proinflammatory cytokines in the development and progression of
glomerulonephritis, there is little information on Th1 or Th2 predominance in
Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis (HSPN). Since T-bet and GATA-3 are
transcriptional factors that regulate the differentiation of helper T lymphocytes
into Th1 and Th2, we examined the relative mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in
the urinary sediment of children with proteinuric HSPN by real-time quantitative 
PCR. Eight consecutive patients with proteinuric HSPN (4 with grade IIIa and 4
with grade IIIb according to the International Study of Kidney Disease in
Children criteria) and 20 healthy subjects were enrolled in this study. The
relative expression level of T-bet was significantly higher in the urinary
sediment of patients with HSPN at presentation than in that of the healthy
controls (p = 0.021), while the relative expression of GATA-3 was significantly
lower in the urinary sediment of patients than in that of controls (p = 0.002).
Urinary mRNA expression of T-bet correlated with the urinary protein/creatinine
ratio (r = 0.608, p = 0.013), and correlated inversely with serum level of total 
protein (r = -0.574, p = 0.020). Moreover, a significantly increased intensity of
T-bet immunostaining was observed in the glomeruli in the biopsy specimen of all 
study patients. All patients received immunosuppressive therapy. Repeat
measurements of urinary mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 after treatment
revealed that the expression of T-bet in patients had significantly decreased
relative to the baseline (p = 0.003), while the expression of GATA-3 remained
static. In a patient subjected to a post-treatment renal biopsy, the increased
intensity of immunostaining of T-bet had clearly diminished following
immunosuppressive treatment, in accordance with a significant decrease in urinary
mRNA expression of T-bet. These observations suggest that patients with
proteinuric HSPN demonstrate increased T-bet and depressed GATA-3 expression in
the urinary sediment, indicating a possible shift in Th1/Th2 balance towards Th1 
predominance.

PMID: 21922214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 19;31(16):2017-27. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.382. Epub 2011 Sep 5.

GATA3 inhibits lysyl oxidase-mediated metastases of human basal triple-negative
breast cancer cells.

Chu IM(1), Michalowski AM, Hoenerhoff M, Szauter KM, Luger D, Sato M, Flanders K,
Oshima A, Csiszar K, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Discovery of mechanisms that impede the aggressive and metastatic phenotype of
human basal triple-negative-type breast cancers (BTNBCs) could provide novel
targets for therapy for this form of breast cancer that has a relatively poor
prognosis. Previous studies have demonstrated that expression of GATA3, the
master transcriptional regulator of mammary luminal differentiation, can reduce
the tumorigenicity and metastatic propensity of the human BTNBC MDA-MB-231 cell
line (MB231), although the mechanism for reduced metastases was not elucidated.
We demonstrate through gene expression profiling that GATA3 expression in 231
cells resulted in the dramatic reduction in the expression of lysyl oxidase
(LOX), a metastasis-promoting, matrix-remodeling protein, in part, through
methylation of the LOX promoter. Suppression of LOX expression by GATA3 was
further confirmed in the BTNBC Hs578T cell line. Conversely, reduction of GATA3
expression by small interfering RNA in luminal BT474 cells increased LOX
expression. Reconstitution of LOX expression in 231-GATA3 cells restored
metastatic propensity. A strong inverse association between LOX and GATA3
expression was confirmed in a panel of 51 human breast cancer cell lines.
Similarly, human breast cancer microarray data demonstrated that high LOX/low
GATA3 expression is associated with the BTNBC subtype of breast cancer and poor
patient prognosis. Expression of GATA3 reprograms BTNBCs to a less aggressive
phenotype and inhibits a major mechanism of metastasis through inhibition of LOX.
Induction of GATA3 in BTNBC cells or novel approaches that inhibit LOX expression
or activity could be important strategies for treating BTNBCs.

PMCID: PMC3235255
PMID: 21892208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mol Syst Biol. 2011 Aug 30;7:526. doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.59.

Cellular reprogramming by the conjoint action of ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3 to a
ligand-inducible growth state.

Kong SL(1), Li G, Loh SL, Sung WK, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology 2, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

Despite the role of the estrogen receptor a (ERa) pathway as a key growth driver 
for breast cells, the phenotypic consequence of exogenous introduction of ERa
into ERa-negative cells paradoxically has been growth inhibition. We mapped the
binding profiles of ERa and its interacting transcription factors (TFs), FOXA1
and GATA3 in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells, and observed that these three TFs form
a functional enhanceosome that regulates the genes driving core ERa function and 
cooperatively modulate the transcriptional networks previously ascribed to ERa
alone. We demonstrate that these enhanceosome occupied sites are associated with 
optimal enhancer characteristics with highest p300 co-activator recruitment, RNA 
Pol II occupancy, and chromatin opening. Most importantly, we show that the
transfection of all three TFs was necessary to reprogramme the ERa-negative
MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells to restore the estrogen-responsive growth resembling 
estrogen-treated ERa-positive MCF-7 cells. Cumulatively, these results suggest
that all the enhanceosome components comprising ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3 are
necessary for the full repertoire of cancer-associated effects of the ERa.

PMCID: PMC3202798
PMID: 21878914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Indian J Exp Biol. 2011 Aug;49(8):585-93.

Effects of beta-arrestin 2 on cytokine production of CD4+ T lymphocytes of mice
with allergic asthma.

Wang G(1), Liu Y, Yang M, Liu S, Ma L, Gong S, Li K, Zhang L, Xiang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

Beta-arrestin 2 has been shown to participate in the pathogenesis of asthma by
inducing Th2 cell migration to the lungs. Whether beta-arrestin 2 regulates
cytokine production of CD4+ T cells is still unknown. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the effect of beta-arrestin 2 on the cytokine production
of CD4+ T lymphocytes and the mechanism involved in a mouse model for asthma.
After silencing beta-arrestin 2 expression in CD4+ T lymphocytes from asthmatic
mice by RNA interference (RNAi), the interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) levels in CD4+ T lymphocyte culture supernatants with or without
terbutaline stimulation were determined. Cell-surface beta2 adrenergic receptor
(beta2AR) as well as GATA3 expression of CD4+ T lymphocytes were also measured.
CD4+ T lymphocytes of mice with allergic asthma expressed higher levels of
beta-arrestin 2 on both mRNA and protein levels. beta-arrestin 2 RNAi decreased
IL-4 (43.16%) and GATA3 (protein 77.21%, mRNA 62.98%) expression after
terbutaline stimulation. Cell-surface beta2AR of CD4+ T lymphocytes decreased
(15.27%) after terbutaline treatment, but recovered after beta-arrestin 2 RNAi
down-modulation. These findings demonstrate that beta-arrestin 2 regulates IL-4
production and GATA3 expression of CD4+ T lymphocytes partly through the beta2AR 
signaling pathway in an allergic asthma model.

PMID: 21870426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):299-311. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.007.

Genome-wide analyses of transcription factor GATA3-mediated gene regulation in
distinct T cell types.

Wei G(1), Abraham BJ, Yagi R, Jothi R, Cui K, Sharma S, Narlikar L, Northrup DL, 
Tang Q, Paul WE, Zhu J, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The transcription factor GATA3 plays an essential role during T cell development 
and T helper 2 (Th2) cell differentiation. To understand GATA3-mediated gene
regulation, we identified genome-wide GATA3 binding sites in ten well-defined
developmental and effector T lymphocyte lineages. In the thymus, GATA3 directly
regulated many critical factors, including Th-POK, Notch1, and T cell receptor
subunits. In the periphery, GATA3 induced a large number of Th2 cell-specific as 
well as Th2 cell-nonspecific genes, including several transcription factors. Our 
data also indicate that GATA3 regulates both active and repressive histone
modifications of many target genes at their regulatory elements near GATA3
binding sites. Overall, although GATA3 binding exhibited both shared and
cell-specific patterns among various T cell lineages, many genes were either
positively or negatively regulated by GATA3 in a cell type-specific manner,
suggesting that GATA3-mediated gene regulation depends strongly on cofactors
existing in different T cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3169184
PMID: 21867929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2011 Jul-Aug;44(4):520-1.

Immunophenotyping of circulating T cells in a mucosal leishmaniasis patient
coinfected with HIV.

Castellano LR(1), Llaguno M, Silva MV, Machado JR, Correia D, Silva-Vergara ML,
Rodrigues V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunologia, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade
Federal do Triângulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG, Brasil. luciocastellano@ccs.ufpb.br

HIV coinfection modifies the clinical course of leishmaniasis by promoting a Th2 
pattern of cytokine production. However, little information is available
regarding the lymphocytic response in untreated coinfected patients. This work
presents the immunophenotyping of Leishmania-stimulated T cells from a
treatment-naÏve HIV+ patient with ML. Leishmania braziliensis antigens induced
CD69 expression on CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ cells. It also increased IL-4
intracellular staining on CD3+CD4+GATA3- population and decreased the percentage 
of CD3+CD4+IL-17+ cells. This suggests that modulations in the IL-4R/STAT6
pathway and the Th17 population may serve as parasitic evasion mechanisms in
HIV/ML. Further studies are required to confirm these results.

PMID: 21860904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Dec;91(3):761-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2011.08.003. Epub 2011
Aug 9.

Chronic alcohol consumption induces cardiac remodeling in mice from Th1 or Th2
background.

Liu W(1), Li J, Tian W, Xu T, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, first affiliated hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

AIMS: The effects of T helper (Th) cells on alcoholic cardiomyopathy have not
been extensively investigated. Strain of mice with Th1 or Th2 immunological
background were utilized in this study in order to explore the role of Th1/Th2 in
chronic alcohol-induced cardiac fibrosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: C57BL/6 WT or Balb/c mice were treated with alcohol for 90
days. Then cardiac structure and function were analyzed via echocardiography.
Spleen CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs were determined by flow cytometry. The hearts were
stained using haematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Masson's trichome. Myocardial
ultrastructure was observed by electron microscopy. Expression of T-bet, GATA-3, 
IL-4 and IFN-gamma were determined by real-time RT-PCR. The heart was dilated
significantly in the C57BL/6 WT+alcohol group and Balb/c+alcohol group compared
with the controls. CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs were not statistically different.
Masson's trichome staining revealed that fibrosis was more pronounced in the
alcohol treated groups than the controls. Fibrosis was more evident in the
Balb/c+alcohol group compared to the C57BL/6 WT+alcohol group. Alcohol
consumption caused a decrease in the Th1 polarization and an increase in the Th2 
response.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic alcohol consumption induced a Th2 response within the
Th1/Th2 balance. Th2 response is one of the underlying mechanism involved in
alcohol-induced cardiac fibrosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002229. Epub 2011 
Aug 11.

Glutamine synthetase is a genetic determinant of cell type-specific glutamine
independence in breast epithelia.

Kung HN(1), Marks JR, Chi JT.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Although significant variations in the metabolic profiles exist among different
cells, little is understood in terms of genetic regulations of such cell
type-specific metabolic phenotypes and nutrient requirements. While many cancer
cells depend on exogenous glutamine for survival to justify the therapeutic
targeting of glutamine metabolism, the mechanisms of glutamine dependence and
likely response and resistance of such glutamine-targeting strategies among
cancers are largely unknown. In this study, we have found a systematic variation 
in the glutamine dependence among breast tumor subtypes associated with mammary
differentiation: basal- but not luminal-type breast cells are more
glutamine-dependent and may be susceptible to glutamine-targeting therapeutics.
Glutamine independence of luminal-type cells is associated mechanistically with
lineage-specific expression of glutamine synthetase (GS). Luminal cells can also 
rescue basal cells in co-culture without glutamine, indicating a potential for
glutamine symbiosis within breast ducts. The luminal-specific expression of GS is
directly induced by GATA3 and represses glutaminase expression. Such distinct
glutamine dependency and metabolic symbiosis is coupled with the acquisition of
the GS and glutamine independence during the mammary differentiation program.
Understanding the genetic circuitry governing distinct metabolic patterns is
relevant to many symbiotic relationships among different cells and organisms. In 
addition, the ability of GS to predict patterns of glutamine metabolism and
dependency among tumors is also crucial in the rational design and application of
glutamine and other metabolic pathway targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC3154963
PMID: 21852960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. APMIS. 2011 Sep;119(9):597-604. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02774.x. Epub 2011 
Jun 15.

Placental trophoblasts shifted Th1/Th2 balance toward Th2 and inhibited Th17
immunity at fetomaternal interface.

Liu F(1), Guo J, Tian T, Wang H, Dong F, Huang H, Dong M.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Genetics, Ministry of Education, Hangzhou, China.

The aims were to clarify the effect of placental trophoblasts on T lymphocytes by
assessing production of cytokines and expression of transcription factors
regulating Th1, Th2, and Th17 immunity in T lymphocytes. Placental trophoblasts
were isolated and conditioned medium was made after trophoblast cultivation for
72 h. T lymphocytes were cultured in presence or absence of conditioned medium.
ELISA was used to detect concentration of IL-2, TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-10, and
IL-17 in supernatants of T cell and real-time PCR was used to detect the status
of Th1 (T-bet, STAT-4), Th2 (GATA-3, STAT-6), and Th17 (RORC) immunity in T
lymphocyte. We found that the level of IL-2, IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, and IL-17 was
significantly decreased when T lymphocytes were cultured in conditioned medium
compared with control, while IL-10 and IL-4 level were not significantly changed.
The presence of conditioned medium significantly decreased the ratio of Th1/Th2. 
The expression of GATA-3 and STAT-6 were significantly increased and STAT-4 was
reduced when T lymphocyte was cultured in conditioned medium, while the
expression of T-bet and RORC was not significantly different. We concluded that
placental trophoblast-induced shift of Th1/Th2 balance toward Th2 and inhibition 
of Th17 might be among the mechanisms involved in maternal tolerance to fetus.

© 2011 The Authors. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

PMID: 21851417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2329-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34153. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

A new case of HDR syndrome with severe female genital tract malformation: comment
on "Novel mutation in the gene encoding the GATA3 transcription factor in a
Spanish familial case of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) 
syndrome with female genital tract malformations" by Hernández et al.

Moldovan O, Carvalho R, Jorge Z, Medeira A.

Comment on
    Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 1;143A(7):757-62.

PMID: 21834031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2011 Sep;55(5):534-40. doi: 10.1007/s10384-011-0047-x. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

Transconjunctival immunotherapy using cholera toxin B to treat experimental
allergic conjunctivitis in a mouse model.

Oikawa A(1), Shoji J, Inada N, Sawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Visual Sciences, Department of Ophthalmology, Nihon University
School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-Kamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610, Japan.
aoikawa@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: We evaluated the use of immunological biomarkers in transconjunctival
immunotherapy by using cholera toxin B for treating experimental allergic
conjunctivitis in a mouse model.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were sensitized using intraperitoneal injections of
ovalbumin (OVA) and were then divided into two groups. The first group was
treated by topical instillation of OVA after the instillation of combined OVA and
cholera toxin B (CTB) solution B group). The second group was treated by topical 
instillation of OVA alone (allergy group). The control group consisted of
nonsensitized mice undergoing topical OVA instillation only. The numbers of
eosinophils and CD4-positive lymphocytes in the conjunctiva were determined
histologically, and the observation of immunoglobulin A (IgA)-positive cells in
the conjunctiva was performed by immunohistochemistry. Cytokine concentration in 
the conjunctiva was determined by the protein-array methods. Messenger RNA
expression of T-cell-specific markers, such as T-bet, GATA-3, and Foxp3, in the
conjunctiva was detected by reversed transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The number of eosinophils and CD4-positive lymphocytes increased
significantly in the allergy group compared with the control group (P < 0.001)
but showed no difference between the CTB group and control group. Concentrations 
of interleukin 4 (IL-4) (P < 0.05), B-lymphocyte chemoattractant (P < 0.01), and 
thymus-expressed chemokine (P < 0.05) in the conjunctiva were significantly
higher in the CTB group than in the other two groups. GATA-3 messenger RNA (mRNA)
in the conjunctiva was expressed in the three groups, but T-bet and Foxp3 were
not detected.
CONCLUSION: Transconjunctival immunotherapy using CTB can be evaluated by
histological examination of eosinophils and CD4-positive T cells, and a mucosal
immunity-associated chemokine and a helper T-cell-17-associated chemokine as
biomarkers.

PMID: 21826470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nature. 2011 Aug 3;476(7358):63-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10279.

A critical role for TCF-1 in T-lineage specification and differentiation.

Weber BN(1), Chi AW, Chavez A, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Yang Q, Shestova O, Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The vertebrate thymus provides an inductive environment for T-cell development.
Within the mouse thymus, Notch signals are indispensable for imposing the T-cell 
fate on multipotential haematopoietic progenitors, but the downstream effectors
that impart T-lineage specification and commitment are not well understood. Here 
we show that a transcription factor, T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1; also known as
transcription factor 7, T-cell specific, TCF7), is a critical regulator in T-cell
specification. TCF-1 is highly expressed in the earliest thymic progenitors, and 
its expression is upregulated by Notch signals. Most importantly, when TCF-1 is
forcibly expressed in bone marrow (BM) progenitors, it drives the development of 
T-lineage cells in the absence of T-inductive Notch1 signals. Further
characterization of these TCF-1-induced cells revealed expression of many
T-lineage genes, including T-cell-specific transcription factors Gata3 and
Bcl11b, and components of the T-cell receptor. Our data suggest a model where
Notch signals induce TCF-1, and TCF-1 in turn imprints the T-cell fate by
upregulating expression of T-cell essential genes.

PMCID: PMC3156435
PMID: 21814277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Life Sci. 2011 Sep 12;89(11-12):364-70. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.07.002. Epub 2011
Jul 23.

Shikonin inhibited mitogen-activated IL-4 and IL-5 production on EL-4 cells
through downregulation of GATA-3 and c-Maf induction.

Lee CC(1), Kang JJ, Chiang BL, Wang CN, Cheng YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. leechenchen@mail.cmu.edu.tw

AIM: To investigate the effects of shikonin on phorbol myristate acetate (PMA)
plus cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-induced T helper (T(H)) 2 cell
cytokine production, and the underlying mechanism.
MAIN METHODS: We used activated EL-4 murine T-lymphoma cells, which produce
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-5, but not interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, as T(H)2 cell-like cells
and treated them with PMA+cAMP to investigate the effects of shikonin on T(H)2
cytokines, transcriptional factors, and the related mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK)/nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway.
KEY FINDINGS: The data show that shikonin inhibited the PMA+cAMP-induced mRNA and
protein expression of IL-4 and IL-5 via the downregulation of GATA-binding
protein-3 (GATA-3) and c-musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma (Maf) but not T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet). Moreover, shikonin suppressed the phosphorylation
of p38, inhibitor of <U+03BA>B (I<U+03BA>B) kinase (IKK)-ß and I<U+03BA>B-a, and the subsequent I<U+03BA>B-a 
degradation induced by PMA+cAMP; however, the PMA+cAMP-induced phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK), which resulted in minor inhibition and
phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), seemed to be unaffected by
shikonin treatment.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study suggests that downregulation of GATA-3 and c-Maf via the
suppression of p38, IKK-ß and I<U+03BA>B-a phosphorylation might contribute to the
inhibitory effect of shikonin on mitogen-induced IL-4 and IL-5 production in
EL-4T cells. Furthermore, shikonin is a potential drug for treating allergic
diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21806999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;27(8):876-9.

[The effect of Uygur medicine Hyssopus officinalis L on expression of T-bet,
GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA in lung tissue of asthma rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HY(1), Ding JB, Halmurat U, Hou M, Xue ZQ, Zhu M, Tian SG, Ma XM.

Author information: 
(1)Xinjiang VIP Lab of Great Physician and Pharmacology of Traditional Chinese
Medical Formulae, Urumqi, China.

AIM: To study the Uygur medicine Hyssopus officinalis L on T-bet, GATA-3, STAT-3 
mRNA levels of asthma rats in order to explore the mechanism of its treatment of 
asthma.
METHODS: Rats were randomly divided into normal control group, asthma model group
and dexamethasone group and water extract of Hyssopus officinalis L high and low 
dose group. The rats were sensitized with OVA, Al(OH)(3); and DPT vaccine and
then challenged with inhalation of aerosolized OVA solution for Preparation of
asthma model and the level of T-bet, GATA-3, STAT-3 mRNA were detected with
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The normal control group and model group, model group and treatment
group, the expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA in the lung tissue was
statistically significant differences(P<0.05). Compared with model group, after
treatment of Hyssopus officinalis L the expression of GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA of
asthma rats significantly reduced (P<0.05), but the expression of T-bet mRNA was 
significantly higher (P<0.05).The expression of GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA of
Hyssopus officinalis L high-dose treatment group was lower than the low-dose
treatment group (P<0.05), but T-bet mRNA that was higher(P<0.05). The expression 
of T-bet mRNA has negative correlation with GATA-3 mRNA (r=-0.696), the
expression of STAT-3 mRNA has correlation with T-bet mRNA and GATA-3
mRNA(r=-0.767, 0.772), P<0.05.
CONCLUSION: Hyssopus officinalis L probably regulates the differentiation of Th1,
Th2 and Th17 on transcription level to play the role of anti-inflammatory.

PMID: 21806885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 27;31(30):10903-18. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2358-11.2011.

Developmental profiling of spiral ganglion neurons reveals insights into auditory
circuit assembly.

Lu CC(1), Appler JM, Houseman EA, Goodrich LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The sense of hearing depends on the faithful transmission of sound information
from the ear to the brain by spiral ganglion (SG) neurons. However, how SG
neurons develop the connections and properties that underlie auditory processing 
is largely unknown. We catalogued gene expression in mouse SG neurons from
embryonic day 12, when SG neurons first extend projections, up until postnatal
day 15, after the onset of hearing. For comparison, we also analyzed the closely 
related vestibular ganglion (VG). Gene ontology analysis confirmed enriched
expression of genes associated with gene regulation and neurite outgrowth at
early stages, with the SG and VG often expressing different members of the same
gene family. At later stages, the neurons transcribe more genes related to mature
function, and exhibit a dramatic increase in immune gene expression. Comparisons 
of the two populations revealed enhanced expression of TGFß pathway components in
SG neurons and established new markers that consistently distinguish auditory and
vestibular neurons. Unexpectedly, we found that Gata3, a transcription factor
commonly associated with auditory development, is also expressed in VG neurons at
early stages. We therefore defined new cohorts of transcription factors and axon 
guidance molecules that are uniquely expressed in SG neurons and may drive
auditory-specific aspects of their differentiation and wiring. We show that one
of these molecules, the receptor guanylyl cyclase Npr2, is required for
bifurcation of the SG central axon. Hence, our dataset provides a useful resource
for uncovering the molecular basis of specific auditory circuit assembly events.

PMCID: PMC3167573
PMID: 21795542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Cytokine. 2011 Nov;56(2):458-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.06.022. Epub 2011 Jul
26.

Effect of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist on T helper cell
differentiation induced by phorbol-myristate-acetate and ionomycin.

Gao M(1), Jin W, Qian Y, Ji L, Feng G, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing
Medical University, No. 300, Guangzhou road, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

AIM: To investigate the effect of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
on T helper (TH) cell differentiation and intracellular transcriptional factors
in vitro.
METHODS: Ten male healthy volunteers (aged 20-45 y, BMI 18-25) were enrolled in
this study. Twenty milliliters peripheral blood was collected in the morning from
fasted volunteers and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated.
PBMC were incubated with phorbol-myristate-acetate (25 ng/ml) (PMA) plus
ionomycin (1 µg/ml) in the presence of ketamine or MK-801 at 37 °C. TH subsets,
supernatant interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin 4 (IL-4), and intracellular
transcriptional factors T-bet and GATA3 were analyzed 4 h later.
RESULTS: The number of TH0 cells was kept constant and at baseline before PMA and
ionomycin stimulation in each group. TH1 cells, TH2 cells, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 levels 
were significantly increased after PMA and ionomycin stimulation. Ketamine and
MK-801 decreased TH1 cells, TH2 cells, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 levels but increased the
ratio of TH1/TH2 and IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4 in the presence of PMA and ionomycin. Ketamine or
MK-801 alone had no effect on either of them. T-bet and GATA3 activities in PBMC 
were significantly increased after PMA and ionomycin stimulation. Ketamine and
MK-801 decreased T-bet and GATA3 activities but increased the ratio of
T-bet/GATA3 following PMA and ionomycin stimulation. Ketamine or MK-801 alone had
no effect on the activity of T-bet, GATA3 or T-bet/GATA3.
CONCLUSION: NMDA antagonist can suppress TH cell differentiation and subsequent
cytokines production but increase TH1/TH2 ratio following PMA and ionomycin
stimulation, it may be related to its regulation on T-bet and GATA3 activities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21795061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Genes Cancer. 2010 Dec;1(12):1178-88. doi: 10.1177/1947601911404223.

GATA Transcription Factors and Cancer.

Zheng R(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

It has been almost a quarter century since it was first appreciated that a class 
of oncogenes contained in rapidly transforming avian retroviruses encoded
DNA-binding transcription factors. As with other oncogenes, genetic recombination
with the viral genome led to their overexpression or functional alteration. In
the years that followed, alterations of numerous transcription factors were shown
to be causatively involved in various cancers in human patients and model
organisms. Depending on their normal cellular functions, these factors were
subsequently categorized as proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. This
review focuses on the role of GATA transcription factors in carcinogenesis. GATA 
factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that control the development of
diverse tissues by activating or repressing transcription. GATA factors thus
coordinate cellular maturation with proliferation arrest and cell survival.
Therefore, a role of this family of genes in human cancers is not surprising.
Prominent examples include structural mutations in GATA1 that are found in almost
all megakaryoblastic leukemias in patients with Down syndrome; loss of GATA3
expression in aggressive, dedifferentiated breast cancers; and silencing of GATA4
and GATA5 expression in colorectal and lung cancers. Here, we discuss possible
mechanisms of carcinogenesis vis-à-vis the normal functions of GATA factors as
they pertain to human patients and mouse models of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092280
PMID: 21779441  [PubMed]


435. Transplantation. 2011 Sep 15;92(5):529-35. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318229f785.

Downregulation of mucins in graft bile ducts after liver transplantation in rats.

Tian F(1), Cheng L, Li D, Liu Z, Zeng Y, Xu J, Li X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, No. 20 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Nonanastomotic biliary strictures represent a serious complication
after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). This study investigates the
potential role of mucins in bile duct injury after OLT.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: normal group (Normal,
n=5), sham-operated group (Sham, n=20), OLT group with 1 hr donor cold ischemic
time (n=20), and OLT group with 12 hr donor cold ischemic time (OLTn=20).
Expression of mucins and GATA factors in bile ducts was examined by real-time
polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting. Bile was
collected for biochemical analysis, and the histological changes associated with 
bile duct injury were evaluated.
RESULTS: In normal bile ducts, Muc1, Muc2, Muc3A, Muc4, and Muc6 mRNA were
expressed, whereas Muc5AC mRNA was undetectable. The expression of Muc1, Muc3A,
and Muc4 but not Muc2 and Muc6 at mRNA level in graft bile ducts decreased
remarkably early after OLT. The decreased expression of Muc1 and Muc4 was further
confirmed at protein level by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting.
Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold ischemic time was
significantly associated with the injury severity scores of large but not small
bile ducts. Among six GATA factors, GATA3, GATA4, and GATA6 mRNA were expressed
in normal bile ducts. GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels decreased significantly after
OLT.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold
ischemic time may play a potential role in large bile duct injury early after
OLT.

PMID: 21775928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Oct;41(10):2852-61. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041224. Epub 2011 Aug
30.

Neonatal lung immune responses show a shift of cytokines and transcription
factors toward Th2 and a deficit in conventional and plasmacytoid dendritic
cells.

Roux X(1), Remot A, Petit-Camurdan A, Nahori MA, Kiefer-Biasizzo H, Marchal G,
Lagranderie M, Riffault S.

Author information: 
(1)UR892, INRA, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

The high incidence of lung-damaging life-threatening respiratory infections in
infants may be related to the immaturity of their immune systems. To determine
whether lung immune features differ in early life compared with those in
adulthood, whole lung as well as lung T lymphocyte and DC responses were
investigated in BALB/c neonates versus adults. Higher expression of GATA-3 and
rapid and sustained production of type 2 cytokines by lung explants after in
vitro exposure to anti-CD3 was the hallmark of the neonatal period, suggestive of
a Th2 bias. Neonatal lung GATA-3-producing cells were identified as CD3(+), CD4
and CD8 double-negative T lymphocytes, a subset found at a higher frequency in
neonatal than adult lung. The neonatal lungs contained fewer conventional DCs,
with a lower ratio of CD103(+) to CD11b(+) DCs, and a much lower number of
plasmacytoid DCs in comparison with adult lungs. Yet, when stimulated in vivo by 
BCG, neonatal lung DCs matured and primed adult naïve CD4(+) T cells toward Th1
as efficiently as adult BCG-primed lung DCs. Conversely, both adult and neonatal 
BCG-primed lung DCs induced a Th2 cytokine response from neonatal naïve lymph
node T cells, suggestive of an intrinsic feature of neonatal T lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21770043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Immunol Lett. 2011 Oct 30;140(1-2):81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.06.011. Epub 
2011 Jul 6.

Antipsychotic drugs suppress the AKT/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and regulate the
differentiation of T-cell subsets.

Chen ML(1), Tsai TC, Lin YY, Tsai YM, Wang LK, Lee MC, Tsai FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Taipei Branch, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.

Antipsychotic drugs (APDs) are commonly used to ease the symptoms of
schizophrenia; however, these same drugs also have an effect on the human immune 
system. Our previous studies have shown that risperidone and clozapine
effectively decrease the production of IFN-<U+03B3> for CD4(+) T-cells in PBMC. In
contrast, haloperidol causes an increase in the production of IFN-<U+03B3> for CD4(+)
T-cells in PBMC. In this study we show that risperidone and clozapine can reduce 
Th1 cell differentiation and T-bet expression. The differentiation of Th1 cells
was reduced in clozapine or risperidone treated PBMC by inhibiting the
phosphorylation of AKT but not STAT-4. Typical APD, haloperidol, had the opposite
effect in regulating T cell differentiation when compared with atypical APDs
including risperidone and clozapine. Haloperidol decreased the expression of
GATA-3, a Th2-related transcription factor, by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation rather
than STAT-6 phosphorylation and thus decreased Th2 differentiation. In addition, 
chronic risperidone and clozapine treatment reduces the IFN-<U+03B3> producing CD4(+)
T-cell population within PBMC. In conclusion, this study suggests that APDs do
indeed regulate the body's immune response and therefore all APDs should have
their own patent in regulating immune responses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Stem Cell Rev. 2012 Mar;8(1):150-62. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9301-3.

Dissecting the first transcriptional divergence during human embryonic
development.

Bai Q(1), Assou S, Haouzi D, Ramirez JM, Monzo C, Becker F, Gerbal-Chaloin S,
Hamamah S, De Vos J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1040, Montpellier, 34000, France.

The trophoblast cell lineage is specified early at the blastocyst stage, leading 
to the emergence of the trophectoderm and the pluripotent cells of the inner cell
mass. Using a double mRNA amplification technique and a comparison with
transcriptome data on pluripotent stem cells, placenta, germinal and adult
tissues, we report here some essential molecular features of the human mural
trophectoderm. In addition to genes known for their role in placenta (CGA, PGF,
ALPPL2 and ABCG2), human trophectoderm also strongly expressed Laminins, such as 
LAMA1, and the GAGE Cancer/Testis genes. The very high level of ABCG2 expression 
in trophectoderm, 7.9-fold higher than in placenta, suggests a major role of this
gene in shielding the very early embryo from xenobiotics. Several genes,
including CCKBR and DNMT3L, were specifically up-regulated only in trophectoderm,
indicating that the trophoblast cell lineage shares with the germinal lineage a
transient burst of DNMT3L expression. A trophectoderm core transcriptional
regulatory circuitry formed by 13 tightly interconnected transcription factors
(CEBPA, GATA2, GATA3, GCM1, KLF5, MAFK, MSX2, MXD1, PPARD, PPARG, PPP1R13L,
TFAP2C and TP63), was found to be induced in trophectoderm and maintained in
placenta. The induction of this network could be recapitulated in an in vitro
trophoblast differentiation model.

PMCID: PMC3285757
PMID: 21750961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2012;356:145-64. doi: 10.1007/82_2011_141.

Encoding stability versus flexibility: lessons learned from examining epigenetics
in T helper cell differentiation.

Oestreich KJ(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

It is currently unclear whether our classifications for T helper cell subtypes
truly define stable lineages or rather they represent cells with a more flexible 
phenotype. This distinction is important for predicting the behavior of T helper 
cells during normal immune responses as well as in pathogenic conditions.
Determining the mechanisms by which T helper cell lineage-defining transcription 
factors are expressed and subsequently regulate epigenetic and downstream gene
regulatory events will provide insight into this complex question. Importantly,
lineage-defining transcription factors that regulate epigenetic events have the
potential to redefine the fate of the cell when they are expressed. In contrast, 
factors that regulate the events downstream of a permissive epigenetic
environment will only have the capacity to modulate the underlying gene
expression profile that is already established in that cell. Finally, mechanisms 
related to the antagonism versus cooperation between the lineage-defining factors
for opposing T helper cell subsets will influence the characteristics of the
cell. Here, we provide an overview of these topics by discussing epigenetic
states in T helper cell subtypes as well as the mechanisms by which
lineage-defining factors, such as T-bet, regulate gene expression profiles at
both the epigenetic and general transcription level. We also examine some of what
is known about the interplay between the T helper cell lineage-defining
transcription factors T-bet, GATA3, Foxp3, Ror<U+03B3>t, and Bcl-6 and how this relates 
to the proper functioning of T helper cell subsets. Defining the mechanisms by
which these factors regulate gene expression profiles will aid in our ability to 
predict the functional capabilities of T helper cell subsets.

PMID: 21748629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Oct;28(4):605-11. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.746. Epub 2011 Jul
8.

Analysis of laser-microdissected prostate cancer tissues reveals potential tumor 
markers.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Lindstrot A, Buettner R, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

Prostate cancer (PCA) is a clinically heterogeneous and often multifocal disease 
with a clinical outcome difficult to predict. A deeper knowledge of the molecular
basis of the disease may lead to a better prediction of prognosis. Therefore, in 
this study we investigated the molecular basis of PCA by identifying potential
tumor markers in laser-microdisected PCA tissues. Among a group of PCA patients, 
quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed to compare the expression of 70 genes.
These genes were selected from the results of two microarrays which investigated 
the gene expression profile differences between moderately or poorly
differentiated prostate carcinoma glands and the corresponding normal glands.
Among the genes examined, CDKN2A, GATA3, CREBBP, ITGA2, NBL1 and TGM4 were
down-regulated in the prostate carcinoma glands compared to the corresponding
normal glands, whereas TFF3, TMPRSS2 and ERG were up-regulated. Our findings
indicate that these genes may play roles as tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes
in PCA, and may serve as potential tumor markers and novel therapeutic targets.

PMID: 21743959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Appl Toxicol. 2012 Oct;32(10):815-22. doi: 10.1002/jat.1706. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

Involvement of Th2 cytokines in the mouse model of flutamide-induced acute liver 
injury.

Higuchi S(1), Kobayashi M, Yano A, Tsuneyama K, Fukami T, Nakajima M, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

Drug-induced liver injury is a growing concern for pharmaceutical companies and
patients because numerous drugs have been linked to hepatotoxicity and it is the 
most common reason for a drug to be withdrawn. Flutamide rarely causes liver
dysfunction in humans, and immune allergic reactions have been suggested in some 
cases. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms of flutamide-induced liver
injury in BALB/c mice. Plasma alanine aminotransferase and aspartate
aminotransferase levels were significantly increased 3, 6 and 9<U+2009>h after flutamide
(1500<U+2009>mg<U+2009>kg<U+207B>¹ , p.o.) administration. The biomarker for oxidative stress was not 
changed, but Th2-dominant immune-related factors, such as interleukin (IL)-4,
IL-5, STAT6 and GATA-binding protein (GATA)-3, were induced in
flutamide-administered mice. The pre-administration of monoclonal-IL-4 antibody
suppressed the hepatotoxicity of flutamide. In addition, we investigated the
effect of 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGD2 (DK-PGD2; 10<U+2009>µg per mouse, i.p.)
administration on flutamide-induced acute liver injury. Coadministration of
DK-PGD2 and flutamide resulted in a significant increase in alanine
aminotransferase and a remarkable increase of macrophage inflammatory protein-2. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated that flutamide-induced acute liver injury is
mediated by Th2-dominant immune responses in mice.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21735453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2011 Jun 21;65:414-26.

[The influence of transcription factors on CD4+ T cell differentiation].

[Article in Polish]

Swist K(1), Pajtasz-Piasecka E.

Author information: 
(1)Politechnika Wroclawska.

A number of distinguished populations with manifold functions and various
pathways of differentiation have been identified within T lymphocytes. The cells 
expressing CD4 coreceptor on their cell surface are the most varied group.
Depending on changes in different tissue microenvironments induced by such
cytokines as IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-10 or TGF-ß, CD4+ T lymphocytes can differentiate
into alternative subpopulations performing helper, regulatory/suppressor function
(Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, Th22, Tfh, iTreg and Tr1). In the direction of lineage
differentiation of these lymphocytes, transcription factors play the key role.
The most important of them are T-bet, GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, FOXP3, AHR and c-Maf. A
cytokine binding to a specific receptor activates the transcription factors,
other DNA-binding proteins, and epigenetic alterations, enabling the
transcription of proper genetic information. The plasticity of CD4+ cell
differentiation seems to be in dynamic balance between initial commitment and
flexibility of these cells in the face of a changing environment. Even more,
phenotypical and functional borders between particular subpopulations have turned
out to be fluent. Then, the influence of extrinsic factors on the activation of
mechanisms responsible for conversion of CD4+ T lymphocytes into functional
mature cells appears to be more complicated than was previously thought.

PMID: 21734326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):28833-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.233932. Epub
2011 Jun 27.

Histone deacetylase 9 deficiency protects against effector T cell-mediated
systemic autoimmunity.

Yan K(1), Cao Q, Reilly CM, Young NL, Garcia BA, Mishra N.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, UAS.

Co-repressor histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) plays a key role in the development
and differentiation of many types of cells, including regulatory T cells.
However, the biological function of HDAC9 in T effector cells is unknown.
Systemic autoimmune diseases like lupus, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis have 
dysfunctional effector T cells. To determine the role of HDAC9 in systemic
autoimmunity, we created MRL/lpr mice with HDAC9 deficiency that have aberrant
effector T cell function. HDAC9 deficiency led to decreased lympho-proliferation,
inflammation, autoantibody production, and increased survival in MRL/lpr mice.
HDAC9-deficient mice manifested Th2 polarization, decreased T effector follicular
cells positive for inducible co-stimulator, and activated T cells in vivo
compared with HDAC9-intact MRL/lpr mice. HDAC9 deficiency also resulted in
increased GATA3 and roquin and decreased BCL6 gene expression. HDAC9 deficiency
was associated with increased site-specific lysine histone acetylation at H3
(H3K9, H3K14, and H3K18) globally that was localized to IL-4, roquin, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> promoters with increased gene
expression, respectively. In kidney and spleen, HDAC9 deficiency decreased
inflammation and cytokine and chemokine production due to peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> overexpression. These findings suggest that
HDAC9 acts as an epigenetic switch in effector T cell-mediated systemic
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3190691
PMID: 21708950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 15;410(4):866-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.080. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Defective GATA-3 expression in Th2 LCR-deficient mice.

Hwang SS(1), Kim K, Lee GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Republic of
Korea.

Th2 cell differentiation is critically influenced by transcription factor GATA-3 
and by various cis-acting elements including enhancers, silencers and a locus
control region (LCR) in the Th2 cytokine locus. Th2 LCR-deficient Th2 cells
completely lost the expression of GATA-3 and the phosphorylation of STAT6.
Histone 3 lysine 4 (H3-K4) was hypomethylated in the gata3 locus in these cells. 
GATA-3 and STAT6 bound several regulatory regions in the gata3 locus and
transactivated the expression of the gata3 gene. These results suggest that Th2
differentiation program stimulates feed-forward regulation of gata3 gene
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002064. Epub
2011 Jun 9.

Towards an evolutionary model of transcription networks.

Xie D(1), Chen CC, He X, Cao X, Zhong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA.

DNA evolution models made invaluable contributions to comparative genomics,
although it seemed formidable to include non-genomic features into these models. 
In order to build an evolutionary model of transcription networks (TNs), we had
to forfeit the substitution model used in DNA evolution and to start from
modeling the evolution of the regulatory relationships. We present a quantitative
evolutionary model of TNs, subjecting the phylogenetic distance and the
evolutionary changes of cis-regulatory sequence, gene expression and network
structure to one probabilistic framework. Using the genome sequences and gene
expression data from multiple species, this model can predict regulatory
relationships between a transcription factor (TF) and its target genes in all
species, and thus identify TN re-wiring events. Applying this model to analyze
the pre-implantation development of three mammalian species, we identified the
conserved and re-wired components of the TNs downstream to a set of TFs including
Oct4, Gata3/4/6, cMyc and nMyc. Evolutionary events on the DNA sequence that led 
to turnover of TF binding sites were identified, including a birth of an Oct4
binding site by a 2nt deletion. In contrast to recent reports of large
interspecies differences of TF binding sites and gene expression patterns, the
interspecies difference in TF-target relationship is much smaller. The data
showed increasing conservation levels from genomic sequences to TF-DNA
interaction, gene expression, TN, and finally to morphology, suggesting that
evolutionary changes are larger at molecular levels and smaller at functional
levels. The data also showed that evolutionarily older TFs are more likely to
have conserved target genes, whereas younger TFs tend to have larger re-wiring
rates.

© 2011 Xie et al.

PMCID: PMC3111474
PMID: 21695281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Aug;78(8):585-96. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21345. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Conditional repression of STAT5 expression during lactation reveals its exclusive
roles in mammary gland morphology, milk-protein gene expression, and neonate
growth.

Reichenstein M(1), Rauner G, Barash I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, the Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

The role of Stat5 in maintaining adequate lactation was studied in Stat5a(-/-)
mice expressing a conditionally suppressed transgenic STAT5 in their mammary
glands. This system enables distinguishing STAT5's effects on lactation from its 
contribution to mammary development during gestation. Females were allowed to
express STAT5 during their first pregnancy. After delivery, STAT5 levels were
manipulated by doxycycline administration and withdrawal. In two lines of
genetically modified mice, the absence of STAT5 expression during the first 10
days of lactation resulted in a decrease of 29% or 41% in newborn weight gain.
The STAT5-dependent decrease in growth was recoverable, but not completely
reversible, particularly when STAT5 expression was omitted for the first 4 days
of lactation. Within the first 10 days of STAT5-omitted lactation, alveolar
occupancy regressed by 50% compared to that measured at delivery. By Day 10, only
18% of the fat-pad area was involved in milk production. The alveolar regression 
caused by 4 days of STAT5 deficiency was reversible, but neonate growth remained 
delayed. STAT5 deficiency resulted in reduced estrogen receptor a and connexin 32
gene expression, accompanied by delayed induction of both anti- and pro-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members. An increase in Gata-3 expression may reflect an attempt to 
maintain alveolar progenitors. A decrease of 39% and 23% in WAP and a-lactalbumin
expression, respectively, with no associated effects on ß-casein, also resulted
from lack of STAT5 expression in the first 10 days of lactation. This deficiency 
enhances the major effect of alveolar regression on delayed weight gain in
newborns.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21688337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Immunol Rev. 2011 Jul;242(1):31-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2011.01020.x.

Pathophysiology of allergic inflammation.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Allergic inflammation is due to a complex interplay between several inflammatory 
cells, including mast cells, basophils, lymphocytes, dendritic cells,
eosinophils, and sometimes neutrophils. These cells produce multiple inflammatory
mediators, including lipids, purines, cytokines, chemokines, and reactive oxygen 
species. Allergic inflammation affects target cells, such as epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, vascular cells, and airway smooth muscle cells, which become an
important source of inflammatory mediators. Sensory nerves are sensitized and
activated during allergic inflammation and produce symptoms. Allergic
inflammatory responses are orchestrated by several transcription factors,
particularly NF-<U+03BA>B and GATA3. Inflammatory genes are also regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms, including DNA methylation and histone modifications. There are
several endogenous anti-inflammatory mechanisms, including anti-inflammatory
lipids and cytokines, which may be defective in allergic disease, thus amplifying
and perpetuating the inflammation. Better understanding of the pathophysiology of
allergic inflammation has identified new therapeutic targets but developing
effective novel therapies has been challenging. Corticosteroids are highly
effective with a broad spectrum of anti-inflammatory effects, including
epigenetic modulation of the inflammatory response and suppression of GATA3.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21682737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20731. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020731. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Helios is associated with CD4 T cells differentiating to T helper 2 and
follicular helper T cells in vivo independently of Foxp3 expression.

Serre K(1), Bénézech C, Desanti G, Bobat S, Toellner KM, Bird R, Chan S, Kastner 
P, Cunningham AF, Maclennan IC, Mohr E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Immunity and Infection, MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute 
for Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, England, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Although in vitro IL-4 directs CD4 T cells to produce T helper 2
(Th2)-cytokines, these cytokines can be induced in vivo in the absence of
IL-4-signalling. Thus, mechanism(s), different from the in vitro pathway for
Th2-induction, contribute to in vivo Th2-differentiation. The pathway for in vivo
IL-4-independent Th2-differentiation has yet to be characterized.
FINDINGS: Helios (ikzf2), a member of the Ikaros transcription regulator family, 
is expressed in thymocytes and some antigen-matured T cells as well as in
regulatory T cells. It has been proposed that Helios is a specific marker for
thymus-derived regulatory T cells. Here, we show that mouse ovalbumin-specific
CD4 (OTII) cells responding to alum-precipitated ovalbumin (alumOVA) upregulate
Th2 features - GATA-3 and IL-4 - as well as Helios mRNA and protein. Helios is
also upregulated in follicular helper T (TFh) cells in this response. By
contrast, OTII cells responding to the Th1 antigen - live attenuated
ovalbumin-expressing Salmonella - upregulate Th1 features - T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> - but
not Helios. In addition, CD4 T cells induced to produce Th2 cytokines in vitro do
not express Helios. The kinetics of Helios mRNA and protein induction mirrors
that of GATA-3. The induction of IL-4, IL-13 and CXCR5 by alumOVA requires NF-<U+03BA>B1
and this is also needed for Helios upregulation. Importantly, Helios is induced
in Th2 and TFh cells without parallel upregulation of Foxp3. These findings
suggested a key role for Helios in Th2 and TFh development in response to
alum-protein vaccines. We tested this possibility using Helios-deficient OTII
cells and found this deficiency had no discernable impact on Th2 and TFh
differentiation in response to alumOVA.
CONCLUSIONS: Helios is selectively upregulated in CD4 T cells during Th2 and TFh 
responses to alum-protein vaccines in vivo, but the functional significance of
this upregulation remains uncertain.

PMCID: PMC3108993
PMID: 21677778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Blood. 2011 Aug 4;118(5):1291-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-338046. Epub 2011 Jun
13.

GATA3 is redundant for maintenance and self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells.

Buza-Vidas N(1), Duarte S, Luc S, Bouriez-Jones T, Woll PS, Jacobsen SE.

Author information: 
(1)Haematopoietic Stem Cell Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

GATA3 has been identified as a master regulator of T helper cells, as well as
being important for early thymic progenitors and T-cell commitment. However,
Gata3 expression initiates already at the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) level,
implicating a potential role also in the regulation of HSCs. Herein we used a
conditional Gata3 knockout strategy in which Gata3 expression was completely
deleted from the earliest stage of embryonic hematopoietic development after
emergence of HSCs from hemogenic endothelium. Through a detailed analysis of HSCs
at the phenotypic and functional level, we demonstrate that steady-state levels
of HSCs are normal in Gata3(fl/fl)Vav-Cre(tg/+) mice. Moreover, through long-term
primary and secondary transplantation experiments, we also unequivocally
demonstrate that Gata3 has a redundant role in post-transplantation HSC
self-renewal.

PMID: 21670475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Jun;63(6):1738-47. doi: 10.1002/art.30489.

GATA-3 up-regulation in CD8+ T cells as a biomarker of immune dysfunction in
systemic sclerosis, resulting in excessive interleukin-13 production.

Medsger TA Jr(1), Ivanco DE, Kardava L, Morel PA, Lucas MR, Fuschiotti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Despite the importance of interleukin-13 (IL-13) in systemic sclerosis
(SSc) and other fibrotic diseases, its mechanisms of action are not understood.
We have reported that excessive amounts of IL-13 are produced by peripheral blood
effector CD8+ T cells from patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc). The aim
of the present study was to establish the molecular basis of IL-13 dysregulation 
in the pathogenesis of SSc.
METHODS: Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and intracellular
staining were used to study the transcription factors that control naive
peripheral blood CD8+ T cell differentiation into type 1 and type 2
cytokine-secreting cells. Intracellular staining revealed that GATA-3 levels in
freshly isolated naive CD8+ T cells correlated with specific clinical
manifestations. We therefore assessed the effects of GATA-3 inhibition on IL-13
production in CD8+ T cells from the SSc patients.
RESULTS: Freshly isolated naive peripheral blood CD8+ T cells expressed high
levels of GATA-3 and failed to down-regulate IL-13 production when cultured under
type 1-skewing conditions, but maintained adequate levels of interferon-<U+03B3>
production. Cellular GATA-3 levels were significantly higher in patients with
dcSSc and early inflammatory disease. Silencing of GATA-3 with small interfering 
RNA significantly reduced IL-13 production by CD8+ T cells, demonstrating a
causal relationship between GATA-3 and IL-13.
CONCLUSION: These results provide important new insights into SSc pathogenesis
and suggest that increased GATA-3 expression in CD8+ T cells could be a highly
relevant biomarker of immune dysfunction in patients with dcSSc. GATA-3 could be 
a novel therapeutic target for this currently incurable disease.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21638273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Int Immunol. 2011 Jul;23(7):415-20. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr029. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

An updated view on transcription factor GATA3-mediated regulation of Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation.

Yagi R(1), Zhu J, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

CD4 T(h) are critical for orchestrating adaptive immune responses. The expression
of the transcription factor GATA3 (GATA-binding protein 3) is up-regulated or
down-regulated during T(h)2 or T(h)1 cell differentiation, respectively.
Furthermore, GATA3 is responsible for induction of T(h)2 differentiation and
represses T(h)1 differentiation. In this review, we present an updated view on
the molecular mechanisms through which GATA3 regulates T(h)1/T(h)2
differentiation. During T(h)2 cell differentiation, GATA3 directly binds to the
T(h)2 cytokine gene locus at several regions and regulates expression. On the
other hand, GATA3 inhibits T(h)1 cell differentiation by preventing up-regulation
of IL-12 receptor ß2 and STAT4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 
4) and neutralization of Runx3 (runt-related transcription factor 3) function
through protein-protein interaction. GATA3 may also directly act on the Ifng
gene. In summary, GATA3 serves as a transcriptional activator or repressor
through direct action on transcriptional machinery and/or affecting chromatin
remodeling at many critical loci encoding cytokines, cytokine receptors,
signaling molecules as well as transcription factors that are involved in the
regulation of T(h)1 and T(h)2 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3123974
PMID: 21632975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019889. Epub 2011 May 19.

Expansion of CD4(+) CD25(+) and CD25(-) T-Bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 and ROR<U+03B3>t cells in
allergic inflammation, local lung distribution and chemokine gene expression.

Lu Y(1), Malmhäll C, Sjöstrand M, Rådinger M, O'Neil SE, Lötvall J, Bossios A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Krefting Research Centre, Institute of
Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Allergic asthma is associated with airway eosinophilia, which is regulated by
different T-effector cells. T cells express transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, 
ROR<U+03B3>t and Foxp3, representing Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg cells respectively. No
study has directly determined the relative presence of each of these T cell
subsets concomitantly in a model of allergic airway inflammation. In this study
we determined the degree of expansion of these T cell subsets, in the lungs of
allergen challenged mice. Cell proliferation was determined by incorporation of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) together with 7-aminoactnomycin (7-AAD). The
immunohistochemical localisation of T cells in the lung microenvironments was
also quantified. Local expression of cytokines, chemokines and receptor genes was
measured using real-time RT-PCR array analysis in tissue sections isolated by
laser microdissection and pressure catapulting technology. Allergen exposure
increased the numbers of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+), ROR<U+03B3>t(+) and Foxp3(+) cells in
CD4(+)CD25(+) and CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells, with the greatest expansion of GATA-3(+)
cells. The majority of CD4(+)CD25(+) T-bet(+), GATA-3(+), ROR<U+03B3>t(+) and Foxp3(+)
cells had incorporated BrdU and underwent proliferation during allergen exposure.
Allergen exposure led to the accumulation of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+) and Foxp3(+)
cells in peribronchial and alveolar tissue, GATA-3(+) and Foxp3(+) cells in
perivascular tissue, and ROR<U+03B3>t(+) cells in alveolar tissue. A total of 28
cytokines, chemokines and receptor genes were altered more than 3 fold upon
allergen exposure, with expression of half of the genes claimed in all three
microenvironments. Our study shows that allergen exposure affects all T effector 
cells in lung, with a dominant of Th2 cells, but with different local cell
distribution, probably due to a distinguished local inflammatory milieu.

PMCID: PMC3098248
PMID: 21625544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Immunol. 2011 Jul 1;187(1):441-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001881. Epub 2011 May 
25.

Coordinate regulation of GATA-3 and Th2 cytokine gene expression by the
RNA-binding protein HuR.

Stellato C(1), Gubin MM, Magee JD, Fang X, Fan J, Tartar DM, Chen J, Dahm GM,
Calaluce R, Mori F, Jackson GA, Casolaro V, Franklin CL, Atasoy U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The posttranscriptional mechanisms whereby RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) regulate T
cell differentiation remain unclear. RBPs can coordinately regulate the
expression of functionally related genes via binding to shared regulatory
sequences, such as the adenylate-uridylate-rich elements (AREs) present in the 3'
untranslated region (UTR) of mRNA. The RBP HuR posttranscriptionally regulates
IL-4, IL-13, and other Th2 cell-restricted transcripts. We hypothesized that the 
ARE-bearing GATA-3 gene, a critical regulator of Th2 polarization, is under HuR
control as part of its coordinate posttranscriptional regulation of the Th2
program. We report that in parallel with stimulus-induced increase in GATA-3 mRNA
and protein levels, GATA-3 mRNA half-life is increased after restimulation in the
human T cell line Jurkat, in human memory and Th2 cells, and in murine Th2-skewed
cells. We demonstrate by immunoprecipitation of ribonucleoprotein complexes that 
HuR associates with the GATA-3 endogenous transcript in human T cells and found, 
using biotin pulldown assay, that HuR specifically interacts with its 3'UTR.
Using both loss-of-function and gain-of-function approaches in vitro and in
animal models, we show that HuR is a critical mediator of stimulus-induced
increase in GATA-3 mRNA and protein expression and that it positively influences 
GATA-3 mRNA turnover, in parallel with selective promotion of Th2 cytokine
overexpression. These results suggest that HuR-driven posttranscriptional control
plays a significant role in T cell development and effector function in both
murine and human systems. A better understanding of HuR-mediated control of Th2
polarization may have utility in altering allergic airway inflammation in human
asthmatic patients.

PMID: 21613615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):24896-905. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.245019. Epub
2011 May 25.

Functional involvement of dual specificity phosphatase 16 (DUSP16), a c-Jun
N-terminal kinase-specific phosphatase, in the regulation of T helper cell
differentiation.

Musikacharoen T(1), Bandow K, Kakimoto K, Kusuyama J, Onishi T, Yoshikai Y,
Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

Naïve CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells differentiate into distinct subsets of effector 
cells (Th1, Th2, Th17, and induced regulatory T cells (iTreg)) expressing
different sets of cytokines upon encounter with presented foreign antigens. It
has been well established that Th1/Th2 balance is critical for the nature of the 
following immune responses. Previous reports have demonstrated important roles of
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in Th1/Th2 balance, whereas the regulatory
mechanisms of JNK activity in Th cells have not been elucidated. Here, we show
that dual specificity phosphatase 16 (DUSP16, also referred to as MKP-M or
MKP-7), which preferentially inactivates JNK, is selectively expressed in Th2
cells. In the in vitro differentiation assay of naïve CD4(+) cells, DUSP16
expression is up-regulated during Th2 differentiation and down-regulated during
Th1 differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed the increased
acetylation of histone H3/H4 at the dusp16 gene promoter in CD4(+) T cells under 
the Th2 condition. Adenoviral transduction of naïve CD4(+) T cells with DUSP16
resulted in increased mRNA expression of IL-4 and GATA-3 in Th2 and decreased
expression of IFN<U+03B3> and T-bet in Th1 differentiation. In contrast, transduction of
a dominant negative form of DUSP16 had the reverse effects. Furthermore, upon
immunization, T cell-specific dusp16 transgenic mice produced antigen-specific
IgG2a at lower amounts, whereas DN dusp16 transgenic mice produced higher amounts
of antigen-specific IgG2a accompanied by decreased amounts of antigen-specific
IgG1 and IgE than those of control mice. Together, these data suggest the
functional role of DUSP16 in Th1/Th2 balance.

PMCID: PMC3137064
PMID: 21613215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019806. Epub 2011 May 17.

GATA3 expression is decreased in psoriasis and during epidermal regeneration;
induction by narrow-band UVB and IL-4.

Rácz E(1), Kurek D, Kant M, Baerveldt EM, Florencia E, Mourits S, de Ridder D,
Laman JD, van der Fits L, Prens EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Psoriasis is characterized by hyperproliferation of keratinocytes and by
infiltration of activated Th1 and Th17 cells in the (epi)dermis. By expression
microarray, we previously found the GATA3 transcription factor significantly
downregulated in lesional psoriatic skin. Since GATA3 serves as a key switch in
both epidermal and T helper cell differentiation, we investigated its function in
psoriasis. Because psoriatic skin inflammation shares many characteristics of
epidermal regeneration during wound healing, we also studied GATA3 expression
under such conditions.Psoriatic lesional skin showed decreased GATA3 mRNA and
protein expression compared to non-lesional skin. GATA3 expression was also
markedly decreased in inflamed skin of mice with a psoriasiform dermatitis
induced with imiquimod. Tape-stripping of non-lesional skin of patients with
psoriasis, a standardized psoriasis-triggering and skin regeneration-inducing
technique, reduced the expression of GATA3. In wounded skin of mice, low GATA3
mRNA and protein expression was detected. Taken together, GATA3 expression is
downregulated under regenerative and inflammatory hyperproliferative skin
conditions. GATA3 expression could be re-induced by successful narrow-band UVB
treatment of both human psoriasis and imiquimod-induced psoriasiform dermatitis
in mice. The prototypic Th2 cytokine IL-4 was the only cytokine capable of
inducing GATA3 in skin explants from healthy donors. Based on these findings we
argue that GATA3 serves as a key regulator in psoriatic inflammation,
keratinocyte hyperproliferation and skin barrier dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3096641
PMID: 21611195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Sep;57(4):518-25. Epub 2011 May 23.

Regulation of trophoblast-specific factors by GATA2 and GATA3 in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Someya Y, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Numerous transcription factors that regulate trophoblast developmental processes 
have been identified; however, the regulation of trophoblast-specific gene
expression has not been definitively characterized. While a new role of Gata3 in 
trophoblast development was being demonstrated in mice, we examined effects of
GATA transcription factors on conceptus interferon tau (IFNT), a major
trophectoderm factor in ruminants. In this study, expression patterns of
trophoblast ASCL2, CDX2, CSH1, ELF5, HAND1, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were initially 
examined, from which ASCL2, CDX2, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were found to be similar 
to those of GATA2 and GATA3 in days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0=day of estrus) bovine
conceptuses. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that
endogenous GATA2 and GATA3 occupied GATA binding sites on the upstream regions of
CSH1, IFNT, and TKDP1 genes and on the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells. In transient transfection analyses of the upstream region
of bovine CSH1, and IFNT or the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene, over-expression of 
GATA2 induced transactivation of these trophoblast-specific genes in bovine
non-trophoblast ear fibroblast EF cells, but over-expression of GATA3 did not
substantially affect their transactivation. In CT-1 cells, endogenous CDX2 and
IFNT mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA2 siRNA, while endogenous ASCL2 and CDX2
mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA3 siRNA. Our results indicate that in addition
to trophectoderm lineage specification, GATA2 and/or GATA3 are involved in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific gene transcription in bovine trophoblast CT-1 
cells.

PMID: 21606631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 May 24;8:56. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-56.

Predominance of Th2 polarization by vitamin D through a STAT6-dependent
mechanism.

Sloka S(1), Silva C, Wang J, Yong VW.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute and the Department of Clinical Neurosciences
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D has several reported immunomodulatory properties including 
the reduced generation of pro-inflammatory CD4+ T helper 1 (Th1) cells and the
increase in levels of the anti-inflammatory Th2 subset. Less clear has been the
impact of vitamin D on the pro-inflammatory Th17 subset, and whether and how
vitamin D may preferentially drive the polarization of one of the T helper
subsets.
METHODS: Using human peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells and mouse
splenocytes and lymph node cells in culture, we examined whether and how vitamin 
D preferentially skews T cells towards the Th1, Th2 or Th17 subsets. Mice
afflicted with the multiple sclerosis-like condition, experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), were examined in vivo for the relevance of the tissue
culture-derived results.
RESULTS: We report that the biologically active form of vitamin D,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 {1,25(OH)2D3}, consistently generates human and murine
Th2 cells in culture, frequently leaving unchanged the levels of Th1/Th17
cytokines. As a result, the ratio of Th2 to Th1 and Th17 is increased by
1,25(OH)2D3. The upregulation of Th2 to Th1 or Th17 subsets by 1,25(OH)2D3 is
enabled by an increase of the GATA-3 transcription factor, which itself is
promoted upstream by an elevation of the STAT6 transcription factor. In mice, the
alleviation of EAE severity by 1,25(OH)2D3 is accompanied by elevation of levels 
of GATA-3 and STAT6. Significantly, the efficacy of 1,25(OH)2D3 in ameliorating
EAE is completely lost in mice genetically deficient for STAT6, which was
accompanied by the inability of 1,25(OH)2D3 to raise GATA-3 in STAT6 null
lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results of vitamin D promoting a Th2 shift through upstream
GATA-3 and STAT6 transcription factors shed mechanistic understanding on the
utility of vitamin D in MS.

PMCID: PMC3118349
PMID: 21605467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Toxicology. 2011 Aug 15;286(1-3):28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 12.

Dysregulation of immune responses in an allergic mouse model following low-level 
toluene exposure.

Fujimaki H(1), Win-Shwe TT, Yoshida Y, Kunugita N, Arashidani K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan. fujimaki@nies.go.jp

To investigate the effect of low-level toluene inhalation on immune regulation in
an allergic mouse model, C3H/HeN mice were exposed to 0, 5, 50, or 500ppm of
toluene for 6h/day, 5 days/week for 3 or 6 weeks. For allergic mouse model, half 
of the mice in each group were immunized with ovalbumin (OVA). Allergic mice
exposed to toluene for 3 weeks did not exhibit any changes in their plasma, lung 
or spleen samples. Although exposure to toluene alone for 6 weeks did not
increase the number of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, 
coexposure to 50ppm toluene and OVA increased the number of BAL cells.
Histological changes and increased amounts of fibronectin were observed in the
lungs of OVA-immunized, 50-ppm-toluene-exposed mice. Exposure to 500ppm
significantly increased the expressions of transcription factors STAT3, STAT4 and
STAT5a mRNAs in spleen. In spleens from the allergic mouse model, the expressions
of STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT6, GATA3 and Foxp3 mRNAs were significantly enhanced
following exposure to 50ppm toluene for 6 weeks, but the expression of T-bet mRNA
was not increased. Regarding the Th1/Th2 balance, the expressions of IL-4 and
IL-12 mRNAs were enhanced in the spleens of toluene-exposed mice. Total IgG1
antibody production in the plasma was significantly increased in the
50-ppm-toluene-exposed allergic mouse model. These results indicate that
low-level toluene exposure might dysregulate the allergic responses to OVA in
C3H/HeN mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;128(1):192-201.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.04.029. Epub 2011 May 20.

Lung dendritic cells induce T(H)17 cells that produce T(H)2 cytokines, express
GATA-3, and promote airway inflammation.

Raymond M(1), Van VQ, Wakahara K, Rubio M, Sarfati M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunoregulation Laboratory, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Research Center (CRCHUM), Notre-Dame Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells (DCs) are crucial to shape the adaptive immune
response. Extensive in vitro manipulation reprograms T(H)2 and T(H)17 cell lines 
into T(H)1 cells, leading to the concept of CD4(+) T(H) cell subset plasticity.
The conversion of memory T(H)17 cells into T(H)2 cells or vice versa remains to
be clarified.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the localization of T(H)17/T(H)2 cells in vivo, their
cellular origin (T(H)2 vs T(H)17), and the underlying mechanisms that drive the
generation of these double T(H) producers.
METHODS: Antigen-loaded bone marrow-derived DCs (ovalbumin-DCs) were repeatedly
administered locally (intratracheally) or systemically (intravenously) to naive
mice to elicit chronic airway inflammation. Inflamed lungs and mediastinal lymph 
nodes were examined for the presence of IL-17(+)IL-13(+)IL-4(+)CD4(+) T cells
that coexpressed retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t and GATA-3
(T(H)17/T(H)2).
RESULTS: We show that repetitive administration of inflammatory ovalbumin-DCs,
locally or systemically, promoted the development of antigen-specific
T(H)17/T(H)2 cells in lungs and mediastinal lymph nodes. Immunized mice had
IgE-independent and steroid-resistant airway inflammation with a mixed neutrophil
and eosinophil infiltration of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Airway
inflammatory signal regulatory protein a-positive DCs reprogrammed
in vitro-generated T(H)17 but not T(H)2 cells, as well as lung effector T(H)
cells, into T(H)17/T(H)2 cells.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate the existence of T(H)17/T(H)2 cells that express
GATA-3 in inflamed tissues and their T(H)17 origin. We further propose that
repeated immunization with inflammatory DCs prevails on the route of DC
administration to drive T(H)17/T(H)2-associated chronic lung inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cytokine. 2011 Aug;55(2):294-300. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.04.016. Epub 2011 May 
17.

Vitamin D(3) down-regulates proinflammatory cytokine response to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis through pattern recognition receptors while inducing protective
cathelicidin production.

Khoo AL(1), Chai LY, Koenen HJ, Oosting M, Steinmeyer A, Zuegel U, Joosten I,
Netea MG, van der Ven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory Medical Immunology, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

A well-known association between vitamin D(3) and infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis has previously been reported, but little is known regarding the
underlying mechanisms. We have investigated how 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)
[1,25(OH)(2)D(3)] affects the proinflammatory cytokine production induced by M.
tuberculosis. Furthermore, we explored whether 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) influence the
production of the protective antimycobacterial peptide cathelicidin. Upon in
vitro stimulation with M. tuberculosis, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) induced a dose-dependent 
down-regulation of IL-6, TNFa and IFN<U+03B3>, while increasing the production of IL-10 
in culture supernatant as well as cathelicidin mRNA expression. This effect on
cytokine response was not due to modulation of T-helper cell differentiation, as 
T-bet, GATA3, Foxp3 and ROR-<U+03B3>t mRNA expression remained unaffected. Similarly,
1,25(OH)(2)D(3) did not affect suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 and SOCS3
mRNA expression. The mechanism whereby 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) inhibited the
proinflammatory cytokine response was through reduced expression of the pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) - TLR2, TLR4, Dectin-1 and mannose receptor, whose
mRNA and protein expression were both reduced. The suppression of PRRs could be
restored by a VDR antagonist. Upon M. tuberculosis stimulation, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)
modulates the balance in cytokine production towards an anti-inflammatory profile
by repression of TLR2, TLR4, Dectin-1 and mannose receptor expression, while
increasing cathelicidin production. These two effects may have beneficial
consequences, by reducing the collateral tissue damage induced by proinflammatory
cytokines, while the antibacterial effects of cathelicidin are enhanced.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21592820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 Oct;19(5):478-83. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318216af63.

Hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the ureter: unusual case presenting hepatic and
ovarian metastases.

Rotellini M(1), Messerini L, Stomaci N, Raspollini MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Critical Care Medicine and Surgery,
University Hospital Careggi, University of Florence, Italy.

Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a rare neoplasm, which has a striking morphologic
similarity to hepatocarcinoma. It has been described in different organs, the
most common are stomach, lung, and pancreas. In some cases, it is characterized
by high serum levels of a-fetoprotein. This tumor has a pattern similar to the
hepatocarcinoma. The typical features are a combination of histopathologic
aspects of solid nests and trabecular structures of polygonal atypical cells with
eosinophil and granular cytoplasm and immunohistochemical expression of
a-fetoprotein and of carcinoembryonic antigen in half of cases. Here, we report
the case of an old female patient affected by hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the
ureter with ovarian, small intestine, and hepatic involvement. We discuss the
clinical aspects, the morphologic features, and the immunoistochemical staining
useful for differential diagnosis.

PMID: 21558843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Reproduction. 2011 Aug;142(2):295-307. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0044. Epub 2011 May 9.

Nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility and inefficient development of pig-mouse
cytoplasmic hybrid embryos.

Amarnath D(1), Choi I, Moawad AR, Wakayama T, Campbell KH.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Development and Biotechnology Group, School of Biosciences, The
University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, Loughborough, Leicestershire, LE12
5RD, UK.

Inter-species somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT) embryos usually fail to
develop to the blastocyst stage and beyond due to incomplete reprogramming of
donor cell. We evaluated whether using a karyoplast that would require less
extensive reprogramming such as an embryonic blastomere or the meiotic spindle
from metaphase II oocytes would provide additional insight into the development
of iSCNT embryos. Our results showed that karyoplasts of embryonic or oocyte
origin are no different from somatic cells; all iSCNT embryos, irrespective of
karyoplast origin, were arrested during early development. We hypothesized that
nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility could be another reason for failure of
embryonic development from iSCNT. We used pig-mouse cytoplasmic hybrids as a
model to address nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility in iSCNT embryos. Fertilized
murine zygotes were reconstructed by fusing with porcine cytoplasts of varying
cytoplasmic volumes (1/10 (small) and 1/5 (large) total volume of mouse zygote). 
The presence of pig cytoplasm significantly reduced the development of mouse
zygotes to the blastocyst stage compared with control embryos at 120<U+200A>h post-human
chorionic gondotropin (41 vs 6 vs 94%, P<0.05; 1/10, 1/5, control respectively). 
While mitochondrial DNA copy numbers remained relatively unchanged, expression of
several important genes namely Tfam, Polg, Polg2, Mfn2, Slc2a3 (Glut3), Slc2a1
(Glut1), Bcl2, Hspb1, Pou5f1 (Oct4), Nanog, Cdx2, Gata3, Tcfap2c, mt-Cox1 and
mt-Cox2 was significantly reduced in cytoplasmic hybrids compared with control
embryos. These results demonstrate that the presence of even a small amount of
porcine cytoplasm is detrimental to murine embryo development and suggest that a 
range of factors are likely to contribute to the failure of inter-species nuclear
transfer embryos.

PMID: 21555359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Int J Dev Biol. 2011;55(3):297-303. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103178jd.

Limited inner ear morphogenesis and neurosensory development are possible in the 
absence of GATA3.

Duncan JS(1), Lim KC, Engel JD, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa, USA.

Haploinsufficiency of Gata3 causes hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal
dysplasia (HDR) syndrome in mice and humans. Gata3 null mutation leads to early
lethality around embryonic day (E)11.5, but catecholamine precursor
administration can rescue Gata3 null mutants to E16.5. At E11.5, GATA3 deficiency
results in the development of an empty otocyst with an endolymphatic duct.
However, using rescued mice we found that some morphogenesis and neurosensory
development is possible in the ear without Gata3. Extending previous studies, we 
find that at E16.5, Gata3 mutant inner ears can undergo partial morphogenesis and
develop an endolymphatic duct, a utricular and saccular recess, and a shortened
cochlear duct. In addition to the obvious morphogenic aberrations, these studies 
demonstrate that a subset of neurons develop and connect a fragmented sensory
patch of MYO7A-positive hair cells to the vestibular nuclei of the brainstem. In 
situ hybridization studies reveal altered expression of several transcription
factors relevant to ear development and we hypothesize that this may relate to
the observed dysmorphia and restricted neurosensory development. While a cochlear
duct can form, there is no concurrent cochlear neurosensory development,
observations consistent with specific hearing defects encountered by HDR patients
and mice with Gata3-associated expression alterations. Gata3 null mutant
phenocopies the otic maldevelopment (cochlear duct formation in the absence of
neurosensory development) seen in Foxg1cre mediated conditional deletion of
microRNA processing enzyme, Dicer1. Finally, while GATA3 is expressed in the
developing vestibulo-cochlear efferent (VCE) neurons, and its absence in the null
mutants disrupts VCE projections to the ear, loss of GATA3 does not affect VCE
progenitor cell migration.

PMID: 21553382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Transplantation. 2011 Jul 27;92(2):170-5. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e31821eab65.

Intrarenal IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA expression differentiates clinical and subclinical
glomerulitis in renal transplant recipients.

Buob D(1), Hazan M, Homs S, Matignon M, Mansour H, Audard V, Desvaux D, Remy P,
Noel C, Bastuji-Garin S, Cohen J, Lang P, Grimbert P.

Author information: 
(1)Univ Lille Nord de France F-59000, France.

BACKGROUND: Transplant glomerulitis, characterized by mononuclear cell
infiltration of glomeruli, is likely to occur during clinical or subclinical
antibody-mediated rejection.
METHODS: To determine whether T-cell phenotype influences the clinical
presentation of this pathologic condition, we used reverse transcription
quantitative polymerase chain reaction to analyze expression of Treg cells
(Foxp3), cytotoxic CD8 T cells (Granzyme B), Th1 cells (INF-<U+03B3>,T Bet), Th2 cells
(GATA3, IL-4), and Th17 pathway (IL-17). Our study included 20 renal transplant
recipients exhibiting subclinical glomerulitis (SG) diagnosed after a routine
3-month posttransplant biopsy. Results were compared with those observed in 22
patients with normal routine biopsies at 3 months (N) and 17 patients with
clinical glomerulitis occurring during early acute renal dysfunction within the
first year after transplantation in a context of acute antibody-mediated
rejection.
RESULTS: Our results show that expression of IL-4 mRNA was significantly higher
in SG patients than in N patients (P = 0.02). Expression of IFN-<U+03B3> was
significantly higher in patients with clinical glomerulitis than in patients with
SG (P<0.001) and was associated with a clinical expression of glomerulitis.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the balance of Th1/Th2 is likely to
differentiate clinical expression of transplant glomerulopathy. They also
indicate that therapeutic approaches in cases of SG should be defined with
caution and take into account transcriptional criteria.

PMID: 21546865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.011. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

The transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a are required for survival of
sympathetic progenitors and differentiated sympathetic neurons.

Schmidt M(1), Huber L, Majdazari A, Schütz G, Williams T, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstrasse 46, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Differentiation of sympathetic neurons is controlled by a group of transcription 
factors, including Phox2b, Ascl1, Hand2 and Gata3, induced by bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) in progenitors located in ganglion primordia at the dorsal aorta.
Here, we address the function of the transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a,
expressed in migrating neural crest cells (NCC) and maintained in sympathetic
progenitors and differentiated neurons. The elimination of both AP-2a and AP-2ß
results in the virtually complete absence of sympathetic and sensory ganglia due 
to apoptotic cell death of migrating NCC. In the AP-2ß knockout only sympathetic 
ganglia (SG) are targeted, leading to a reduction in ganglion size by about 40%, 
which is also caused by apoptotic death of neural crest progenitors. The
conditional double knockout of AP-2a and AP-2ß in sympathetic progenitors and
differentiated noradrenergic neurons results in a further decrease in neuron
number, leading eventually to small sympathetic ganglion rudiments postnatally.
The elimination of AP-2ß also leads to the complete absence of noradrenergic
neurons of the Locus coeruleus (LC). Whereas AP-2a/ß transcription factors are in
vivo not required for the onset or maintenance of noradrenergic differentiation, 
their essential survival functions are demonstrated for sympathetic progenitors
and noradrenergic neurons.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Aug;28(2):171-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.685. Epub 2011 Apr
28.

GATA binding protein 3 overexpression and suppression significantly contribute to
the regulation of allergic skin inflammation.

Bae CJ(1), Lee JW, Shim SB, Jee SW, Lee SH, Woo JM, Lee CK, Hwang DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Animal Resources, National Institute of Food and Drug
Evaluation, Korea FDA, Cheongwon 363-951, Republic of Korea.

GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a key molecule regulating the balance in the
ratio of type 1 helper T (Th1) cells to type 2 helper T (Th2) cells, which is
thought to be indicative of the pathogenesis of allergic diseases such as asthma 
and atopic dermatitis. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of GATA3
in allergic skin inflammation. Transgenic (Tg) mice overexpressing human GATA3
(hGATA3) were produced by the microinjection of pCMV/hGATA3 constructs into
fertilized mouse eggs. The hGATA3 gene was successfully expressed at the protein 
level in the lymph node and thymus of CMV/hGATA3 transfected cells and Tg mice.
CMV/hGATA3 Tg mice showed a significant increase in the allergic skin
inflammation response such as ear thickness, draining auricular lymph node (aLN) 
weight, epidermal thickness, inflammatory cell number and Th2 immunoglobulin (Ig)
concentration compared to wild-type (WT) mice after phthalic anhydride (PA)
treatment. Furthermore, the secretion of Th2 type cytokines was increased by PA
treatment in CMV/hGATA3 Tg mice, while the secretion of Th1 type cytokine was
suppressed under the same conditions. However, the increased levels of Th2 type
cytokines in CMV/hGATA3 Tg mice were almost recovered by the down-regulation of
GATA3 expression with D-pinitol treatment. Therefore, these findings suggest that
GATA3 could be considered as a potential target regulating the mechanism
responsible for the differences in allergic skin inflammation.

PMID: 21537830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7079-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-317990. Epub 2011 
May 2.

ERG promotes T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia and is transcriptionally regulated in
leukemic cells by a stem cell enhancer.

Thoms JA(1), Birger Y, Foster S, Knezevic K, Kirschenbaum Y, Chandrakanthan V,
Jonquieres G, Spensberger D, Wong JW, Oram SH, Kinston SJ, Groner Y, Lock R,
MacKenzie KL, Göttgens B, Izraeli S, Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The Ets-related gene (ERG) is an Ets-transcription factor required for normal
blood stem cell development. ERG expression is down-regulated during early
T-lymphopoiesis but maintained in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), where
it is recognized as an independent risk factor for adverse outcome. However, it
is unclear whether ERG is directly involved in the pathogenesis of T-ALL and how 
its expression is regulated. Here we demonstrate that transgenic expression of
ERG causes T-ALL in mice and that its knockdown reduces the proliferation of
human MOLT4 T-ALL cells. We further demonstrate that ERG expression in primary
human T-ALL cells is mediated by the binding of other T-cell oncogenes SCL/TAL1, 
LMO2, and LYL1 in concert with ERG, FLI1, and GATA3 to the ERG +85 enhancer. This
enhancer is not active in normal T cells but in transgenic mice targets
expression to fetal liver c-kit(+) cells, adult bone marrow stem/progenitors and 
early CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymic progenitors. Taken together, these data
illustrate that ERG promotes T-ALL and that failure to extinguish activity of
stem cell enhancers associated with regulatory transcription factors such as ERG 
can contribute to the development of leukemia.

PMID: 21536859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Immunol. 2011 Jun 1;186(11):6378-89. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100179. Epub 2011
May 2.

Genome-wide analysis reveals unique regulation of transcription of Th2-specific
genes by GATA3.

Horiuchi S(1), Onodera A, Hosokawa H, Watanabe Y, Tanaka T, Sugano S, Suzuki Y,
Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
260-8670, Japan.

Differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into Th2 cells is accompanied by chromatin
remodeling and increased expression of a set of Th2-specific genes, including
those encoding Th2 cytokines. IL-4-mediated STAT6 activation induces high levels 
of transcription of GATA3, a master regulator of Th2 cell differentiation, and
enforced expression of GATA3 induces Th2 cytokine expression. However, it remains
unclear whether the expression of other Th2-specific genes is induced directly by
GATA3. A genome-wide unbiased chromatin immunoprecipitation assay coupled with
massive parallel sequencing analysis revealed that GATA3 bound to 1279 genes
selectively in Th2 cells, and 101 genes in both Th1 and Th2 cells.
Simultaneously, we identified 26 highly Th2-specific STAT6-dependent inducible
genes by DNA microarray analysis-based three-step selection processes, and among 
them 17 genes showed GATA3 binding. We assessed dependency on GATA3 for the
transcription of these 26 Th2-specific genes, and 10 genes showed increased
transcription in a GATA3-dependent manner, whereas 16 genes showed no significant
responses. The transcription of the 16 GATA3-nonresponding genes was clearly
increased by the introduction of an active form of STAT6, STAT6VT. Therefore,
although GATA3 has been recognized as a master regulator of Th2 cell
differentiation, many Th2-specific genes are not regulated by GATA3 itself, but
in collaboration with STAT6.

PMID: 21536806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jun;240(6):1626-34. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22651. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Lgr4-deficient mice showed premature differentiation of ureteric bud with reduced
expression of Wnt effector Lef1 and Gata3.

Mohri Y(1), Oyama K, Akamatsu A, Kato S, Nishimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

We previously reported that Lgr4 has a critical role in the morphogenesis of
kidney, but the detailed functions of Lgr4 in kidney development have not been
elucidated. In contrast to Lgr4 null mice with 129Ola × C57BL/6J mixed
background, C57BL/6J-backcrossed Lgr4 null mice (Lgr4(-/-)) showed the severe
phenotype of embryonic lethality and also had dilated tubules in kidneys at
E16.5. Based on quantitative RT-PCR and in situ hybridization, branching
morphogenesis at E15.5 in the Lgr4(-/-) was arrested earlier, and both DBA-lectin
staining and immunohistochemical analysis using Aqp3 antibodies showed that the
ureteric bud (UB) of Lgr4(-/-) kidneys underwent premature differentiation.
Furthermore, quantitative RT-PCR and histological analysis suggested that the
impaired UB differentiation was caused by down-regulation of the Wnt pathway and 
Gata3 in the Lgr4(-/-) kidneys. We demonstrate here that Lgr4 has a novel
function for maintaining the UB in an undifferentiated state.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21523854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Development. 2011 May;138(10):2089-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.056838.

Nephric duct insertion is a crucial step in urinary tract maturation that is
regulated by a Gata3-Raldh2-Ret molecular network in mice.

Chia I(1), Grote D, Marcotte M, Batourina E, Mendelsohn C, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicholas Avenue, New
York, NY 10032, USA.

Urinary tract development depends on a complex series of events in which the
ureter moves from its initial branch point on the nephric duct (ND) to its final 
insertion site in the cloaca (the primitive bladder and urethra). Defects in this
maturation process can result in malpositioned ureters and hydronephrosis, a
common cause of renal disease in children. Here, we report that insertion of the 
ND into the cloaca is an unrecognized but crucial step that is required for
proper positioning of the ureter and that depends on Ret signaling. Analysis of
Ret mutant mice at birth reveals hydronephrosis and defective ureter maturation, 
abnormalities that our results suggest are caused, at least in part, by delayed
insertion of the ND. We find a similar set of malformations in mutants lacking
either Gata3 or Raldh2. We show that these factors act in parallel to regulate ND
insertion via Ret. Morphological analysis of ND extension in wild-type embryos
reveals elaborate cellular protrusions at ND tips that are not detected in Ret,
Gata3 or Raldh2 mutant embryos, suggesting that these protrusions may normally be
important for fusion with the cloaca. Together, our studies reveal a novel
Ret-dependent event, ND insertion, that, when abnormal, can cause obstruction and
hydronephrosis at birth; whether ND defects underlie similar types of urinary
tract abnormalities in humans is an interesting possibility.

PMCID: PMC3082308
PMID: 21521737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Mar;16(3):531-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01329.x.

IL-10 production in non-small cell lung carcinoma patients is regulated by ERK,
P38 and COX-2.

Patel S(1), Vetale S, Teli P, Mistry R, Chiplunkar S.

Author information: 
(1)Chiplunkar Lab, Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in
Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai, India.

Immune dysfunction is hallmark of patients with non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC). The molecular mechanism involved in COX-2- and PGE2-mediated production 
of immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 is not well-understood. Our study addresses
the involvement of T cell downstream signalling intermediates, cytokines (IL-10
and IFN-<U+03B3>) and their transcription factors (T-bet and GATA-3) in COX-2-mediated
regulation of lymphocyte functions in NSCLC patients. In comparison to healthy
individual, a marked decrease in lymphocyte proliferation to anti-CD3 MAb was
observed in NSCLC patients by thymidine incorporation assay. Using flow
cytometry, decrease in intracellular calcium release with increase in reactive
oxygen species was observed in lymphocytes of NSCLC patients. These patients
showed increased IL-10 and PGE2 with reduced IFN-<U+03B3> production by ELISA. Results
demonstrated defect in regulation of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 as
analysed by Western blotting (WB), immunoprecipitation and EMSA. Overexpression
of p-p38, p-ERK and COX-2 were observed with diminished p-JNK by WB. IL-10/IFN-<U+03B3> 
levels were found to be differentially regulated via p38 and ERK
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in cooperation with COX-2.
Inhibition of these pathways using selective inhibitors lead to increased
lymphocyte proliferative response to anti-CD3 MAb and IFN-<U+03B3> production with
decrease in IL-10 production. Studies showed involvement of ERK, p38 and COX-2
pathways in high IL-10 production, driven by lung tumour derived PGE2. The
selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib showed ability to alter the cytokine balance 
by affecting regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 transcription factors.

© 2012 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822929
PMID: 21507199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Front Neuroanat. 2011 Apr 5;5:23. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2011.00023. eCollection
2011.

Comparison of Pretectal Genoarchitectonic Pattern between Quail and Chicken
Embryos.

Merchán P(1), Bardet SM, Puelles L, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Centre for Biomedical Research 
on Rare Diseases (CIBERER 736), School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, 
Spain.

Regionalization of the central nervous system is controlled by local networks of 
transcription factors that establish and maintain the identities of
neuroepithelial progenitor areas and their neuronal derivatives. The conserved
cerebral Bauplan of vertebrates must result essentially from conserved patterns
of developmentally expressed transcription factors. We have previously produced
detailed molecular maps for the alar plate of prosomere 1 (the pretectal region) 
in chicken (Ferran et al., 2007, 2008, 2009). Here we compare the early molecular
signature of the pretectum of two closely related avian species of the family
Phasianidae, Coturnix japonica (Japanese quail) and Gallus gallus (chicken),
aiming to test conservation of the described pattern at a microevolutionary
level. We studied the developmental pretectal expression of Bhlhb4, Dbx1, Ebf1,
Gata3, Gbx2, Lim1, Meis1, Meis2, Pax3, Pax6, Six3, Tal2, and Tcf7l2 (Tcf4) mRNA, 
using in situ hybridization, and PAX7 immunohistochemistry. The genoarchitectonic
profile of individual pretectal domains and strata was produced, using comparable
section planes. Remarkable conservation of the combinatorial genoarchitectonic
code was observed, fundamented in a tripartite anteroposterior subdivision.
However, we found that at corresponding developmental stages the pretectal region
of G. gallus was approximately 30% larger than that of C. japonica, but seemed
relatively less mature. Altogether, our results on a conserved genoarchitectonic 
pattern highlight the importance of early developmental gene networks that
causally underlie the production of homologous derivatives in these two
evolutionarily closely related species. The shared patterns probably apply to
sauropsids in general, as well as to more distantly related vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC3074437
PMID: 21503155  [PubMed]


473. J Immunol. 2011 May 15;186(10):5772-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003192. Epub 2011 
Apr 15.

TLR4 signaling via MyD88 and TRIF differentially shape the CD4+ T cell response
to Porphyromonas gingivalis hemagglutinin B.

Gaddis DE(1), Michalek SM, Katz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294, USA.

Recombinant hemagglutinin B (rHagB), a virulence factor of the periodontal
pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis, has been shown to induce protective immunity
against bacterial infection. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that rHagB is a
TLR4 agonist for dendritic cells. However, it is not known how rHagB dendritic
cell stimulation affects the activation and differentiation of T cells.
Therefore, we undertook the present study to examine the role of TLR4 signaling
in shaping the CD4(+) T cell response following immunization of mice with rHagB. 
Immunization with this Ag resulted in the induction of specific CD4(+) T cells
and Ab responses. In TLR4(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) but not Toll/IL-1R
domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-ß-deficient (TRIF(Lps2)) mice, there was
an increase in the Th2 CD4(+) T cell subset, a decrease in the Th1 subset, and
higher serum IgG(1)/IgG(2) levels of HagB-specific Abs compared with those in
wild-type mice. These finding were accompanied by increased GATA-3 and Foxp3
expression and a decrease in the activation of CD4(+) T cells isolated from
TLR4(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) mice. Interestingly, TLR4(-/-) CD4(+) T cells showed an 
increase in IL-2/STAT5 signaling. Whereas TRIF deficiency had minimal effects on 
the CD4(+) T cell response, it resulted in increased IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 production
by memory CD4(+) T cells. To our knowledge, these results demonstrate for the
first time that TLR4 signaling, via the downstream MyD88 and TRIF molecules,
exerts a differential regulation on the CD4(+) T cell response to HagB Ag. The
gained insight from the present work will aid in designing better therapeutic
strategies against P. gingivalis infection.

PMCID: PMC3809913
PMID: 21498664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Oct;91(2):548-62. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2011.03.006. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

HLA DRB1*1503 allelic haplotype predominance and associated immunodysregulation
in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Suggs MJ(1), Majithia V, Lewis RE, Cruse JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunopathology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 
North State St., Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, relapsing, and remitting disease
affecting primarily African American females of child bearing age. Familial
aggregation of this disease suggests that at least part of the susceptibility for
this disease is genetic, although environmental and hormonal influences are also 
likely to play a role. Early studies of genetic susceptibility to SLE revealed
several of the major histocompatibility complex molecules, namely HLA DR, to be
linked to SLE. Meta-analysis of genome scans has yielded loci significant for
lupus patients, one of which includes the MHC region. Regulatory T cells are
immunoregulatory cells that modulate activated immune cells. These cells play a
large role in homeostasis of the immune responses and maintenance of immunologic 
tolerance, i.e., prevention of autoimmunity. Decreased numbers of regulatory T
cells have been described in many autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus
erythematosus. Autoantibody production in systemic lupus erythematosus and the
resulting immune complex formation and complex deposition into tissues are
arguably the central core of immune dysregulation leading to disease
manifestations and symptoms. Inability of the immune system to recognize and
inhibit autoreactive immune cells in this particular autoimmune disease may be
the result of inappropriate numbers and function of regulatory T cells. This
study aims to characterize the immune cell population in patients from our
community suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus and to prove that these
patients exhibit a unique cellular profile compared to healthy age, race and
gender matched control subjects. Surprisingly, our findings demonstrate that
patients from the local Mississippi area exhibit increased proportions of CD25(+)
FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells and CD25(+) FoxP3(-) T cells (of CD45(+) CD3(+)
CD4(+) helper T cells) as compared to healthy controls. HLA tissue-typing of
these lupus patients revealed a prominent subgroup (~30%) of patients possessing 
the HLA DRB1*1503 allele. The investigation of this subgroup demonstrated
regulatory T cell composition similar to that of the total lupus group and to
that of the non-HLA DRB1*1503 subgroup. Genetic analysis for molecular gene
expression levels of various lupus-associated genes by real-time PCR demonstrated
a unique profile as compared to healthy controls. Increased gene expression of
FoxP3 together with decreased gene expression levels of GATA3, TNFAIP3, and
TNFSF4 suggest that variations in gene products compared to healthy controls may 
be playing a role in the immune cell dysregulation and disproportionate CD25(+)
FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21497601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Apr;144(4):506-13. doi:
10.1177/0194599810396133. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist induces regulatory T
cells in a murine model of allergic rhinitis.

Wang W(1), Zhu Z, Zhu B, Ma Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
(PPAR)-<U+03B3> agonist on the induction of regulatory T cells (Tregs) in a murine model
of allergic rhinitis.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Animal study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: BALB/c mice that received ovalbumin sensitization and
challenge served as the ovalbumin group (n = 6). Two separate groups of 6 mice
received intragastric administration with PPAR-<U+03B3> agonist pioglitazone (30
mg/kg/d) or pioglitazone plus PPAR-<U+03B3> antagonist GW9662 (0.5 mg/d) before each
ovalbumin challenge. The control group (n = 6) was treated with drug vehicle
alone. Various allergic responses were assessed. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction was performed to investigate the mRNA expression of forkhead box P3
(Foxp3), T-bet, and GATA-3. Flow cytometry was used to determine the percentage
of Tregs.
RESULTS: Mice developed typical pathophysiological allergic rhinitis features
after the ovalbumin challenge. The frequencies of sneezing and scratching were
significantly decreased by pioglitazone treatment (P < .0001). Eosinophils
infiltration and the levels of interleukin-5 and interferon-<U+03B3> in nasal cavity
lavage fluid and sera immunoglobulin E were also markedly decreased by
pioglitazone (P < .001). The expression of Foxp3 mRNA and the population of Tregs
were significantly increased by pioglitazone (P < .05). Cotreatment with GW9662
reversed the anti-inflammatory effects of pioglitazone. The effects of PPAR-<U+03B3>
agonist on Foxp3 mRNA expression and Tregs induction were abrogated by
administration of GW9662.
CONCLUSION: PPAR-<U+03B3> agonist attenuates upper airway allergic inflammation in a
PPAR-<U+03B3>-dependent fashion, and the beneficial effects of pioglitazone in airway
allergic inflammation may be mediated by induction of Tregs.

PMID: 21493225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Immunol. 2011 Jul;48(12-13):1360-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.02.014. Epub
2011 Apr 12.

Constitutive high expression of interleukin-4/13A and GATA-3 in gill and skin of 
salmonid fishes suggests that these tissues form Th2-skewed immune environments.

Takizawa F(1), Koppang EO, Ohtani M, Nakanishi T, Hashimoto K, Fischer U,
Dijkstra JM.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute for Infectiology, Insel Riems D-17498, Germany.

Rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon interleukin-4/13A (IL-4/13A) genes were
identified. They were found expressed at high level in thymus, gill, and skin, in
concert with the transcription factor gene GATA-3. High expression levels of
IL-4, IL-13, and GATA-3 were also detected in murine thymus, suggesting similar
importance of the fish and mammalian homologues for early T cell development. In 
mammals, combined high expression of IL-4/13 and GATA-3 in tissues other than
thymus is mostly indicative of Th2 responses. Th2-skewage may protect fish skin
and gill from parasites and from damage by inflammatory Th1 and Th17 responses.
The immune milieus of fish gill and skin are relevant to aquaculture, because
these tissues are preferred sites for vaccine administration. The similarities
between the immune milieus of fish gill and thymus may reflect an evolutionary
relationship, since these tissues map close together lining the gill cavity.
Expression patterns of IL-4/13A and interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) in isolated trout
gill cells and pronephrocytes were consistent with Th2 identity of IL-4/13A.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21489635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jul;41(7):2086-96. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041130.

Rapamycin-sensitive signals control TCR/CD28-driven Ifng, Il4 and Foxp3
transcription and promoter region methylation.

Tomasoni R(1), Basso V, Pilipow K, Sitia G, Saccani S, Agresti A, Mietton F,
Natoli G, Colombetti S, Mondino A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Transplantation and Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) controls T-cell differentiation in
response to polarizing cytokines. We previously found that mTOR blockade by
rapamycin (RAPA) delays the G1-S cell cycle transition and lymphocyte
proliferation. Here, we report that both mTOR complex 1 and mTOR complex 2 are
readily activated following TCR/CD28 engagement and are critical for early
expression of Ifng, Il4 and Foxp3, and for effector T cell differentiation in the
absence of polarizing cytokines. While inhibition of mTOR complex 1 and cell
division were evident at low doses of RAPA, inhibition of mTOR complex 2, Ifng,
Il4 and Foxp3 expression, and T-cell polarization required higher doses and more 
prolonged treatments. We found that while T-bet and GATA3 were readily induced
following TCR/CD28 engagement, administration of RAPA delayed their expression,
and interfered with the loss of DNA methylation within Ifng and Il4 promoter
regions. In contrast, RAPA prevented activation-dependent DNA methylation of the 
Foxp3 promoter favoring Foxp3 expression. As a result, RAPA-cultured cells lacked
immediate effector functions and instead were enriched for IL-2+ cells. We
propose that mTOR-signaling, by timing the expression of critical transcription
factors and DNA methylation of proximal promoter regions, regulates
transcriptional competence at immunologically relevant sites and hence lymphocyte
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21480212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Immunol. 2011 May;48(9-10):1224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.03.007. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

Distribution and expression analysis of transcription factors in tissues and
progenitor cell populations of the goldfish (Carassius auratus L.) in response to
growth factors and pathogens.

Katzenback BA(1), Karpman M, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

We report on the mRNA levels of a panel of transcription factors in the kidney
and spleen tissues, and in the cell populations from the blood, the spleen, and
in the sorted kidney progenitor cells. The mRNA levels of cebpa, cjun, cmyb,
egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1 were assessed in
healthy goldfish as well as in fish challenged with two different pathogens,
Aeromonas salmonicida A449 or Trypanosoma carassii. Spleen tissue from healthy
goldfish showed higher expression of myeloid (cjun), erythroid (gata1) and
lymphoid (gata3, pax5) transcription factors, and lower expression of the myeloid
transcription factor cebpa when compared to that of kidney. Splenocytes and PBLs 
had significantly higher mRNA levels of the transcription factors involved in
myeloid (pu.1, mafb, cjun, egr1, cebpa), erythroid (gata1, lmo2), and lymphoid
pathways (gata3 and pax5) compared to sorted kidney R1 progenitor cells, while R1
progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of early progenitor transcription factors
(runx1 and cmyb). Furthermore, the R1 progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of 
the transcription factors involved in early progenitor cells (egr1, gata2) and
the lymphoid lineage progenitors (gata3, pax5) compared to those in kidney. The
mRNA levels of the transcription factors (gata2, mafb, cjun, gata1, lmo2, gata3, 
and pax5) in R1 progenitor cells changed during cultivation; they were elevated
in day 2 R1 cells and down-regulated by day 6 of cultivation, when compared to
those of day 0 R1 cells. Treatment of day 2 R1 progenitor cells with rgCSF-1
resulted in an up-regulation of transcription factors important for myeloid cell 
development (cjun and egr1). Similarly, rgkitla up-regulated the expressions of
myeloid (mafb, egr1 and cebpa) transcription factors. Changes in the expression
of transcription factors in the R1 progenitor cells were related to the observed 
developmental processes of myeloid progenitor cells during cultivation or
treatment with recombinant growth factors in vitro. We also observed differential
expressions of the transcription factors in R1 progenitor cells following
exposure of the goldfish to either prokaryotic (heat-killed A. salmonicida A449) 
or eukaryotic (T. carassii) pathogens.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21474183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Stem Cells. 2011 Jun;29(6):928-39. doi: 10.1002/stem.640.

Directed expression of Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 synergize to induce the
serotonergic neuron phenotype during in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Nefzger CM(1), Haynes JM, Pouton CW.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Action, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Monash University (Parkville Campus), Melbourne, Australia.

Investigation of serotonergic neuronal activity and its relationship to disease
has been limited by a lack of physiologically relevant in vitro cell models.
Serotonergic neurons derived from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could provide a
platform for such studies and provide models for use in drug discovery. Here, we 
report enhancement of serotonergic differentiation using a genetic approach.
Expression of Gata2 increased the yield of serotonergic neurons. Enhancement was 
only achieved when Gata2 was expressed under the control of the tissue-specific
promoter of the transcription factor Nkx6.1. High levels of Gata2 expression in
ESCs compromised pluripotency and induced non-neuronal differentiation. Combined 
directed expression of Gata2, proneural gene Mash1, and forkhead transcription
factor Foxa2 further enhanced serotonergic neural differentiation, resulting in a
10-fold increase in serotonin content. These neurons were also capable of
depolarization (KCl, 30 mM)-induced elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) . The
presence of sonic hedgehog during differentiation produced a further modest
increase in numbers (1.5-fold). Transgene expression did not influence the number
of tyrosine hydroxylase positive neurons in the cultures after 20 days, implying 
that Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 modulate in vitro differentiation at a time beyond
the decision-point for dopaminergic or nondopaminergic commitment. This study
demonstrates that the directed expression of specific transcription factors
enhances serotonergic neuron differentiation in vitro and highlights the
importance of transgene expression at the right stage of ESC differentiation to
effect the generation of a desired neural subtype.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21472823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Jan-Feb;29(1 Suppl 64):S23-34. Epub 2011 May 11.

Both Th2 and Th17 responses are involved in the pathogenesis of Churg-Strauss
syndrome.

Jakiela B(1), Sanak M, Szczeklik W, Sokolowska B, Plutecka H, Mastalerz L, Musial
J, Szczeklik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) is a rare systemic vasculitis associated
with eosinophilia and granuloma formation. The contribution of individual
T-helper cell lineages in pathogenesis of CSS is unknown. We hypothesised that in
CSS an imbalance of major effector T-cell subpopulations takes place, and is
further influenced by the mode of treatment.
METHODS: We investigated the immunophenotype, cytokine production and
transcriptome profile in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) from 19 patients with
stable CSS (10 were treated with glucocorticoids alone (CSS/GC), 9 with steroids 
and other immunosuppressive drugs (CSS/IS)), and 13 healthy controls.
Furthermore, serum IL-5 and CCR4-active chemokines (CCL17, CCL22) were measured
in six patients with active disease and upon remission.
RESULTS: All CSS patients had decreased percentage of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells. 
In the CSS/GC group we found an increase in the Th17/Treg ratio and up-regulation
of both Th2 and Th17 markers as evidenced by (1) over expression of Th2-related
genes (GATA3, STAT6) in PBL, (2) elevated concentrations of serum IL-5 and CCL17,
and (3) a concomitant increase in the number of Th17 cells, and secretion of
IL-17A by stimulated PBL. The level of CCR4-active chemokines was increased in
active-CSS, and correlated with blood eosinophilia. The combined treatment with
steroids and other immunosuppressive drugs was associated with a significant
decrease in both Th2-related chemokines and the number of Th17 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that both Th2 and Th17 lineages are involved in
the pathogenesis of CSS, while CCR4-active chemokines contribute to eosinophilia 
in the active disease. These phenomena are down regulated by immunosuppressive
therapy.

PMID: 21470488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Jul-Aug;4(4):663-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.469. Epub 2011 Mar
31.

Correlation between the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 and the levels of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> in
patients with allergic asthma.

Yong J(1), Chen GQ, Huang B, Wu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Dongnan University, Jiangyin, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China. jiyongmyp@126.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the ratio of the transcription factors
T-bet/GATA-3 in patients with allergic asthma. Forty-seven individuals with
allergic asthma and 47 healthy control individuals provided 5 ml of
anticoagulated peripheral venous blood. Lymphocytes in peripheral blood were
isolated by Ficoll and treated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) at a final
concentration of 100 mg/l for 48 h. Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-4 (IL-4)
levels were detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and the 
mRNA levels of both T-bet and GATA-3 were detected using reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). IFN-<U+03B3> levels in the lymphocytes of asthmatic 
patients were lower than those of the control group (P<0.05) and were positively 
correlated with the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3. By contrast, IL-4 levels were
significantly higher in asthmatic patients than in the control group (P<0.01) and
were negatively correlated with the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3. In conclusion, the
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 can be used as an objective indicator of immune imbalance
in patients with allergic asthma.

PMID: 21468546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Roum Arch Microbiol Immunol. 2010 Oct-Dec;69(4):190-6.

Plasticity of regulatory T cells under cytokine pressure.

Diaconu CC(1), Neagu AI, Lungu R, Tardei G, Alexiu I, Bleotu C, Economescu MC,
Bumbacea RS, Pele I, Bumbacea D.

Author information: 
(1)Antiviral Therapy Department, Stefan S. Nicolau Institute of Virology,
Bucharest, Romania. ccdiaconu@yahoo.com

CD4+ T helper (Th) cells have been divided into different subsets as defined by
their cytokine products and functions after their activation. CD4+ T cell subsets
are continuously discovered and until now Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, and regulatory T
(Treg) cells have been almost unanimously recognized but yet not completely
characterized. The selective production of cytokines by each of the subsets is
probably the master key of the mechanisms of immune regulation. The cytokine
milieu is extremely important on deciding the fate of T cells. Generally, more
than one cytokine is needed for differentiating to a particular lineage and just 
recently it was shown that this status quo of commitment could be challenged. It 
is well known that cytokines bind to Type I/II cytokine receptors signaling via
Janus kinases (JAKs) followed by activation of Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription (STAT). STAT molecules work together with other transcription
factors (Foxp3, RORgammat and RORalpha, T-bet, GATA3, Runx 1, NFAT, etc.) also
controlled by cytokines, in modulating the Th phenotype and functions. In this
review, we analyze the plasticity of Treg population focusing on the most recent 
discoveries on how microenvironmental cytokines refine/modify Treg phenotype and 
function, thus changing their fate.

PMID: 21462833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011 Jun;13(6):611-8. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfr014. Epub 2011 Mar
19.

Expression of functional T-cell markers and T-cell receptor Vbeta repertoire in
endomyocardial biopsies from patients presenting with acute myocarditis and
dilated cardiomyopathy.

Noutsias M(1), Rohde M, Göldner K, Block A, Blunert K, Hemaidan L, Hummel M,
Blohm JH, Lassner D, Kühl U, Schultheiss HP, Volk HD, Kotsch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Pneumonology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Germany. michel.noutsias@staff.uni-marburg.de

AIMS: To quantify and functionally characterize the intramyocardial T-cells in
endomyocardial biopsies (EMBs) from patients presenting with acute myocarditis
(AMC) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of genes characterizing Th1 [interferon (IFN)<U+03B3>,
Tbet-1, Eomesodermin, interleukin (IL)-27], Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, GATA3), Th17
(IL-17), regulatory [regulatory T-cells (Treg); FoxP3, TGFß, IL-10], anergic
(GRAIL), and cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs: Perforin, Granulysin, Granzyme A), as well 
as of functional T-cell receptor Vbeta (TRBV) families were investigated in EMBs 
from AMC patients (n= 58) and DCM patients (n= 34) by pre-amplified real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These data were compared with
EMBs from n= 19 controls. Expression of CD3d, CD3z, and TRBC (T-cell receptor
beta constant region) were associated with the immunohistological diagnosis of
inflammatory cardiomyopathy (DCMi). In EMBs from DCM patients with increased CD3d
expression, significantly increased markers of Th1 (IFN<U+03B3>, T-bet, Eomesodermin),
regulatory T-cells (Treg; FoxP3, TGFß), and cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs: Perforin,
Granulysin, Granzyme A) were present, while no differential polarization of
T-cells was found in EMBs form AMC patients. A differential dominance of distinct
functional TRBV families was associated with different cardiotropic viruses: TRBV
11 and 24 with Parvovirus B19; TRBV4, 10 and 28 with human herpes virus type 6;
and TRBV14 for Coxsackie virus, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The T-cell infiltrates in human DCMi are characterized by
differential expression of functional T-cell markers indicating Th1, Treg, and
CTLs, while no major role could be confirmed for Th17. The virus-associated
differential TRBV dominance suggests an antiviral specificity of virus-induced
T-cell responses in human DCMi.

PMID: 21422001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1373-85. doi: 10.1172/JCI42579. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

The Notch ligand Jagged2 promotes lung adenocarcinoma metastasis through a
miR-200-dependent pathway in mice.

Yang Y(1), Ahn YH, Gibbons DL, Zang Y, Lin W, Thilaganathan N, Alvarez CA,
Moreira DC, Creighton CJ, Gregory PA, Goodall GJ, Kurie JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epithelial tumor cells transit to a mesenchymal state in response to
extracellular cues, in a process known as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). The precise nature of these cues has not been fully defined, an important 
issue given that EMT is an early event in tumor metastasis. Here, we have found
that a population of metastasis-prone mouse lung adenocarcinoma cells expresses
Notch and Notch ligands and that the Notch ligand Jagged2 promotes metastasis.
Mechanistically, Jagged2 was found to promote metastasis by increasing the
expression of GATA-binding (Gata) factors, which suppressed expression of the
microRNA-200 (miR-200) family of microRNAs that target the transcriptional
repressors that drive EMT and thereby induced EMT. Reciprocally, miR-200
inhibited expression of Gata3, which reversed EMT and abrogated metastasis,
suggesting that Gata3 and miR-200 are mutually inhibitory and have opposing
effects on EMT and metastasis. Consistent with this, high levels of Gata3
expression correlated with EMT in primary tumors from 2 cohorts of lung
adenocarcinoma patients. These findings reveal what we believe to be a novel
Jagged2/miR-200-dependent pathway that mediates lung adenocarcinoma EMT and
metastasis in mice and may have implications for the treatment of human
epithelial tumors.

PMCID: PMC3069760
PMID: 21403400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Histopathology. 2011 Apr;58(5):766-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03796.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 14.

High-level expression of forkhead-box protein A1 in metastatic prostate cancer.

Jain RK(1), Mehta RJ, Nakshatri H, Idrees MT, Badve SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

AIMS: Expression of forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1), a transcription factor
important for normal development of the prostate gland, is thought to be
controlled by steroid hormones and GATA3. The aim of this study was to
investigate the expression and potential role of FOXA1 and GATA3 transcription
factors as prognostic factors in prostate cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of FOXA1, GATA3 and androgen receptor (AR) was
retrospectively analysed by immunohistochemistry in a series of 80 primary
tumours and 28 metastatic prostate cancers, including 15 matched paired samples. 
Nuclear AR expression did not significantly differ between primary and metastatic
tumours. High-level nuclear FOXA1 expression was seen in 19% of primary and 89%
of metastatic tumours (P < 0.0001). FOXA1 expression correlated positively with
tumour size, extraprostatic extension, angiolymphatic invasion, AR and lymph node
metastases at diagnosis, but did not correlate with age, T stage, Gleason score, 
presence of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia or multifocality, seminal vesicle
or perineural invasion, or surgical excision margin status. Expression of GATA3
was not seen in either normal epithelium or tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary analyses suggest that high-level FOXA1 expression is
associated with the development of metastatic prostate cancer. If these data are 
confirmed, FOXA1 expression could be used to classify patients at higher risk for
metastases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21401706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Jul;26(7):1167-70. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-1835-8. Epub
2011 Mar 12.

Novel DNA mutation in the GATA3 gene in an Emirati boy with HDR syndrome and
hypomagnesemia.

Al-Shibli A(1), Al Attrach I, Willems PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, P.O. Box 15258, Al-Ain, United Arab 
Emirates. ashibli@tawamhospital.ae

We report the case of a young Emirati boy with HDR (Hypoparathyroidism,
sensorineural Deafness, and Renal hypoplasia) syndrome due to the novel
heterozygous deletion of two nucleotides (c.35_36delGC ) in exon 2 of the GATA3
gene. The patient developed hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia at 3 weeks of age
with high fractional excretion of magnesium, indicating renal magnesium loss.
This is the first published report of hypomagnesemia in association with HDR
syndrome.

PMID: 21399899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Cancer Cell. 2011 Mar 8;19(3):333-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.037.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 conditions human dendritic cells to prime inflammatory
T(H)2 cells via an IL-12- and OX40L-dependent pathway.

Godefroy E(1), Manches O, Dréno B, Hochman T, Rolnitzky L, Labarrière N, Guilloux
Y, Goldberg J, Jotereau F, Bhardwaj N.

Author information: 
(1)New York University Langone Medical Center, Cancer Institute, New York, NY,
USA.

Comment in
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Jul;3(7):821-3.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) is a proteolytic enzyme degrading the
extracellular matrix and overexpressed by many tumors. Here, we documented the
presence of MMP-2-specific CD4(+) T cells in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) from melanoma patients. Strikingly, MMP-2-specific CD4(+) T cells
displayed an inflammatory T(H)2 profile, i.e., mainly secreting TNF-a, IL-4, and 
IL-13 and expressing GATA-3. Furthermore, MMP-2-conditioned dendritic cells (DCs)
primed naïve CD4(+) T cells to differentiate into an inflammatory T(H)2 phenotype
through OX40L expression and inhibition of IL-12p70 production. MMP-2 degrades
the type I IFN receptor, thereby preventing STAT1 phosphorylation, which is
necessary for IL-12p35 production. Active MMP-2, therefore, acts as an endogenous
type 2 "conditioner" and may play a role in the observed prevalence of
detrimental type 2 responses in melanoma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073826
PMID: 21397857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Clin Periodontol. 2011 Jun;38(6):509-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-051X.2011.01712.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 11.

Effect of non-surgical periodontal therapy on the levels of Th17/Th1/Th2
cytokines and their transcription factors in Chinese chronic periodontitis
patients.

Zhao L(1), Zhou Y, Xu Y, Sun Y, Li L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

AIM: A new subset of CD4(+) T cells, Th17, has been recently discovered
independent from Th1/Th2 paradigm. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of non-surgical periodontal therapy on the expression of Th17/Th1/Th2
cytokines and transcription factors, and Th17 cell vibration in Chinese chronic
periodontitis patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The levels of Th17/Th1/Th2 cytokines (IL-17,
IL-21/IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4) in gingival crevicular fluid from 30 chronic periodontitis
patients before and after treatment were determined by ELISA. The expression of
transcription factors (RORC, T-bet and GATA-3) in peripheral blood was measured
by real-time PCR, and the levels of Th17 cells in CD4(+) T cells were determined 
by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After treatment, the levels of IL-17 and IL-21 were down-regulated
(P<0.05), and IL-4 was increased (P<0.05), but there were no differences in the
level of IFN-<U+03B3> (P>0.05). Correspondingly, the expression of RORC was decreased
1.99-fold (P<0.05), and GATA-3 was increased 1.76-fold (P<0.05). However, there
were no differences in the level of T-bet (P>0.05). Moreover, the quantity of
Th17 cells in peripheral blood was decreased (P<0.05), especially IL-17(+)
IFN-<U+03B3>(+) subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Th17 cells play a destructive role in the
immune balance of periodontitis, and the effect of Th1 cells is not significant, 
while Th2 cells have a protective effect.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21392046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(9):1894-904. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05065-11. Epub 2011 Mar 
7.

An NK and T cell enhancer lies 280 kilobase pairs 3' to the gata3 structural
gene.

Hosoya-Ohmura S(1), Lin YH, Herrmann M, Kuroha T, Rao A, Moriguchi T, Lim KC,
Hosoya T, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 3071 BSRB, 109 Zina Pitcher
Place, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48103, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-3 is vital for multiple stages of T cell and natural
killer (NK) cell development, and yet the factors that directly regulate Gata3
transcription during hematopoiesis are only marginally defined. Here, we show
that neither of the Gata3 promoters, previously implicated in its tissue-specific
regulation, is alone capable of directing Gata3 transcription in T lymphocytes.
In contrast, by surveying large swaths of DNA surrounding the Gata3 locus, we
located a cis element that can recapitulate aspects of the Gata3-dependent T cell
regulatory program in vivo. This element, located 280 kbp 3' to the structural
gene, directs both T cell- and NK cell-specific transcription in vivo but harbors
no other tissue activity. This novel, distant element regulates multiple major
developmental stages that require GATA-3 activity.

PMCID: PMC3133233
PMID: 21383068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Apr 15;207(4):262-70. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.01.003. Epub
2011 Mar 4.

Immunopathological characteristics of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
caused by Mycobacterium parascrofulaceum infection in a patient with AIDS.

Hibiya K(1), Tateyama M, Teruya H, Nakamura H, Tasato D, Kazumi Y, Hirayasu T,
Tamaki Y, Haranaga S, Higa F, Maeda S, Fujita J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Respiratory, and Digestive Medicine, Control and
Prevention of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of the
Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan. kenjihibiya@gmail.com

Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) caused by mycobacterium in
patients with AIDS is often experienced in clinical practice. There is, however, 
a paucity of data documenting the histopathological findings and the
pathogenesis. We determined the immunopathological characteristics of IRIS
associated with Mycobacterium parascrofulaceum infection in an AIDS patient. A
patient presented with pulmonary lymphadenitis and involvement of the pulmonary
lingular segment. Portions of the involved lymph nodes and lung were excised, and
the immunological properties were analyzed by immunohistochemical assays. The
histological characteristics of lymph nodes showed a caseous necrosis.
Histopathologically, the pulmonary lesion was composed of exudative and
proliferative lesions. CD4(+), CD8(+), CD57(+), and CD25(+)/FoxP3(+) cells were
observed in both types of lesions. Clusters of CD20(+) cells and GATA3(+) cells
were predominantly observed in exudative lesions, while T-bet(+) cells were
dominant in proliferative lesions. ROR-<U+03B3>(+) cells were also observed in exudative
lesions. These results indicate that the cellular immunity to mycobacteria was
recovering in the lung tissue. In M. parascrofulaceum pulmonary infection, the
exudative lesion had characteristics of Th2 and Th17-type immunities. In
contrast, the proliferative lesion had characteristics of Th-1 type immunity. Our
data provide the first evidence to reveal the status of the axis of distinctive
immunity in the process of granuloma formation caused by a mycobacterium-related 
infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21377277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Neuroimmunol. 2011 Apr;233(1-2):249-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.01.012.
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

RORC and Foxp3 axis in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with neuro-Behçet's
disease.

Hamzaoui K(1), Borhani Haghighi A, Ghorbel IB, Houman H.

Author information: 
(1)Tunis El Manar University, Medicine Faculty of Tunis, Homeostasis and Cell
Dysfunction Unit Research UR/99/08-40, Tunisia. kamel.hamzaoui@gmail.com

Neurological manifestations are present in 5% to 30% of patients with Behçet's
disease (BD). Neuro-Behçet's Disease (NBD) is hypothetically caused by T helper
(Th) cells, which development is dependent on the expression of lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) mRNA expression of TBX21, GATA3,
RORC, FOXP3 and EBI3 were assessed in 18 NBD patients and 26 controls disease [16
noninflammatory neurological disease (NIND) and 10 headache attributed to
Behçet's disease (HaBD)]. Expression of TBX21 (Th1), RORC (Th17) and Foxp3 (Treg)
were increased in NBD patients compared to HaBD and NIND patients. EBI3 and
Th2-associated GATA3 expressions were found to be decreased (P<0.0001 and
P<0.0001) in NBD patients. Analysis of transcription factor ratios, revealed an
increase in the RORC/FOXP3 and TBX21/GATA3 ratios in NBD patients (P<0.0001;
P<0.0003). Our findings indicate that both Th1 and Th17 mRNA expressions
involving a possible impairment of Treg cells. This might play a role in CSF-NBD 
inflammation, permitting activation of harmful T cell subpopulations. The
TBX21/GATA3 and RORC/FOXP3 ratios dysregulations in NBD are consistent with those
reported in other inflammatory diseases and indicating the plasticity existing
between Th1, Th17 and Treg cells during inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21367463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):197-201.

[Conventional dose of prednisone regulates Th-associated gene expression in de
novo ITP patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Wu BT, Wang WG, Zhan YX, Zou SH, Cheng YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200031, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the T cell (helper T cells) immune status in 
ITP patients and its relation with therapeutic response. 20 de novo ITP patients 
were enrolled (8 males, 12 females) with a median age of 41 (20 to 81). Real-time
RT-PCR method was used to measure the gene expression of Th cells including
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, GATA-3, TGF-ß, Foxp3, IL-2, IL-4 in PBMNC of ITP patients before
and after conventional dose of prednisone therapy [1 mg/(kg·d)] and in PBMNC of
20 normal controls. The results showed that T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-2 were
significantly over-expressed in PBMNC of ITP patients before treatment compared
with that in normal controls (p < 0.01), and compared with that before treatment,
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-2 were markedly down-regulated in ITP patients after
treatment. Before treatment, the expressions of Foxp3, TGF-ß, GATA3 and IL-4 in
ITP patients did not show difference from normal controls, while after treatment 
Foxp3 were more up-regulated than that before treatment (p < 0.05). After
treatment, TGF-ß expression showed a different pattern between old and young
patients. TGF-ß expression was down-regulated (p < 0.05) among ITP patients
younger than 60, while up-regulated in older patients. It is concluded that there
is an imbalance of Th1/Th2/Treg cytokines in ITP patients, which can be reversed 
by glucocorticoid treatment. The conventional dose of glucocorticoid may be
regarded as effective therapy for de novo ITP patients, it may correlate with
improvement of imbalance between Th1/The2/Treg cytokines.

PMID: 21362251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):184-8.

[Role of cytokines and gene expression characteristics in cultured lymphocytes ex
vivo for adoptive immunotherapy].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang GL(1), Tao XY, Liu ZL, Liu Y, Wang Z, Liu HX, Cai P, Bu DF, Guo XL, Zhu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

Different cytokines are needed in the course of culturing cells to do adoptive
immunotherapy. This study was aimed to investigate the differentiation directions
of lymphocytes and related gene expression characteristics after combined
stimulation of lymphocytes by different cytokines or EBV antigen peptide combined
with cytokines. The experiment was divided into 4 groups. The levels of total T
lymphocytes (CD3(+)), T helper lymphocytes (CD3(+)CD4(+)), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CD3(+)CD8(+)), memory T cells (CD3(+)CD8(+)CD45RO(+)), naive T cells
(CD3(+)CD8(+)CD45RA(+)), Th2 cells (CD3(+)CD30(+)), B cells (CD19(+)), NK cells
(CD56(+)), naive T regulatory cells (CD4(+)CD25(+)), precise T regulatory cells
(CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+)) were detected by flow cytometry. The expression levels of
house-keeping gene (mad1, pten), T helper cells transcriptional regulatory gene
t-bet (Th1), gata3 (Th2), cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>(Th1), IL-4(Th2) were detected by using
RT-PCR. The results showed that CTL in EBV polypeptide group were dominant cells 
with certain clinical effects. Comparison of result of EBV polypeptide group with
other 3 different cytokine stimulating groups demonstrated that EBV antigen
peptide had much more effects on stimulating CTL generation. The expression of
IFN-<U+03B3> gene was significantly increased; the T helper differentiation-related gene
t-bet, gata3 also increased evidently, while expression change of house-keeping
gene mad1 and pten were not evident. Addition of different cytokines and antigen 
peptides in culture may be much more effective on stimulating CTL generation. It 
is concluded that specific CTL can be obtained by using the lymphocytes
co-cultured with EBV and cytokines, and the different cytokines play different
roles in cell differentiation.

PMID: 21362248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Immunol. 2011 Apr 1;186(7):3892-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003505. Epub 2011 Feb
25.

Regulation of GATA-3 expression during CD4 lineage differentiation.

Gimferrer I(1), Hu T, Simmons A, Wang C, Souabni A, Busslinger M, Bender TP,
Hernandez-Hoyos G, Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

GATA-3 is necessary for the development of MHC class II-restricted CD4 T cells,
and its expression is increased during positive selection of these cells. TCR
signals drive this upregulation, but the signaling pathways that control this
process are not well understood. Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we
show that GATA-3 upregulation during thymocyte-positive selection is the result
of additive inputs from the Ras/MAPK and calcineurin pathways. This upregulation 
requires the presence of the transcription factor c-Myb. Furthermore, we show
that TH-POK can also upregulate GATA-3 in double-positive thymocytes, suggesting 
the existence of a positive feedback loop that contributes to lock in the initial
commitment to the CD4 lineage during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3074202
PMID: 21357543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Brain. 2011 Mar;134(Pt 3):693-703. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr010.

Tyrosine kinase 2 variant influences T lymphocyte polarization and multiple
sclerosis susceptibility.

Couturier N(1), Bucciarelli F, Nurtdinov RN, Debouverie M, Lebrun-Frenay C, Defer
G, Moreau T, Confavreux C, Vukusic S, Cournu-Rebeix I, Goertsches RH, Zettl UK,
Comabella M, Montalban X, Rieckmann P, Weber F, Müller-Myhsok B, Edan G, Fontaine
B, Mars LT, Saoudi A, Oksenberg JR, Clanet M, Liblau RS, Brassat D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U563 and Pôle des neurosciences, University of Toulouse 3, 31000
Toulouse, France.

The tyrosine kinase 2 variant rs34536443 has been established as a genetic risk
factor for multiple sclerosis in a variety of populations. However, the
functional effect of this variant on disease pathogenesis remains unclear. This
study replicated the genetic association of tyrosine kinase 2 with multiple
sclerosis in a cohort of 1366 French patients and 1802 controls. Furthermore, we 
assessed the functional consequences of this polymorphism on human T lymphocytes 
by comparing the reactivity and cytokine profile of T lymphocytes isolated from
individuals expressing the protective TYK2(GC) genotype with the
disease-associated TYK2(GG) genotype. Our results demonstrate that the protective
C allele infers decreased tyrosine kinase 2 activity, and this reduction of
activity is associated with a shift in the cytokine profile favouring the
secretion of Th2 cytokines. These findings suggest that the rs34536443 variant
effect on multiple sclerosis susceptibility might be mediated by deviating T
lymphocyte differentiation toward a Th2 phenotype. This impact of tyrosine kinase
2 on effector differentiation is likely to be of wider importance because other
autoimmune diseases also have been associated with polymorphisms within tyrosine 
kinase 2. The modulation of tyrosine kinase 2 activity might therefore represent 
a new therapeutic approach for the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 21354972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Immunol Lett. 2011 Jun 30;137(1-2):70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.02.020. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

Oxygen tension regulates NK cells differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells
in vitro.

Yun S(1), Lee SH, Yoon SR, Myung PK, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells are differentiated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
which are located at the lowest end of an oxygen gradient within the bone marrow 
(BM). In this report, we investigated whether oxygen tension could affect NK cell
differentiation from hematopoietic cells in vitro. We found that hypoxia led to
an inhibition of differentiation in NK cells, and increased oxygen supply
alleviated this inhibition and restored NK cell differentiation under hypoxic
condition. Hypoxia-treated cells demonstrated reduced mRNA expression of
transcription factors (TFs) that have important roles in NK cell differentiation,
such as EOMES, T-bet, GATA-3 and ETS-1. Moreover, hypoxia-pretreated cells
recovered mRNA expression of TFs when the oxygen tension was changed to normoxia.
Our findings suggest that oxygen tension modulates in vitro differentiation of NK
cells through the regulation of TF expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Neurochem Int. 2011 Sep;59(3):413-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.02.016. Epub
2011 Feb 22.

Midbrain and forebrain patterning delivers immunocytochemically and functionally 
similar populations of neuropeptide Y containing GABAergic neurons.

Khaira SK(1), Nefzger CM, Beh SJ, Pouton CW, Haynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University (Parkville
Campus), Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Neurons differentiated in vitro from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have the
potential to serve both as models of disease states and in drug discovery
programs. In this study, we use sonic hedgehog (SHH) and fibroblast growth factor
8 (FGF-8) to enrich for forebrain and midbrain phenotypes from mouse ESCs. We
then investigate, using Ca(2+) imaging and [(3)H]-GABA release studies, whether
the GABAergic neurons produced exhibit distinct functional phenotypes. At day 24 
of differentiation, reverse transcriptase-PCR showed the presence of both
forebrain (Bf-1, Hesx1, Pgc-1a, Six3) and midbrain (GATA2, GATA3) selective mRNA 
markers in developing forebrain-enriched cultures. All markers were present in
midbrain cultures except for Bf-1 and Pgc-1a. Irrespective of culture conditions 
all GABA immunoreactive neurons were also immunoreactive to neuropeptide Y (NPY) 
antibodies. Forebrain and midbrain GABAergic neurons responded to ATP (1 mM),
L-glutamate (30 µM), noradrenaline (30 µM), acetylcholine (30 µM) and dopamine
(30 µM), with similar elevations of intracellular Ca(2+)([Ca(2+)](i)). The
presence of GABA(A) and GABA(B) antagonists, bicuculline (30 µM) and CGP55845 (1 
µM), increased the elevation of [Ca(2+)](i) in response to dopamine (30 µM) in
midbrain, but not forebrain GABAergic neurons. All agonists, except dopamine,
elicited similar [(3)H]-GABA release from forebrain and midbrain cultures.
Dopamine (30 µM) did not stimulate significant [(3)H]-GABA release in midbrain
cultures, although it was effective in forebrain cultures. This study shows that 
differentiating neurons toward a midbrain fate restricts the expression of
forebrain markers. Forebrain differentiation results in the expression of
forebrain and midbrain markers. All GABA(+) neurons contain NPY, and show similar
agonist-induced elevations of [Ca(2+)](i) and [(3)H]-GABA release. This study
indicates that the pharmacological phenotype of these particular neurons may be
independent of the addition of the patterning factors that direct neurons toward 
forebrain and midbrain fates.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Dev Neurobiol. 2011 Jul;71(7):650-61. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20881.

Effects of retinoic acid and butyric acid on the expression of prestin and Gata-3
in organotypic cultures of the organ of corti of newborn rats.

Gross J(1), Stute K, Fuchs J, Angerstein M, Amarjargal N, Mazurek B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Molecular Biology Research Laboratory,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Germany.
johann.gross@charite.de

Prestin is the motor protein of the outer hair cells of the organ of Corti and a 
key factor in ensuring a high level of sensitivity of mammalian hearing. The
factors that influence prestin expression are still largely unknown. We studied
the effects of the application of retinoic acid, a ligand of a nuclear receptor, 
and of butyric acid, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase activity, on the
expression of mRNA of prestin and Gata-3 in the organotypic culture of the organ 
of Corti of newborn rats using RT-PCR. Application of retinoic acid at
concentrations of 1-50 µM results in a dose-dependent expression decrease after
two days in culture. Treatment with sodium butyrate (0.5-2 mM) elevated the
expression of prestin and Gata-3. Statistically significant correlations between 
Gata-3 and prestin mRNA levels were observed under all conditions. The data
indicate that retinoid nuclear transcription factors, GATA-3 and histone
acetylation/deacetylation processes may have a regulatory role to play in prestin
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21344672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Mar;41(3):568-74. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041098. Epub 2011 Feb
10.

The enigma of CD4-lineage specification.

Xiong Y(1), Bosselut R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research (CCR), NCI, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4259, USA.

CD4(+) T cells are essential for defenses against pathogens and affect the
functions of most cells involved in the immune response. Although CD4(+) T cells 
generally recognize peptide antigens bound to MHC-II molecules, important subsets
are restricted by other MHC or MHC-like molecules, including CD1d-restricted
"invariant" iNK T cells. This review discusses recently identified nodes in the
transcriptional circuits that are involved in controlling CD4(+) T-cell
differentiation, notably the commitment factor Thpok and its interplay with Runx 
transcriptional regulators, and focuses on how transcription factors acting
upstream of Thpok, including Gata3, Tox and E-box proteins, promote the emergence
of CD4-lineage-specific gene expression patterns.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3388806
PMID: 21341258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Hum Pathol. 2011 Aug;42(8):1149-58. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.11.011. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

Plasmacytoid urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder: clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular analysis of a case series.

Raspollini MR(1), Sardi I, Giunti L, Di Lollo S, Baroni G, Stomaci N, Menghetti
I, Franchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Histology and Molecular Diagnostics, University Hospital Careggi, 
Viale G.B. Morgagni, Florence, Italy 50134. mariarosaria.raspollini@unifi.it

A plasmacytoid variant of urothelial carcinoma has been recently recognized in
the World Health Organization classification system. This is characterized by a
discohesive growth of plasmacytoid cells with eccentric nuclei, extending in the 
bladder wall and often in the perivesical adipose tissue. Herein, we report the
clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular features
of a series of plasmacytoid urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Four
bladder carcinomas characterized by epithelial cells with morphologic appearance 
resembling plasma cells were evaluated at the immunohistochemical, electron
microscopic, and molecular genetic levels. Tumor cells stained with cytokeratins,
epithelial membrane antigen, GATA-3 (endothelial transcription factor 3), CD15,
p53, and p16. In addition, malignant cells strongly stained with CD138 in all the
cases, whereas leukocyte common antigen and multiple myeloma 1/interferon
regulatory factor 4 were completely negative, nor immunoreactivity was seen for
either <U+03BA> or <U+03BB> light chains. The electron microscopic examination showed the
presence of divergent squamous and glandular differentiation. At variance with
conventional urothelial carcinoma, the analysis of exons 4-9 of TP53 gene
revealed no alteration in all the 4 tumors tested, and this can be of value in
choosing additional chemotherapy after surgery. Plasmacytoid carcinoma of the
bladder is a tumor entity, which can be characterized by specific
immunohistochemical markers, including positivity for GATA-3, and presents
phenotypic and genotypic peculiarities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Malays J Pathol. 2010 Dec;32(2):117-22.

Expression and mutational analysis of GATA3 in Malaysian breast carcinomas.

Bong PN(1), Zakaria Z, Muhammad R, Abdullah N, Ibrahim N, Emran NA, Syed Hussain 
SN.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Unit, Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Medical Research,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. ivyna@imr.gov.my

The GATA3 gene is a potential tumour marker and putative tumour suppressor gene
in breast cancer. Its expression is associated with better prognosis and disease 
free survival in breast cancer patients. We aimed to evaluate GATA3 transcriptome
expression and mutation in breast carcinomas and correlate its expression with
oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), lymph node (LN) status,
tumour grade and c-erbB-2 expression. Twenty-two breast infiltrating ductal
carcinomas and paired normal tissues were used in Branch DNA assay to detect
GATA3 mRNA expression. Normalized data for GATA3 mRNA expression were grouped
according to the ER, PR and LN status, tumour grade and c-erbB-2 expression of
the tumours. Statistical significance was tested using t-test and ANOVA at 95%
confidence interval level. Mutational analysis of GATA3 was performed by direct
sequencing of the coding regions of GATA3 mRNA. Our findings showed that GATA3
gene were over-expressed and under-expressed by > 2 fold change in 12 and 4
tested samples, respectively. Eighty per cent of ER positive breast carcinomas
were GATA3 positive. There was a statistically significant correlation between
GATA3 expression and ER at 95% confidence interval level between the study
groups. On the contrary, GATA3 expression was not statistically significant with 
PR, LN, tumour grade and c-erbB-2 expression in our study. In addition, we
observed that there was no mutation in mRNA coding region in 16 breast carcinomas
that showed GATA3 differential gene expression. Our preliminary results suggested
that GATA3 is linked to the ER. This scenario suggests that GATA3 may play a
crucial role in oestrogen receptor positive breast cancer patients. Whether GATA3
expression is involved in regulating tumour cell growth in oestrogen responsive
breast cancer is a key question that remains to be answered.

PMID: 21329183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;89(5):640-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.144. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Chromatin remodeling resets the immune system to protect against autoimmune
diabetes in mice.

Patel T(1), Patel V, Singh R, Jayaraman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Epigenetic alteration of the genome has been shown to provide palliative effects 
in mouse models of certain human autoimmune diseases. We have investigated
whether chromatin remodeling could provide protection against autoimmune diabetes
in NOD mice. Treatment of female mice during the transition from prediabetic to
diabetic stage (18-24 weeks of age) with the well-characterized histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A effectively reduced the incidence of
diabetes. However, similar treatment of overtly diabetic mice during the same
time period failed to reverse the disease. Protection against diabetes was
accompanied by histone hyperacetylation in pancreas and spleen, enhanced
frequency of CD4(+) CD62L(+) cells in the spleen, reduction in cellular
infiltration of islets, restoration of normoglycemia and glucose-induced insulin 
release by beta cells. Activation of splenic T lymphocytes derived from protected
mice in vitro with pharmacological agents that bypass the antigen receptor or
immobilized anti-CD3 antibody resulted in enhanced expression of Ifng mRNA and
protein without altering the expression of Il4, Il17, Il18, Inos and Tnfa genes
nor the secretion of IL-2, IL-4, IL-17 and TNF-a proteins. Consistently,
expression of the transcription factor involved in Ifng transcription, Tbet/Tbx21
but not Gata3 and Rorgt, respectively, required for the transcription of Il4 and 
Il17, was upregulated in activated splenocytes of protected mice. These results
indicate that chromatin remodeling can lead to amelioration of diabetes by using 
multiple mechanisms including differential gene transcription. Thus, epigenetic
modulation could be a novel therapeutic approach to block the transition from
benign to frank diabetes.

PMID: 21321581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Jun;164(6):1228-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10240.x.
Epub 2011 May 17.

Influence of the Notch system in the therapeutic response of American tegumentary
leishmaniasis.

Rodrigues KM(1), Oliveira MP, Maretti-Mira AC, Oliveira-Neto MP, Mattos MS, Silva
L, Soares DA, Dolci EL, Perico RA, Pirmez C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Pesquisas Médicas, and Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Av. Brasil 4365, 21045-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The evolution and therapeutic outcome of American tegumentary
leishmaniasis (ATL) depend upon many factors, including the balance between Th1
and Th2 cytokines to control parasite multiplication and lesion extension. Other 
cytokines known for their role in inflammatory processes such as interleukin
IL-17 or IL-18 as well as factors controlling keratinocyte differentiation and
the inflammatory process in the skin, like the Notch system, could also be
involved in the disease outcome. Notch receptors are a group of transmembrane
proteins that regulate cell fate decisions during development and adulthood in
many tissues, including keratinocyte differentiation and T-cell lineage
commitment, depending on their activation by specific groups of ligands
(Delta-like or Jagged).
OBJECTIVES: To compare the in situ expression of Notch system proteins
(receptors, ligands and transcriptional factors) and cytokines possibly involved 
in the disease outcome (IL-17, IL-18, IL-23 and transforming growth factor-ß) in 
ATL cutaneous and mucosal lesions, according to the response to therapy with
N-methyl glucamine.
METHODS: Cutaneous and mucosal biopsies obtained from patients prior to therapy
with N-methyl glucamine were analysed by immunohistochemistry and real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Notch receptors and Delta-like ligands were found increased in patients 
with ATL, particularly those with poor response to therapy or with mucosal
lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: The increase of Notch receptors and Delta-like ligands in patients
with a poor response to treatment suggests that these patients would require a
more aggressive therapeutic approach or at least a more thorough and rigorous
follow-up.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21299543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Feb;22(2):246-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050471.

Predominance of intraglomerular T-bet or GATA3 may determine mechanism of
transplant rejection.

Sun Q(1), Cheng D, Zhang M, He Q, Chen Z, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, 305 East Zhong Shan Road, 
Nanjing 210002, China.

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 determine the differentiation of helper
T cells into Th1 or Th2 cells, respectively. An altered ratio of their relative
expression promotes the pathogenesis of certain immunological diseases, but
whether this may also contribute to the pathogenesis of antibody-mediated
rejection (ABMR) versus T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR) is unknown. Here, we
characterized the intragraft expression of T-bet and GATA3 and determined the
correlation of their levels with the presence of typical lesions of ABMR and
TCMR. We found a predominant intraglomerular expression of T-bet in patients with
ABMR, which was distinct from that in patients with TCMR. In ABMR, interstitial
T-bet expression was typically located in peritubular capillaries, although the
overall quantity of interstitial T-bet was less than that observed in TCMR. The
expression of intraglomerular T-bet correlated with infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+
lymphocytes, which express T-bet, as well as intraglomerular CD68+
monocyte/macrophages, which do not express T-bet. The predominance of
intraglomerular T-bet expression relative to GATA3 expression associated with
poor response to treatment with bolus steroid. In summary, predominance of
intraglomerular T-bet expression correlates with antibody-mediated rejection and 
resistance to steroid treatment.

PMCID: PMC3029897
PMID: 21289214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Jun;73(6):536-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02526.x.

Glucosamine improved atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions in NC/Nga mice by
inhibition of Th2 cell development.

Kim CH(1), Cheong KA, Park CD, Lee AY.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Science Research Center, Dongguk University Research Institute of
Biotechnology, Goyang, South Korea.

Dysregulated Th subset responses, characterized by Th2-dominant allergic
inflammation, are thought to be central to the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
(AD). Glucosamine has been shown to have immunosuppressive properties, but its
effect on AD has not been examined. In this study, the immunoregulatory effects
of glucosamine, using dermatophagoides farinae (Df)-induced AD-like skin lesions 
in NC/Nga mice, were investigated. The clinical scores were reduced significantly
by the treatment with glucosamine at 10 and 20 mg/day. Histological analysis of
the skin also revealed that treatment of glucosamine at 10 and 20 mg/day
significantly reduced the inflammatory cellular infiltrate, including mast cells 
and eosinophils. The levels of serum IgE and Th2 cytokines in spleen cells were
reduced, whereas no significant change was detected in IFN-<U+03B3>, a Th1 cytokine. To 
determine the mechanism associated with inhibition of the Th2 immune response,
the effects of glucosamine on the selective differentiation pathway of the Th
subset in vitro was examined in NC/Nga mice. The results showed that glucosamine 
suppressed the differentiation of naïve CD4(+) T cells to Th2 cells in vitro. On 
the basis of in vivo and in vitro results of the NC/Nga mice, the
immunobiological effects of glucosamine on peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from patients with AD were examined. The production of Th2 cytokines, such as
IL-4 and IL-5, was significantly decreased after in vitro administration of
glucosamine, which suggest that glucosamine might be a useful immunomodulatory
agent for the treatment of human AD.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21284687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Feb;127(2):351-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2010.11.033.

Altered T-cell receptor signaling in the pathogenesis of allergic disease.

Datta S(1), Milner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Mounting evidence from animal models has demonstrated that alterations in T-cell 
receptor (TCR) signaling alone can lead to dramatically skewed differentiation of
naive T cells into T(H)2 cells, to T(H)2 effector functions, and to T(H)2-related
diseases. There is significant potential relevance of these observations to human
disease. Specifically, a number of immunodeficiencies associated with atopic
disease might have atopy as a manifestation because of aberrant TCR signaling. It
is therefore important to attempt to identify a role for defects in TCR signaling
in the pathogenesis of common atopic diseases.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3050552
PMID: 21281865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Jul;50(7):1201-5. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq439.
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

Copy number variations of Interleukin-12B and T-bet are associated with systemic 
lupus erythematosus.

Yu B(1), Shao Y, Yue X, Zhang J, Guan M, Wan J, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Translational Medicine of Dermatology,
Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Department of Dermatology, Shenzhen Hospital
Peking University, Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical
Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong.

OBJECTIVES: Th1 cells have been implicated as the causal agents in the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity. SLE represents the classical prototype of systemic 
autoimmune disease. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been discovered to have
phenotypic consequences and associate with various types of diseases. The current
study aims to explore a possible association between CNVs of Th1 cell-related
genes and the risk of SLE.
METHODS: Genomic DNA and RNA from 532 SLE patients and 576 healthy controls were 
extracted. CNVs of Th1 cell-related genes (T-bet, Stat4, IL-12A, IL-12B, IFN-<U+03B3>,
IP-10 and CXCR3) as well as Th2 and Treg cell-related genes (c-Mef, GATA3, Foxp3,
IL-6 and TGF-ß) were examined, and mRNA levels of IL-12B and T-bet were examined.
RESULTS: Frequencies of IL-12B and T-bet CNVs in SLE patients were significantly 
higher than those in healthy controls. CNVs of IL-12B and T-bet had no
synergistic contribution to SLE. The mRNA levels of IL-12B and T-bet in the
samples with more than two copies of DNA were significantly higher than those
with two copies of DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs of IL-12B and T-bet are associated with the risk of SLE.

PMID: 21278068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Nov;30(11):1157-9.

[Regulatory effect of astragalus injection on Th1/Th2 cell function in patients
with cervical cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu YJ(1), Li L, Gong SX.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Traditional Chinese Medicine and Western Medicine Hospital of
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Astragalus in regulating the imbalance
between naive helper T cells (Th1/Th2) cytokines expression in patients with
cervical cancer.
METHODS: Thirty patients with cervical cancer received intravenous dripping with 
20 mL of Astragalus Injection (AI, contained extract from 40 g of crude drug) per
day for 1 week, peripheral blood sample was collected from patients separately
before and after treatment for extract mononuclear cells by density gradient
centrifugation. The positive percentages of CD4+ interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma )
cell and CD4+ interleukin-4 (IL-4) cell in total CD4+ cells were measured by flow
cytometry; the contents of IFN-gamma, IL-4 in culture supernate were detected
with ELISA; and the expressions of T-cell transcription factor T-cells (T-bet)
and GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3) were determined by RT-PCR. The data were
controlled by those get from 10 healthy persons.
RESULTS: CD4+ IFN-gamma positive cell percentage, T-bet mRNA expression level and
concentration of IFN-gamma in supernate were significantly lower in patients than
those in healthy control respectively, while CD4+ IL-4 positive percentage, level
of GATA3 mRNA expression and IL-4 concentration in supernate were insignificantly
different between the two groups. After AI treatment, the lowered parameters were
up-regulated (P < 0.05), and no obvious change was observed in the CD4+ IL-4
positive cell associated parameters.
CONCLUSION: Th1/Th2 cell function imbalance existed in patients with cervical
cancer, showing a Th2 predominant reaction mode; AI can regulate the imbalance,
offset to Th1, thus to display its anti-tumor effect.

PMID: 21275166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 17;6(1):e14522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014522.

Detection of somatic mutations by high-resolution DNA melting (HRM) analysis in
multiple cancers.

Gonzalez-Bosquet J(1), Calcei J, Wei JS, Garcia-Closas M, Sherman ME, Hewitt S,
Vockley J, Lissowska J, Yang HP, Khan J, Chanock S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Department of Health and Human Services,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America.

Identification of somatic mutations in cancer is a major goal for understanding
and monitoring the events related to cancer initiation and progression. High
resolution melting (HRM) curve analysis represents a fast, post-PCR
high-throughput method for scanning somatic sequence alterations in target genes.
The aim of this study was to assess the sensitivity and specificity of HRM
analysis for tumor mutation screening in a range of tumor samples, which included
216 frozen pediatric small rounded blue-cell tumors as well as 180
paraffin-embedded tumors from breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers (60 of
each). HRM analysis was performed in exons of the following candidate genes known
to harbor established commonly observed mutations: PIK3CA, ERBB2, KRAS, TP53,
EGFR, BRAF, GATA3, and FGFR3. Bi-directional sequencing analysis was used to
determine the accuracy of the HRM analysis. For the 39 mutations observed in
frozen samples, the sensitivity and specificity of HRM analysis were 97% and 87%,
respectively. There were 67 mutation/variants in the paraffin-embedded samples,
and the sensitivity and specificity for the HRM analysis were 88% and 80%,
respectively. Paraffin-embedded samples require higher quantity of purified DNA
for high performance. In summary, HRM analysis is a promising moderate-throughput
screening test for mutations among known candidate genomic regions. Although the 
overall accuracy appears to be better in frozen specimens, somatic alterations
were detected in DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded samples.

PMCID: PMC3022009
PMID: 21264207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1512-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00920-10. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

Dynamic BRG1 recruitment during T helper differentiation and activation reveals
distal regulatory elements.

De S(1), Wurster AL, Precht P, Wood WH 3rd, Becker KG, Pazin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Resources Branch, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore,
Maryland 21224, USA.

T helper cell differentiation and activation require specific transcriptional
programs accompanied by changes in chromatin structure. However, little is known 
about the chromatin remodeling enzymes responsible. We performed genome-wide
analysis to determine the general principles of BRG1 binding, followed by
analysis of specific genes to determine whether these general rules were typical 
of key T cell genes. We found that binding of the remodeling protein BRG1 was
programmed by both lineage and activation signals. BRG1 binding positively
correlated with gene activity at protein-coding and microRNA (miRNA) genes. BRG1 
binding was found at promoters and distal regions, including both novel and
previously validated distal regulatory elements. Distal BRG1 binding correlated
with expression, and novel distal sites in the Gata3 locus possessed
enhancer-like activity, suggesting a general role for BRG1 in long-distance gene 
regulation. BRG1 recruitment to distal sites in Gata3 was impaired in cells
lacking STAT6, a transcription factor that regulates lineage-specific genes.
Together, these findings suggest that BRG1 interprets both differentiation and
activation signals and plays a causal role in gene regulation, chromatin
structure, and cell fate. Our findings suggest that BRG1 binding is a useful
marker for identifying active cis-regulatory regions in protein-coding and miRNA 
genes.

PMCID: PMC3135292
PMID: 21262765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Immunobiology. 2011 Jul;216(7):811-20. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.12.003. Epub
2010 Dec 23.

IL-10 controls Th2-type cytokine production and eosinophil infiltration in a
mouse model of allergic airway inflammation.

Kosaka S(1), Tamauchi H, Terashima M, Maruyama H, Habu S, Kitasato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University Allied Health Science,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Interleukin-10 was originally described as a factor that inhibits cytokine
production by murine Th1 clones. Recent studies have since shown that IL-10 can
also downregulate Th2 clones and their production of IL-4 and IL-5. Because of
its immuno-suppressive properties, IL-10 has been suggested as a potential
therapy for allergic inflammation and asthma. However, the pathophysiological
role of IL-10 in vivo has not been clearly elucidated. We investigated the
effects of IL-10 administration on the production of IgE, cytokine and
allergen-induced Th2 cytokine production as well as its effects on eosinophilic
inflammation. We established GATA-3/TCR double transgenic (GATA-3/TCR-Tg) mice by
crossing GATA-3 transgenic mice with ovalbumin (OVA)-specific TCR transgenic
mice; these mice were then sensitized using an intraperitoneal injection of OVA
adsorbed to alum and challenged with the intratracheal instillation of an
allergen. When GATA-3/TCR-Tg mice sensitized with OVA and alum were injected with
C57-IL-10 cells before OVA inhalation, the levels of IL-5, IL-13, and IL-4
decreased by 40-85% and number of eosinophils decreased by 70% (P<0.03) in the
murine bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). These results suggest that IL-10
plays an important role downstream of the inflammatory cascade in the Th2
response to antigens and in the development of BALF eosinophilia and cytokine
production in a murine model of asthma. These immunosuppressive properties in
animal models indicate that IL-10 could be a potential clinical therapy for the
treatment of allergic inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21257225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Apr 1;317(6):849-58. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.01.006. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Impaired IFN-<U+03B3> production after stimulation with bacterial components by natural 
killer cells from gastric cancer patients.

Lindgren Å(1), Yun CH, Sjöling Å, Berggren C, Sun JB, Jonsson E, Holmgren J,
Svennerholm AM, Lundin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and
Mucosal Immunobiology and Vaccine Institute for Strategic Research, University of
Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. asa.lindgren@microbio.gu.se

Gastric adenocarcinoma is a major health problem world-wide, as this is the
second most common cause of cancer death in the world. It has been estimated that
infection by Helicobacter pylori cause at least half of the gastric cancers.
Previously, we have demonstrated that H. pylori antigens directly activate NK
cells to secrete IFN-<U+03B3>. There is also a marked synergistic effect in NK cells
stimulated with bacterial lysate and low levels of IL-12, a cytokine which is
produced by macrophages and dendritic cells in the H. pylori-infected stomach.
The present study was designed to investigate whether NK cells from gastric
cancer patients display an altered ability to respond to components from H.
pylori and other bacteria. The results show that NK cells from peripheral blood
of gastric cancer patients have a severely suppressed ability to produce IFN-<U+03B3>
after stimulation with H. pylori lysate and the synthetic bacterial lipoprotein
FSL-1. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of IL-12 and lysate is absent in
gastric cancer patients, unless the concentration of IL-12 is increased 10-fold. 
We also demonstrate that there is a similar lack of IFN-<U+03B3> production from NK
cells isolated from the gastric mucosa of cancer patients. In addition, we
propose that the observed suppression is due to tumour-derived TGF-ß and that
increased expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 may be responsible for
the TGF-ß induced suppression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21255568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 19;12:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-43.

MMP1 bimodal expression and differential response to inflammatory mediators is
linked to promoter polymorphisms.

Affara M(1), Dunmore BJ, Sanders DA, Johnson N, Print CG, Charnock-Jones DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QP, UK.

BACKGROUND: Identifying the functional importance of the millions of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome is a difficult challenge.
Therefore, a reverse strategy, which identifies functionally important SNPs by
virtue of the bimodal abundance across the human population of the SNP-related
mRNAs will be useful. Those mRNA transcripts that are expressed at two distinct
abundances in proportion to SNP allele frequency may warrant further study.
Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) is important in both normal development and in 
numerous pathologies. Although much research has been conducted to investigate
the expression of MMP1 in many different cell types and conditions, the
regulation of its expression is still not fully understood.
RESULTS: In this study, we used a novel but straightforward method based on
agglomerative hierarchical clustering to identify bimodally expressed transcripts
in human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) microarray data from 15
individuals. We found that MMP1 mRNA abundance was bimodally distributed in
un-treated HUVECs and showed a bimodal response to inflammatory mediator
treatment. RT-PCR and MMP1 activity assays confirmed the bimodal regulation and
DNA sequencing of 69 individuals identified an MMP1 gene promoter polymorphism
that segregated precisely with the MMP1 bimodal expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicated that the transcription factors
(TFs) ETS1, ETS2 and GATA3, bind to the MMP1 promoter in the region of this
polymorphism and may contribute to the bimodal expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a simple method to identify putative bimodally expressed
RNAs from transcriptome data that is effective yet easy for non-statisticians to 
understand and use. This method identified bimodal endothelial cell expression of
MMP1, which appears to be biologically significant with implications for
inflammatory disease. (271 Words).

PMCID: PMC3040839
PMID: 21244711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Endocr J. 2011;58(2):117-21. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

GATA3 abnormalities in six patients with HDR syndrome.

Fukami M(1), Muroya K, Miyake T, Iso M, Kato F, Yokoi H, Suzuki Y, Tsubouchi K,
Nakagomi Y, Kikuchi N, Horikawa R, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

GATA3 mutations cause HDR (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal 
dysplasia) syndrome and, consistent with the presence of the second DiGeorge
syndrome locus (DGS2) proximal to GATA3, distal 10p deletions often leads to HDR 
and DiGeorge syndromes. Here, we report on six Japanese patients with GATA3
abnormalities. Cases 1-5 had a normal karyotype, and case 6 had a
46,XX,del(10)(p15) karyotype. Cases 1-6 had two or three of the HDR triad
features. Case 6 had no DiGeorge syndrome phenotype except for hypoparathyroidism
common to HDR and DiGeorge syndromes. Mutation analysis showed heterozygous GATA3
mutations in cases 1-5, i.e., c.404-405insC (p.P135fsX303) in case 1, c.700T>C & 
c.708-709insC (p.F234L & p.S237fsX303) on the same allele in case 2,
c.737-738insG (p.G246fsX303) in case 3, c.824G>T (p.W275L) in case 4, and
IVS5+1G>C (splice error) in case 5. Deletion analysis of chromosome 10p revealed 
loss of GATA3 and preservation of D10S547 in case 6. The results are consistent
with the previous finding that GATA3 mutations are usually identified in patients
with two or three of the HDR triad features, and provide supportive data for the 
mapping of DGS2 in the region proximal to D10S547.

PMID: 21242646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):762-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033738. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

Membrane-bound IL-15 stimulation on peripheral blood natural kiler progenitors
leads to the generation of an adherent subset co-expressing dendritic cells and
natural kiler functional markers.

Negrini S(1), Giuliani M, Durali D, Chouaib S, Azzarone B.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1014 Inserm, Paul Brousse Hospital, Villejuif, France.

Human peripheral blood natural killer progenitors represent a flexible,
heterogeneous population whose phenotype and function are controlled by their
membrane-bound IL-15. Indeed, reciprocal membrane-bond IL-15 trans-presentation
commits these cells into NK differentiation, while membrane-bound IL-15
stimulation with its soluble ligand (sIL-15Ra) triggers a reverse signal (pERK1/2
and pFAK) that modifies the developmental program of at least two subsets of
PB-NKPs. This treatment generates: i) the expansion of an immature NK subset
growing in suspension; ii) the appearance of an unprecedented adherent
non-proliferative subset with a dendritic morphology co-expressing marker,
cytokines and functions typical of myeloid dendritic cells
(CD1a(+)/BDCA1(+)/IL-12(+)) and NK cells (CD3-/NKp46(+)/ CD56(+)/IFN<U+03B3>(+)). The
generation of these putative NK/DCs is associated to the rapid inhibition of
negative regulators of myelopoiesis (the transcription factors STAT6 and GATA-3) 
followed by the transient upregulation of inducers of myeloid development, such
as the transcription factors (PU.1, GATA-1) and the anti-apoptotic molecule
(MCL-1).

PMCID: PMC3084924
PMID: 21242188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Mar;46(3):671-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.01.008. Epub
2011 Jan 15.

Cytokines inhibit norepinephrine transporter expression by decreasing Hand2.

Pellegrino MJ(1), Parrish DC, Zigmond RE, Habecker BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Functional noradrenergic transmission requires the coordinate expression of
enzymes involved in norepinephrine (NE) synthesis, as well as the norepinephrine 
transporter (NET) which removes NE from the synapse. Inflammatory cytokines
acting through gp130 can suppress the noradrenergic phenotype in sympathetic
neurons. This occurs in a subset of sympathetic neurons during development and
also occurs in adult neurons after injury. For example, cytokines suppress
noradrenergic function in sympathetic neurons after axotomy and during heart
failure. The molecular basis for suppression of noradrenergic genes is not well
understood, but previous studies implicated a reduction of Phox2a in cytokine
suppression of dopamine beta hydroxylase. We used sympathetic neurons and
neuroblastoma cells to investigate the role of Phox2a in cytokine suppression of 
NET transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Phox2a
did not bind the NET promoter, and overexpression of Phox2a did not prevent
cytokine suppression of NET transcription. Hand2 and Gata3 are transcription
factors that induce noradrenergic genes during development and are present in
mature sympathetic neurons. Both Hand2 and Gata3 were decreased by cytokines in
sympathetic neurons and neuroblastoma cells. Overexpression of either Hand2 or
Gata3 was sufficient to rescue NET transcription following suppression by
cytokines. We examined expression of these genes following axotomy to determine
if their expression was altered following nerve injury. NET and Hand2 mRNAs
decreased significantly in sympathetic neurons 48 h after axotomy, but Gata3 mRNA
was unchanged. These data suggest that cytokines can inhibit NET expression
through downregulation of Hand2 or Gata3 in cultured sympathetic neurons, but
axotomy in adult animals selectively suppresses Hand2 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3046314
PMID: 21241805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Jul;31(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2010.12.019. Epub 
2011 Jan 11.

Comparison of Aeromonas salmonicida resistant and susceptible salmon families: a 
high immune response is beneficial for the survival against Aeromonas salmonicida
challenge.

Zhang Z(1), Niu C, Storset A, Bøgwald J, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Biodiversity Science and Ecological
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University(1), 100875
Beijing, China.

Selective breeding has been employed to improve resistance to infectious diseases
in aquaculture and it is of importance to investigate the expression profiles of 
immune genes together with complement activity of Atlantic salmon with different 
genetic background in response to pathogens, in particular against Aeromonas
salmonicida. This study examined acute phase products, and several central T cell
cytokines and a transcription factor in different tissues, namely head kidney,
spleen and liver, in two families of Atlantic salmon with high and low
mortalities, after challenge by A. salmonicida. The results showed that the
expression pattern of target genes differed in lymphoid and non-lymphoid organs
in the two families. Generally, in lymphoid organs, higher expression of
pro-inflammatory genes, such as TLR5M, TLR5S, GATA3, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-17D, as well as
the pleiotropic cytokine gene IL-10 in the resistant family was observed at the
same time point. One may speculate that a relatively high immune response is a
pre-requisite for increased survival in a A. salmonicida challenge test. In
addition, the resistant fish possessed higher complement activity pre-challenge
compared to susceptible fish. Complement activity may be applied as an indicator 
in selective breeding for enhanced disease resistance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21232605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J BUON. 2010 Oct-Dec;15(4):774-82.

Clinicopathologic and prognostic evaluation of invasive breast carcinoma
molecular subtypes and GATA3 expression.

Demir H(1), Turna H, Can G, Ilvan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School,
Istanbul, Turkey. patdrhd1@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: recently, molecular subclassification of breast carcinomas has been
proposed as a new prognostic parameter.
METHODS: we classified 222 invasive breast carcinoma cases in 5 molecular
subtypes by using tissue microarray (TMA) and immunohistochemistry methods. These
subtypes were luminal A (estrogen receptor/ER and/or progesterone receptor/ PR
positive), luminal B (ER and/or PR positive + HER2 positive), HER2-expressing
type (ER and PR negative, HER2 positive), basal-like type (ER, PR and HER2
negative, positive with at least one of these myoepithelial markers: CK5/6, CK14,
EGFR) and null type (ER, PR, HER2 and myoepithelial markers negative). We
compared these subtypes according to their clinicopathological features and GATA3
expression.
RESULTS: luminal A was the most frequent subtype. According to overall survival
rates, HER2-expressing and basal- like types had the worst prognosis, while
luminal A had the best. However, luminal B had the worst prognosis according to
disease free survival. Most of the squamous differentiated metaplastic carcinomas
were basal-like type. Tubular and mucinous carcinomas were luminal A. Most
basal-like tumors were grade III. The majority of grade I tumors were luminal A. 
GATA3 positivity was associated with low grade tumors and luminal A subtype.
CONCLUSION: molecular classification can be accepted as an independent prognostic
factor for invasive breast carcinomas. GATA3 expression was associated with
luminal A and low histological grade. However, it wasn't shown as an independent 
parameter.

PMID: 21229645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Lett. 2011 Mar 1;302(1):63-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.12.014. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Estrogen receptor-related genes as an important panel of predictors for breast
cancer response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Chen Y(1), Chen C, Yang B, Xu Q, Wu F, Liu F, Ye X, Meng X, Mougin B, Liu G, Shen
Z, Shao Z, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270
Dong An Road, 200032, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: Clinical data suggest that the estrogen receptor (ER) contributes to
chemotherapeutic responsiveness. However, ER status alone is not consistently
predictive. In this study, we used a microarray approach to find novel ER-related
genes that predicted chemotherapy responses, with the hope of providing a robust 
multi-variable prediction method.
METHODS: One hundred and ten patients with stages II and III breast cancer were
included. They received four preoperative cycles of a weekly PCb (paclitaxel plus
carboplatin) regimen. A total of 55 training cases were used for marker discovery
and for identification of any ER-related genes that may have been associated with
a chemotherapeutic response ("training cases"). The other 55 patients were
available as an independent validation set ("validation cases") to test, using
immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: In the training set, 20 significantly differentially expressed genes
were identified. Among these 20 genes, TFF1, ESR1, GATA3 and TFF3 were found to
be ER-related. Among 55 independent validation cases, univariate analysis
indicated that clinical variables and ER-related genes were all significantly
associated with pCR. It was shown that the pCR rate was as high as 80% when these
five factors were all negative. In contrast, these five factors were all positive
in seven of nine chemo-resistant patients.
CONCLUSION: In conjunction with levels of ER-related genes, expression of ER
protein may provide important predictive outcomes for responses to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and may allow for the identification of a subgroup of patients who
could significantly benefit from chemotherapy (or who may be resistant to it).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Theriogenology. 2011 Apr 1;75(6):995-1004. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.11.006. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Effect of different culture media on the temporal gene expression in the bovine
developing embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1), Kim B, Lee B, Jang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

We have previously shown that the in vitro embryonic development and the yield of
viable calves were increased by using a two-step chemically defined medium for
post-fertilization culture of bovine embryos. In this study, we explored the
embryonic development and the temporal behavioral interaction of the genes
involved in IFNt gene expression and how they behave in an orchestrated manner to
increase the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos by culturing in the
chemically defined medium. Behavior of genes included ETS2, CDX2, GATA2, GATA3,
OCT4 and NANOG was analyzed in early bovine IVF produced embryos, (from compact
morulae to the blastocyst hatching stages), by semi- and relative quantitative
PCR and compared between two in vitro culture (IVC) systems, two-step chemically 
defined medium and modified synthetic oviductal fluid (mSOF) containing 8 mg/mL, 
BSA. Early embryonic development was found to be better in two-step chemically
defined culture system than that of mSOF as indicated by the increment of
blastocyst yield, 33.1% in two-step culture system vs 18.8% in mSOF medium, and
the blastocyst hatching, 52.3% in two-step culture system vs 33.5% in mSOF
medium. Relative quantitative gene expression showed harmonic behavior in the
two-step culture system rather than the culture in mSOF, IFNt showed even
increase throughout the embryonic development in the two-step culture medium
while it decreased with blastocyst hatching in mSOF culture condition. Temporal
dominance of OCT4 over all the transcription factors was found in regulation of
IFNt expression (the major factor of expression regulation but in inverse
manner). However, ETS2, CDX2, GATA2 and GATA3 are potent IFNt stimulator in
cumulative manner but in case of OCT4 decrement. CDX2 directly related with IFNt,
but still under OCT4 dominance and also regulated by the subservient of OCT4
which is NANOG. In conclusion, this study confirmed our previous results about
the usefulness of using the two-step chemically defined culture medium for
increasing the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos and elucidated
the dominance of OCT4 over the other genes implicated in regulation of IFNt
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2011 Apr;31(4):393-400. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0069.
Epub 2011 Jan 1.

Highly pathogenic (H5N1) avian influenza induces an inflammatory T helper type 1 
cytokine response in the chicken.

Karpala AJ(1), Bingham J, Schat KA, Chen LM, Donis RO, Lowenthal JW, Bean AG.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO, Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong,
Australia. adam.karpala@csiro.au

To better understand the immune response to highly pathogenic avian influenza
virus, we compared expression of cytokines in chickens infected with avian
influenza virus (A/Vietnam/1203/04) to that in uninfected chickens. Gene
expression analyses revealed that influenza disseminated to multiple organs where
immune responses could be identified. Among those cytokines influenced by
influenza infection were the T helper type (Th)1-associated cytokines interleukin
(IL)12 and interferon <U+03B3>. In addition, a corresponding downregulation of the
intracytoplasmic factor GATA3 was identified, whereas the Th2 cytokines IL4 and
IL10 did not appear to be impacted by the infection. The inflammatory cytokine
IL6 also appeared to be highly upregulated along with type 1 and type 3
interferon. Together, these data indicate that a strong inflammatory and Th1
response occurs after highly pathogenic avian influenza infection in the chicken 
that has implications for strategies that target the immune system for improving 
resistance to avian influenza.

PMID: 21194349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;31(5):971-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01034-10. Epub 2010 Dec
28.

HEB-deficient T-cell precursors lose T-cell potential and adopt an alternative
pathway of differentiation.

Braunstein M(1), Anderson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute and Department of Immunology, University of
Toronto, 2075 Bayview Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Early thymocytes possess multilineage potential, which is progressively
restricted as cells transit through the double-negative stages of T-cell
development. DN1 cells retain the ability to become natural killer cells,
dendritic cells, B cells, and myeloid cells as well as T cells, but these options
are lost by the DN3 stage. The Notch1 signaling pathway is indispensable for
initiation of the T-cell lineage and inhibitory for the B-cell lineage, but the
regulatory mechanisms by which the T-cell fate is locked in are largely
undefined. Previously, we discovered that the E-protein transcription factor
HEBAlt promoted T-cell specification. Here, we report that HEB(-/-) T-cell
precursors have compromised Notch1 function and lose T-cell potential. Moreover, 
reconstituting HEB(-/-) precursors with Notch1 activity enforced fidelity to the 
T-cell fate. However, instead of becoming B cells, HEB(-/-) DN3 cells adopted a
DN1-like phenotype and could be induced to differentiate into thymic NK cells.
HEB(-/-) DN1-like cells retained GATA3 and Id2 expression but had lower levels of
the Bcl11b gene, a Notch target gene. Therefore, our studies have revealed a new 
set of interactions between HEB, Notch1, and GATA3 that regulate the T-cell fate 
choice in developing thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC3067813
PMID: 21189289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 27;4:175. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-175.

Bio-informatics analysis of a gene co-expression module in adipose tissue
containing the diet-responsive gene Nnat.

Li X(1), Thomason PA, Withers DJ, Scott J.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Medicine Department, Imperial College
London, South Kensington, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
xinzhong.li@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Obesity causes insulin resistance in target tissues - skeletal
muscle, adipose tissue, liver and the brain. Insulin resistance predisposes to
type-2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Adipose tissue
inflammation is an essential characteristic of obesity and insulin resistance.
Neuronatin (Nnat) expression has been found to be altered in a number of
conditions related to inflammatory or metabolic disturbance, but its
physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms in adipose tissue, brain,
pancreatic islets and other tissues are not understood.
RESULTS: We identified transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) conserved in the
Nnat promoter, and transcription factors (TF) abundantly expressed in adipose
tissue. These include transcription factors concerned with the control of:
adipogenesis (Ppar<U+03B3>, Klf15, Irf1, Creb1, Egr2, Gata3); lipogenesis (Mlxipl,
Srebp1c); inflammation (Jun, Stat3); insulin signalling and diabetes
susceptibility (Foxo1, Tcf7l2). We also identified NeuroD1 the only documented TF
that controls Nnat expression. We identified KEGG pathways significantly
associated with Nnat expression, including positive correlations with
inflammation and negative correlations with metabolic pathways (most prominently 
oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism)
and protein turnover. 27 genes, including; Gstt1 and Sod3, concerned with
oxidative stress; Sncg and Cxcl9 concerned with inflammation; Ebf1, Lgals12 and
Fzd4 involved in adipogenesis; whose expression co-varies with Nnat were
identified, and conserved transcription factor binding sites identified on their 
promoters. Functional networks relating to each of these genes were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that Nnat is an acute diet-responsive gene in
white adipose tissue and hypothalamus; it may play an important role in
metabolism, adipogenesis, and resolution of oxidative stress and inflammation in 
response to dietary excess.

PMCID: PMC3022651
PMID: 21187013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Mar 24;134(2):281-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.12.021. Epub 
2010 Dec 21.

Cho-kyung-jong-ok-tang, a traditional Korean herbal formula induces type 2 shift 
in murine natural killer cell cytokine production.

Lee HS(1), Cho KH, Kim TK, Kim CH, Ahn SJ, Lee EH, Ahn KS, Jung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)With-Nature Oriental Clinic Group, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Cho-kyung-jong-ok-tang (CKJOT) is a traditional
Korean herbal formula specifically used for female infertility including
unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL).
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present study aims to evaluate the effects of CKJOT on
mouse natural killer (NK) cells to address the possible immunological basis of
protective effects of this herbal medicine on unexplained RPL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: NK cells isolated from spleens of 6-week-old C57BL/6 mice 
were differentiated into NK0, NK1, and NK2 cells in the presence of various
concentrations of CKJOT-extract. Apoptotic cell number, level of intracellular
cytokines, and expression of cytokine-related transcription factors were
measured.
RESULTS: CKJOT had little effect in improving viability of NK0, NK1, and NK2
cells. However, CKJOT addition during NK cell differentiation suppressed the
production of interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), and enhanced that of interleukin-5, in
the NK1 and NK2 subsets, respectively. T-bet, a transcription factor associated
with IFN-<U+03B3> expression was down-regulated; while Th2 linked transcription factors 
(STAT6 and GATA3) were up-regulated especially with 100 µg/mL treatment of CKJOT.
CONCLUSION: The type 2 shift in NK cell-secreted cytokines induced by CKJOT in
mouse NK cells may explain the protective effect associated with its traditional 
use in unexplained RPL.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21182916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):164-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040436. Epub 2010 Dec
1.

TNF superfamily member 13, APRIL, inhibits allergic lung inflammation.

Xiao Y(1), Motomura S, Deyev V, Podack ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Miami, Leonard Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

The T-cell functions of a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL, also known as
TNFSF13) remain largely undefined. We previously showed that APRIL suppressed Th2
cytokine production in cultured CD4(+) T cells and Th2 antibody responses. Here
we show that APRIL suppresses allergic lung inflammation, which is associated
with diminished expression of the transcription factor c-maf. Mice deficient in
the April gene (April(-/-) mice) had significantly aggravated lung inflammation
compared with WT mice in the ovalbumin-induced allergic lung inflammation model. 
Likewise, blockade of APRIL in WT mice by the APRIL-receptor fusion protein,
transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor
(TACI)-Ig, enhanced lung inflammation. Transfer of APRIL-sufficient,
ovalbumin-specific, TCR-transgenic CD4(+) T (OT-II) cells to April(-/-) mice
restored the suppressive effect of APRIL on lung inflammation. Mechanistically,
the expression of the Th2 cytokine transcription factor c-maf, but not GATA-3,
was markedly enhanced in April(-/-) CD4(+) T cells at the RNA and protein level
and under non-polarizing (Th neutral, ThN) and Th2-polarizing conditions. Since
c-maf transactivates the IL-4 gene, the increased c-maf expression in April(-/-) 
mice readily explains increased Th2 cytokine production. Independent of its
effect on IL-4, APRIL suppressed IL-13 expression. APRIL thus may regulate lung
inflammation in a dual way, by acting on c-maf expression and by directly
controlling IL-13 production.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3516998
PMID: 21182087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Stem Cell Rev. 2011 Sep;7(3):624-38. doi: 10.1007/s12015-010-9214-6.

Characterization of a novel umbilical cord lining cell with CD227 positivity and 
unique pattern of P63 expression and function.

Reza HM(1), Ng BY, Phan TT, Tan DT, Beuerman RW, Ang LP.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore.

Umbilical cord tissue is gaining attention as a novel source of multipotent stem 
cells because it is easily obtainable, ethically acceptable and the cells are
immunologically naïve. In this study, we have isolated and characterized a new
cell type expressing MUCIN1 (CD227) from human umbilical cord lining which we
termed MUCIN-expressing Cord Lining Epithelial Cell (CLEC-muc). We found that
CLEC-muc is highly proliferative and had significant clonogenic ability. These
cells express embryonic stem cell markers OCT-4, NANOG, SSEA-4, REX1 and SOX2.
Despite the abundant expression of epithelial cell marker MUCIN1 and
cytokeratins, this population is also positive to the mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
marker CD166. CLEC-muc is unique in p63 expression that shuttles from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus over time in culture. To understand p63 regulation and
function in CLEC-muc, cells were treated with BMP4, a potent morphogen that plays
a role in epidermal differentiation via p63 upregulation in ES cell and
subsequent analyses were done. We found that BMP4 does not alter cytoplasmic
expression of p63 that promotes cell proliferation. However, it increases nuclear
p63 expression together with several other epithelial-associated genes such as
GATA3, JAGGED1, NOTCH1, HES1 and IKKa. BMP4 has also been found to weakly induce 
deltaNp63 expression in CLEC-muc. Our results suggest that CLEC-muc is a novel
stem cell-like population that can be further differentiated by BMP4 to generate 
specific cell-types probably destined to form non-keratinized epithelia.

PMID: 21181306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;30(9):922-7.

[Influence of Shengxue mixture on the expression of T-bet/GATA-3, their relevant 
signal transduction molecules, cytokines, and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with
chronic aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing.

OBJECTIVE: To study the actions of transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, and
their relevant signal transduction pathways on the immune-related pathogenesis
with chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate the immunological
regulation mechanism of Shengxue Mixture (SXM) in regulating levels of Th cell
imbalance, transcriptional factor and relevant signal pathways.
METHODS: All CAA patients selected from Yueyang Hospital of Shanghai University
of traditional Chinese medicine were equally randomized into the treated group
and the control group, 20 patients in each group, and 20 healthy persons were
selected as normal group, the former was treated with SXM according to patients' 
syndrome patterns, namely, SXM-1 was given to patients of Pi-Shen yang-deficiency
pattern, and SXM-2 to those of Pi-Shen yin-deficiency pattern. Patients in the
control group were treated with cyclosporin A (CsA). The mRNA expressions of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and 6
(STAT6) in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of patients were determined 
using real-time fluorescent quantitation polymerase chain reaction before and
after treatment, meantime, the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels
of IFN-gamma, IL-12 and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant were detected by flow 
cytometry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The mRNA expressions of PBMNC T-bet and STAT4, ratios of T-bet/GATA-3,
Th1 proportion and Th1/Th2 ratio, levels of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in PBMNC-cultured
supernatant were all significantly higher in CAA patients than in healthy
controls (P < 0.01), which were lowered after treatment but didn't reach the
normal range (all P < 0.01), excepting for IL-12 level. Comparisons of the
changes between the two treated groups showed insignificant difference (P >
0.05). While the difference between patients and healthy persons in terms of
GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, and IL-4 were insignificant (P > 0.05), either
before or after treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal activation of IFN-gamma/T-bet and IL-12/ STAT4 pathways, as
well as Th1/Th2 balance deviating to Th1 excursion play vital roles in the
immunological pathogenesis of CAA. SXM and CsA could lower the aforesaid abnormal
activation and correct Th1 hyper-polarization, so as to alleviate the
over-activated cell-mediated immunity to eliminate hematopoietic depression in
CAA patients.

PMID: 21179729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):16-7. doi: 10.1038/ni0111-16.

Explaining discordant coordination.

Van Stry M, Bix M.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):77-85.

PMID: 21170001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Immunol. 2011 Feb;138(2):231-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.11.008. Epub 2010
Dec 15.

Florfenicol inhibits allergic airway inflammation in mice by p38 MAPK-mediated
phosphorylation of GATA 3.

Xinxin C(1), Chi C, Xiao C, Xue X, Yongjun Y, Junqing C, Xuming D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, Institute of
Zoonosis, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
5333 Xi'an Road, Changchun, 130062, People's Republic of China.

Florfenicol has been shown to possess anti-inflammatory activity. However, its
possible use for asthma has not yet been studied. First we investigated the
anti-inflammatory properties of florfenicol using mice asthma model. BALB/c mice 
were immunized and challenged by ovalbumin. Treatment with florfenicol caused a
marked reduction in inflammatory cells and three Th2 type cytokines in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluids of mice. The levels of ovalbumin-specific IgE and
airway hyperresponsiveness were significantly altered after treatment with
florfenicol. Histological studies using H&E and AB-PAS staining demonstrate that 
florfenicol substantially inhibited ovalbumin-induced inflammatory cells
infiltration in lung tissue and goblet cell hyperplasia in the airway. These
results were similar to those obtained with dexamethasone treatment. We then
investigated which signal transduction mechanisms could be implicated in
florfenicol activity. Our results suggested that the protective effect of
florfenicol was mediated by the inhibition of the p38 MAPK-mediated
phosphorylation of GATA 3.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21163707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 May;56(5):499-505. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.11.006.
Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients 
with oral lichen planus.

Lu R(1), Zhou G, Du G, Xu X, Yang J, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST), & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School 
& Hospital of Stomatology,Wuhan University, PR China

OBJECTIVE: Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a T-cell-mediated chronic inflammatory
oral disease of unknown aetiology. Imbalanced cytokine production by Th1 and Th2 
probably contributes to the pathogenesis of OLP. Growing evidence has suggested
that two Th1/Th2-specific transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, may play a
critical role in the development of Th1 and Th2 immunity. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate the mRNA expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 in the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of OLP subjects, and their expression patterns
in relation to several clinical features.
DESIGN: Expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells isolated from twenty-eight OLP subjects and sixteen controls were detected 
by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: When OLP subjects were regarded as a whole group, T-bet mRNA level and
the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA in OLP subjects were significantly higher (P<0.05)
than those in controls. When the OLP subjects were divided according to different
clinical forms, genders or age groups, T-bet, but not GATA-3, mRNA levels in
reticular (P<0.01), female (P<0.05) and elder (age>55, P<0.05) OLP patients were 
significantly higher than those in control subjects. T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio only
in reticular (P<0.05) OLP subjects was significantly higher than that in control 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results implicate a predominant role of Th1-type immune response
in pathogenesis of OLP. Different gene expressions of T-bet in different clinical
features may indicate different immunoregulatory mechanisms of OLP.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21163465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):708-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001203. Epub 2010
Dec 15.

Functional characterization of a nonmammalian IL-21: rainbow trout Oncorhynchus
mykiss IL-21 upregulates the expression of the Th cell signature cytokines
IFN-gamma, IL-10, and IL-22.

Wang T(1), Diaz-Rosales P, Costa MM, Campbell S, Snow M, Collet B, Martin SA,
Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 2TZ, United Kingdom.

In mammals, IL-21 is a common <U+03B3> chain cytokine produced by activated CD4(+) T
cells and NKT cells that acts on multiple lineages of cells. Although IL-21 has
also been discovered in birds, amphibians, and fish, to date, no functional
studies have been reported for any nonmammalian IL-21 molecule. We have sequenced
an IL-21 gene (tIL-21) in rainbow trout, which has a six-exon/five-intron
structure, is expressed in immune tissues, and is induced by bacterial and viral 
infection and the T cell stimulant PHA. In contrast to mammals, calcium ionophore
and PMA act synergistically to induce tIL-21. Recombinant tIL-21 (rtIL-21)
induced a rapid and long-lasting (4-72 h) induction of expression of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-10, and IL-22, signature cytokines for Th1-, Th2-, and Th17-type responses,
respectively, in head kidney leukocytes. However, rtIL-21 had little effects on
the expression of other cytokines studied. rtIL-21 maintained the expression of
CD8a, CD8ß, and IgM at a late stage of stimulation when their expression was
significantly decreased in controls and increased the expression of the Th cell
markers CD4, T-bet, and GATA3. Intraperitoneal injection of rtIL-21 confirmed the
in vitro bioactivity and increased the expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-10, IL-21, IL-22, 
CD8, and IgM. Inhibition experiments revealed that the activation of JAK/STAT3,
Akt1/2, and PI3K pathways were responsible for rtIL-21 action. This study helps
to clarify the role of IL-21 in lower vertebrates for the first time, to our
knowledge, and suggests IL-21 is a likely key regulator of T and B cell function 
in fish.

PMID: 21160047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Transplantation. 2011 Jan 27;91(2):191-8. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181ffbab4.

Clinical significance of regulatory T-cell-related gene expression in peripheral 
blood after renal transplantation.

Iwase H(1), Kobayashi T, Kodera Y, Miwa Y, Kuzuya T, Iwasaki K, Haneda M,
Katayama A, Takeda A, Morozumi K, Watarai Y, Uchida K, Nakao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Immunology, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2011 Jan 27;91(2):150-1.

BACKGROUND: Regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been suggested to be deeply
associated with immune tolerance and long-term graft survival in transplantation.
Some recipients with stable graft function (ST) could possibly minimize
immunosuppression during the maintenance period. However, effective assays for
assessing the suitability of patients have yet to be established. The purpose of 
this study was to elucidate the clinical relevance of Treg-related gene
expression such as forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) in peripheral blood after renal
transplantation.
METHODS: Several key molecules related to the function of immune cells such as
Treg, including Foxp3, transforming growth factor-ß, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
antigen-4, chemokine receptor 7, toll-like receptor 4, granzyme B, T-bet, GATA3, 
RORC, a1,2-mannosidase, and proteasome subunit ß 10 were examined in the
peripheral blood of 272 renal transplant recipients by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. The expression levels were
compared between recipients with chronic rejection and ST.
RESULTS: Foxp3 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were reduced immediately after
transplantation and gradually recovered. Pretransplantation levels were closely
correlated with 1 year posttransplantation levels. Recipients with chronic
rejection had significantly lower levels of Foxp3, chemokine receptor 7, and
granzyme B mRNA, and higher levels of toll-like receptor 4 and proteasome subunit
ß 10 mRNA compared with those with ST, although Foxp3 was the most relevant
marker.
CONCLUSION: There is a possibility that monitoring mRNA expression levels of
Treg-related molecules in peripheral blood might offer useful information on
patient selection and early detection of rejection when immunosuppression
minimization strategy is implemented in renal transplantation.

PMID: 21157405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Endocr J. 2011;58(2):123-30. Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Molecular analysis of the GATA3 gene in five Japanese patients with HDR syndrome.

Nakamura A(1), Fujiwara F, Hasegawa Y, Ishizu K, Mabe A, Nakagawa H, Nagasaki K, 
Jo W, Tajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. akieda@med.hokudai.ac.jp

GATA3 is a member of the GATA family of transcription factors. Heterozygous GATA3
abnormalities are associated with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and
renal abnormality (HDR syndrome). However, this triad of symptoms does not occur 
in all HDR patients and other clinical features may be present in some cases. We 
report the clinical phenotypes and the molecular analysis of GATA3 in five
Japanese HDR patients, including two familial cases. All five patients had
hypoparathyroidism and sensorineural deafness, however renal abnormalities were
absent in four patients. In addition, two patients with different mutations of
GATA3 had female genital tract abnormalities. Sequence analysis of GATA3
demonstrated three novel (R262G, c1063delC and C318) and two reported mutations
(c.432insG and c.1051-1G>T). Transient transfection assay using the GATA3
activating reporter system revealed that the transactivating activity of the
R262G, c.1063delC, C318S and c.432insG mutants were markedly decreased,
indicating that all four mutations are loss-of-function. In conclusion, this
study reiterates the clinical variability in HDR syndrome and identifies three
novel mutations of GATA3.

PMID: 21157112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hear Res. 2011 May;275(1-2):66-80. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.12.002. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Conditional deletion of Atoh1 using Pax2-Cre results in viable mice without
differentiated cochlear hair cells that have lost most of the organ of Corti.

Pan N(1), Jahan I, Kersigo J, Kopecky B, Santi P, Johnson S, Schmitz H, Fritzsch 
B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, 143 BB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Atonal homolog1 (Atoh1, formerly Math1) is a crucial bHLH transcription factor
for inner ear hair cell differentiation. Its absence in embryos results in
complete absence of mature hair cells at birth and its misexpression can generate
extra hair cells. Thus Atoh1 may be both necessary and sufficient for hair cell
differentiation in the ear. Atoh1 null mice die at birth and have some
undifferentiated cells in sensory epithelia carrying Atoh1 markers. The fate of
these undifferentiated cells in neonates is unknown due to lethality. We use
Tg(Pax2-Cre) to delete floxed Atoh1 in the inner ear. This generates viable
conditional knockout (CKO) mice for studying the postnatal development of the
inner ear without differentiated hair cells. Using in situ hybridization we find 
that Tg(Pax2-Cre) recombines the floxed Atoh1 prior to detectable Atoh1
expression. Only the posterior canal crista has Atoh1 expressing hair cells due
to incomplete recombination. Most of the organ of Corti cells are lost in CKO
mice via late embryonic cell death. Marker genes indicate that the organ of Corti
is reduced to two rows of cells wedged between flanking markers of the organ of
Corti (Fgf10 and Bmp4). These two rows of cells (instead of five rows of
supporting cells) are positive for Prox1 in neonates. By postnatal day 14 (P14), 
the remaining cells of the organ of Corti are transformed into a flat epithelium 
with no distinction of any specific cell type. However, some of the remaining
organ of Corti cells express Myo7a at late postnatal stages and are innervated by
remaining afferent fibers. Initial growth of afferents and efferents in embryos
shows no difference between control mice and Tg(Pax2-Cre)::Atoh1 CKO mice. Most
afferents and efferents are lost in the CKO mutant before birth, except for the
apex and few fibers in the base. Afferents focus their projections on patches
that express the prosensory specifying gene, Sox2. This pattern of innervation by
sensory neurons is maintained at least until P14, but fibers target the few Myo7a
positive cells found in later stages.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3065550
PMID: 21146598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2010 Nov-Dec;24(6):454-8. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2010.24.3522.

Pioglitazone attenuates allergic inflammation and induces production of
regulatory T lymphocytes.

Wang W(1), Zhu Z, Zhu B, Ma Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, 150 Jimo Road, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-gamma)
agonists have been shown to be involved in the regulation of allergic
inflammatory responses. The molecular mechanisms by which PPAR-gamma activation
inhibits the inflammatory process have not been well understood.
METHODS: BALB/c mice received ovalbumin (OVA) sensitization followed by OVA
intranasal challenge. Mice in the treatment group received intragastric
administration with pioglitazone (PIO; 30 mg/kg) before each OVA challenge.
Various allergic responses were then assessed.
RESULTS: The frequencies of sneezing and nose-scratching and eosinophil
infiltration decreased significantly in the PIO treatment group compared with the
OVA group (p < 0.05). The PIO treatment also showed that the levels of nasal
cavity lavage fluid interleukin (IL)-5 and sera OVA-specific immunoglobulin E
(IgE) were markedly reduced (p < 0.05). PIO significantly increased the
expression of Foxp3 mRNA (p < 0.05) and induced production of regulatory T
lymphocyte (p < 0.01) compared with the OVA group.
CONCLUSION: Given the potent effectiveness shown by PIO, we conclude that
PPAR-gamma agonists deserve investigation as potential therapies for human
allergic upper airway inflammation.

PMID: 21144225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Clin Periodontol. 2011 Feb;38(2):131-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-051X.2010.01660.x.
Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Functional interferences in host inflammatory immune response by airway allergic 
inflammation restrain experimental periodontitis development in mice.

da Fonseca DM(1), Trombone AP, Repeke CE, Avila-Campos MJ, Coelho-Castelo AA,
Silva JS, Campanelli AP, Deperon Bonato VL, Garlet GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão
Preto - FMRP/USP, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

AIMS: periodontal disease (PD) and airway allergic inflammation (AL) present
opposing inflammatory immunological features and clinically present an inverse
correlation. However, the putative mechanisms underlying such opposite
association are unknown.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Balb/C mice were submitted to the co-induction of
experimental PD (induced by Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans oral
inoculation) and AL [induced by sensitization with ovalbumin (OVA) and the
subsequent OVA challenges], and evaluated regarding PD and AL severity, immune
response [cytokine production at periodontal tissues, and T-helper transcription 
factors in submandibular lymph nodes (LNs)] and infection parameters.
RESULTS: PD/AL co-induction decreased PD alveolar bone loss and periodontal
inflammation while experimental AL parameters were unaltered. An active
functional interference was verified, because independent OVA sensitization and
challenge not modulate PD outcome. PD+AL group presented decreased tumour
necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interleukin (IL)-1ß, interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-17A, receptor
activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells ligand
and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-13 levels in periodontal tissues, while IL-4
and IL-10 levels were unaltered by AL co-induction. AL co-induction also resulted
in upregulated T-bet and related orphan receptor <U+03B3> and downregulated GATA3 levels
expression in submandibular LNs when compared with PD group.
CONCLUSION: our results demonstrate that the interaction between experimental
periodontitis and allergy involves functional immunological interferences, which 
restrains experimental periodontitis development by means of a skewed immune
response.

PMID: 21143491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):621-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01376.x. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Ethanol changes gene expression of transcription factors and cytokine production 
of CD4+ T-cell subsets in PBMCs stimulated with LPS.

von Haefen C(1), Mei W, Menk M, Klemz R, Jones A, Wernecke KD, Spies CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Campus Charité
Mitte und Charité Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Acute ethanol intoxication has the potential to alter immune
reactivity by various pathways. The aim of this study was to investigate T-helper
cell subsets transcription factors and cytokines in human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) following a single dose of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
with or without ethanol exposure.
METHODS: Human PBMCs were cultured in the presence of 100 mM ethanol and/or 100
ng/ml LPS for various time periods (1, 3, 8, and 24 hours) and analyzed for the
kinetics of gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR of selected
transcription factors (T-bet, GATA3, Foxp3, and ROR<U+03B3>t) and cytokines (TNF-a,
IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-<U+03B3>). The proportion of Th17 and Treg cells was identified 24 
hours after treatment with ethanol and LPS by multiparameter flow cytometry.
Viability and amount of dead cells were analyzed after 24 and 48 hours by MTT
assay and flow cytometry.
RESULTS:   Following LPS challenge, gene expression of Foxp3 increased, whereas
ROR<U+03B3>t decreased after 3 hours, GATA3 decreased within 1 hour, whereas expression 
of T-bet did not change at any time. Gene expression of TNF-a, interferon-<U+03B3>
(IFN-<U+03B3>), and IL-6 peaked after 3 hours, expression of IL-10 peaked after 8 hours.
Ethanol suppressed the LPS-induced gene expression of Foxp3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and T-bet
after 8 hours, expression of TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> was also suppressed after 3 and 8
hours. Markers of inflammation including TNF-a and IL-1ß in supernatant of PBMCs 
were significantly decreased, while levels of IL-10 and IL-6 remained unchanged
following ethanol exposure. Furthermore, ethanol-treated cells alone or in
combination with LPS had significantly fewer IL-17- and IFN-<U+03B3>-secreting CD4+ T
cells but constant proportion of Treg cells when compared to control cells.
Proliferation and viability of the cells were not influenced under these
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Alcohol interferes with the kinetics of Foxp3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and T-bet gene
expression and the production of TNF-a and IL-1ß and influences the balance of
Treg/Th17 cells following LPS exposure.

Copyright © 2010 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 21143255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):77-85. doi: 10.1038/ni.1966. Epub 2010 Dec 5.

The enhancer HS2 critically regulates GATA-3-mediated Il4 transcription in T(H)2 
cells.

Tanaka S(1), Motomura Y, Suzuki Y, Yagi R, Inoue H, Miyatake S, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Signal Network, Research Center for Allergy and Immunology,
RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):16-7.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Jan;11(1):3.

GATA-3 is a master regulator of T helper type 2 (T(H)2) differentiation. However,
the molecular basis of GATA-3-mediated T(H)2 lineage commitment is poorly
understood. Here we identify the DNase I-hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) element
located in the second intron of the interleukin 4 locus (Il4) as a critical
enhancer strictly controlled by GATA-3 binding. Mice lacking HS2 showed
substantial impairment in their asthmatic responses and their production of IL-4 
but not of other T(H)2 cytokines. Overexpression of Gata3 in HS2-deficient T
cells failed to restore Il4 expression. HS2 deletion impaired the trimethylation 
of histone H3 at Lys4 and acetylation of histone H3 at Lys9 and Lys14 in the Il4 
locus. Our results indicate that HS2 is the target of GATA-3 in regulating
chromosomal modification of the Il4 locus and is independent of the Il5 and Il13 
loci.

PMID: 21131966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;18(5):1211-9.

[Impact of cyclosporine A on the expression of T-bet, GATA-3, relevant signal
transduction molecules, cytokine and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with chronic
aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH, Sun WL, Xue ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Chinese Traditional
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Traditional Medicine, Nanjing 210029,
Jiangsu Province, China.

The study was aimed to explore the effects of T-bet (T-box expressed in T cell), 
GATA-3(GATA binding protein 3) and relevant signal transduction pathways on the
immune-related pathogenesis of chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate 
the immunological regulation mechanism in the treatment of CAA by using
cyclosporine A (CsA) at the level of Th cell imbalance, transcriptional factors, 
and relevant signal pathways. The real-time fluorescent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (real-time FQ-PCR) was used to determine the mRNA expression of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and
signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 (STAT6) in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of CAA patients before and after treatment with CsA; the
flow cytometry (FCM) and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to
determine the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 
and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant. Healthy people were included to test the 
above indexes. The results showed that the mRNA expression of PBMNC T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, Th1/Th2 ratio and levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12
in PBMNC-cultured supernatant of CAA patients were significantly higher than
those of healthy people (p < 0.01). After treating with CsA for 6 months of CsA
treatment, expression of T-bet, STAT4, T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, IFN-<U+03B3> 
and IL-12 levels were lower than before, however, the expression of T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion and IFN-<U+03B3> had not been reduced to normal
state. Compared to healthy people, no significant difference existed in the mRNA 
expression of GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, as well as level of IL-4 before and 
after treatment (p>0.05). It is concluded that the abnormal activation of
IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways, as well as Th balance deviating to Th1
excursion play vital roles in the immunological pathogenesis of AA. CsA lowers
the abnormal activation of IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways to correct Th1
hyperpolarization, which may reduce the abnormally activated cell-mediated
immunity and relax hematopoietic depression of AA patients.

PMID: 21129263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jan;89(1):43-50. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0702-6. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Novel dominant-negative mutant of GATA3 in HDR syndrome.

Ohta M(1), Eguchi-Ishimae M, Ohshima M, Iwabuki H, Takemoto K, Murao K, Chisaka
T, Yamamoto E, Higaki T, Isoyama K, Eguchi M, Ishii E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Maternity & Perinatal Care Unit, Ehime University
Hospital, Shitsukawa, Toon, Matsuyama, Ehime, 791-0295, Japan.

HDR syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by
hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly caused by mutation 
of the GATA3 gene located at chromosome 10p15. We report the case of a neonate
with HDR syndrome and a novel GATA3 mutation. We performed genetic and functional
analysis of GATA3 in this patient and identified a novel heterozygous 1516G><U+2009>C
missense mutation in exon 5, resulting in a cysteine-to-serine substitution at
codon 321 (Cys321Ser). Mutated and wild-type GATA3 proteins were expressed at a
similar level in vitro, indicating that the mutated GATA3 protein was stable.
Luciferase assay revealed that the Cys321Ser-mutated GATA3 lacked transactivation
activity due to loss of DNA-binding activity as confirmed by gel shift assay.
Moreover, mutated GATA3 exerted a dominant-negative effect over the
transactivation activity of wild-type GATA3. These findings indicate that not
only haploinsufficiency of GATA3 but also the dominant-negative effect of
Cys321Ser-mutated GATA3 might have been responsible for the HDR syndrome
phenotype of our patient.

PMID: 21120445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Apr;41(4):490-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03640.x.
Epub 2010 Nov 28.

FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet expression in elderly asthma.

Vale-Pereira S(1), Todo-Bom A, Geraldes L, Schmidt-Weber C, Akdis CA, Mota-Pinto 
A.

Author information: 
(1)General Pathology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal. spereira@fmed.uc.pt

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Apr;41(4):457-8.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder in which Th2, Th1 and
suppressive T cells (Tregs) play a role. The transcription factor FoxP3 plays a
role in Treg differentiation while T-bet is important for Th1 and GATA-3 for Th2 
differentiation from naïve T cells. Recent data show that age-related
deregulation of Treg cells is a mechanism of senescence affecting several chronic
diseases. It is crucial to understand the behaviour of these cell populations in 
asthma for elderly patients.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet gene expression under basal
conditions and after in vitro activation in a group of elderly asthmatic compared
with age-matched healthy individuals.
METHODS: Thirty-two elderly asthmatics and 17 healthy elderly individuals were
selected. Serum total IgE was measured, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were isolated and stimulated in vitro with anti-CD3/anti-CD28, followed
by mRNA isolation. After reverse transcription, real-time quantitative PCR was
performed and relative quantification was determined 2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct)(2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct) method).
RESULTS: The mean values and standard deviation of FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet
relative expression for control vs. asthma were 10.2±6.8 vs. 4.8±3.8, 2.4±2.9 vs.
1.7±0.9 and 3.3±2.1 vs. 2.1±1.5, respectively. Healthy individuals showed
significantly higher expression of FoxP3 and T-bet; asthmatics had a lower
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, higher serum IgE and a positive significant correlation
between total IgE and GATA-3 expression.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Elderly asthmatic patients have lower FoxP3
mRNA expression in PBMC, which can be associated with the sustained inflammatory 
process and with the decreased immune tolerance by Treg cells. The T-bet
deficiency and the correlation of GATA-3 expression with the increase of IgE are 
characteristics of long-lasting asthma. Changes related to the immunosenescence
process could provide an explanation for the minor differences observed between
the groups. It is important to clarify persistent modifications in long-lasting
asthma in the elderly and adequate future therapeutic approaches.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21114556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Immunology. 2011 Feb;132(2):157-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03381.x. Epub
2010 Nov 23.

Interplay of transcription factors in T-cell differentiation and function: the
role of Runx.

Wong WF(1), Kohu K, Chiba T, Sato T, Satake M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Isehara, Japan.

Over the past years, increasing numbers of distinct subsets have been discovered 
and identified for a T lymphocytes' entity. Differentiation and function of each 
T cell subset are controlled by a specific master transcription factor.
Importantly, Runt-related transcription factors, particularly Runx1 and Runx3,
interplay with these master regulators in various aspects of T cells' immunity.
In this review article, we first explain roles of Th-Pok and Runx3 in
differentiation of CD4 versus CD8 single positive cells, and later focus on
cross-regulation of Th-Pok and Runx3 and their relationship with other factors
such as TCR strength. Next, we provide evidences for the direct interplay of
Runx1/3 with T-bet and GATA3 during Th1 versus Th2 commitment to activate or
silence transcription of signature cytokine genes, IFN<U+03B3> and IL4. Lastly, we
explain feed-forward relationship between Runx1 and Foxp3 and discuss roles of
Runx1 in regulatory T cells' suppressive activity. This review highlights an
essential importance of Runx molecules in controlling various T cell subsets'
differentiation and functions through molecular interplay with the master
transcription factors in terms of protein-protein interaction as well as
regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3050439
PMID: 21091910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Pathol. 2010 Dec;41(12):1794-801. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.010.

Higher levels of GATA3 predict better survival in women with breast cancer.

Yoon NK(1), Maresh EL, Shen D, Elshimali Y, Apple S, Horvath S, Mah V, Bose S,
Chia D, Chang HR, Goodglick L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1747, USA.

The GATA family members are zinc finger transcription factors involved in cell
differentiation and proliferation. GATA3 in particular is necessary for mammary
gland maturation, and its loss has been implicated in breast cancer development. 
Our goal was to validate the ability of GATA3 expression to predict survival in
breast cancer patients. Protein expression of GATA3 was analyzed on a
high-density tissue microarray consisting of 242 cases of breast cancer. We
associated GATA3 expression with patient outcomes and clinicopathologic
variables. Expression of GATA3 was significantly increased in breast cancer, in
situ lesions, and hyperplastic tissue compared with normal breast tissue. GATA3
expression decreased with increasing tumor grade. Low GATA3 expression was a
significant predictor of disease-related death in all patients, as well as in
subgroups of estrogen receptor-positive or low-grade patients. In addition, low
GATA3 expression correlated with increased tumor size and estrogen and
progesterone receptor negativity. GATA3 is an important predictor of disease
outcome in breast cancer patients. This finding has been validated in a diverse
set of populations. Thus, GATA3 expression has utility as a prognostic indicator 
in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2983489
PMID: 21078439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3210-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040699. Epub 2010 Oct 
27.

Lck regulates IL-10 expression in memory-like Th1 cells.

Kemp KL(1), Levin SD, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

The Src family kinase Lck is thought to facilitate Th2 differentiation; however, 
its role in Th1 cells has not been well explored. Using mice that lack Lck in
mature T cells, we find that lck(-/-) Th1 skewed cells have normal expression of 
T-bet and produce IFN-<U+03B3> at WT levels. However, there is a 3-fold increase in
IL-10 producing cells in the mutant cultures. These cells do not have elevated
levels of IL-4, GATA3, IL-17 or Foxp3, indicating that they are not Th2, Th17, or
Foxp3(+) T regulatory cells (Treg). Nor do these cells behave in a similar manner
as the type 1 Treg. Most of the IL-10 in the lck(-/-) Th1 cultures is derived
from the memory/activated subset, as the cytokine profile from Th1 cultures
established from purified CD62L(+) (naïve) cells are similar to WT cells.
Furthermore, this IL-10 expression appears to be dependent on IL-12 and
correlates with elevated c-Maf. These data highlight a previously unappreciated
role for Lck in regulating IL-10 in Th1 cells.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3517127
PMID: 21061443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;17(2):236-46. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1369.
Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Gene expression profiles of estrogen receptor-positive and estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancers are detectable in histologically normal breast
epithelium.

Graham K(1), Ge X, de Las Morenas A, Tripathi A, Rosenberg CL.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomics Program and Department of Pathology, Boston University
School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: Previously, we found that gene expression in histologically normal
breast epithelium (NlEpi) from women at high breast cancer risk can resemble gene
expression in NlEpi from cancer-containing breasts. Therefore, we hypothesized
that gene expression characteristic of a cancer subtype might be seen in NlEpi of
breasts containing that subtype.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined gene expression in 46 cases of microdissected
NlEpi from untreated women undergoing breast cancer surgery. From 30 age-matched 
cases [15 estrogen receptor (ER)+, 15 ER-] we used Affymetryix U133A arrays. From
16 independent cases (9 ER+, 7 ER-), we validated selected genes using
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). We then compared gene expression between NlEpi
and invasive breast cancer using four publicly available data sets.
RESULTS: We identified 198 genes that are differentially expressed between NlEpi 
from breasts with ER+ (NlEpiER+) compared with ER- cancers (NlEpiER-). These
include genes characteristic of ER+ and ER- cancers (e.g., ESR1, GATA3, and
CX3CL1, FABP7). qPCR validated the microarray results in both the 30 original
cases and the 16 independent cases. Gene expression in NlEpiER+ and NlEpiER-
resembled gene expression in ER+ and ER- cancers, respectively: 25% to 53% of the
genes or probes examined in four external data sets overlapped between NlEpi and 
the corresponding cancer subtype.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression differs in NlEpi of breasts containing ER+ compared 
with ER- breast cancers. These differences echo differences in ER+ and ER-
invasive cancers. NlEpi gene expression may help elucidate subtype-specific risk 
signatures, identify early genomic events in cancer development, and locate
targets for prevention and therapy.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059257
PMID: 21059815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;9:290. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-290.

The two most common histological subtypes of malignant germ cell tumour are
distinguished by global microRNA profiles, associated with differential
transcription factor expression.

Murray MJ(1), Saini HK, van Dongen S, Palmer RD, Muralidhar B, Pett MR, Piipari
M, Thornton CM, Nicholson JC, Enright AJ, Coleman N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK.
mjm16@hutchison-mrc.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: We hypothesised that differences in microRNA expression profiles
contribute to the contrasting natural history and clinical outcome of the two
most common types of malignant germ cell tumour (GCT), yolk sac tumours (YSTs)
and germinomas.
RESULTS: By direct comparison, using microarray data for paediatric GCT samples
and published qRT-PCR data for adult samples, we identified microRNAs
significantly up-regulated in YSTs (n = 29 paediatric, 26 adult, 11 overlapping) 
or germinomas (n = 37 paediatric). By Taqman qRT-PCR we confirmed differential
expression of 15 of 16 selected microRNAs and further validated six of these
(miR-302b, miR-375, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-122, miR-205) in an independent
sample set. Interestingly, the miR-302 cluster, which is over-expressed in all
malignant GCTs, showed further over-expression in YSTs versus germinomas,
representing six of the top eight microRNAs over-expressed in paediatric YSTs and
seven of the top 11 in adult YSTs. To explain this observation, we used mRNA
expression profiles of paediatric and adult malignant GCTs to identify 10
transcription factors (TFs) consistently over-expressed in YSTs versus
germinomas, followed by linear regression to confirm associations between TF and 
miR-302 cluster expression levels. Using the sequence motif analysis environment 
iMotifs, we identified predicted binding sites for four of the 10 TFs (GATA6,
GATA3, TCF7L2 and MAF) in the miR-302 cluster promoter region. Finally, we showed
that miR-302 family over-expression in YST is likely to be functionally
significant, as mRNAs down-regulated in YSTs were enriched for 3' untranslated
region sequences complementary to the common seed of miR-302a~miR-302d. Such
mRNAs included mediators of key cancer-associated processes, including tumour
suppressor genes, apoptosis regulators and TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential microRNA expression is likely to contribute to the
relatively aggressive behaviour of YSTs and may enable future improvements in
clinical diagnosis and/or treatment.

PMCID: PMC2993676
PMID: 21059207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Nov;126(5):1059-67, 1067.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2010.08.029.

Does genetic regulation of IgE begin in utero? Evidence from T(H)1/T(H)2 gene
polymorphisms and cord blood total IgE.

Hong X(1), Tsai HJ, Liu X, Arguelles L, Kumar R, Wang G, Kuptsova-Clarkson N,
Pearson C, Ortiz K, Bonzagni A, Apollon S, Fu L, Pongracic JA, Schleimer R, Holt 
PG, Bauchner H, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Ann and J. Milburn Smith Child Health Research Program, Children's
Memorial Hospital and Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, Ill
60614-3394, USA.

BACKGROUND: Elucidation of early life factors is critical to understand the
development of allergic diseases, especially those manifesting in early life such
as food allergies and atopic dermatitis. Cord blood IgE (CBIgE) is a recognized
risk factor for the subsequent development of allergic diseases. In contrast with
numerous genetic studies of total serum IgE in children and adults, limited
genetic studies on CBIgE have been conducted.
OBJECTIVE: To test the associations between functional or tagging single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in the T(H)1/T(H)2 pathway and 
CBIgE in a large US inner-city birth cohort.
METHODS: CBIgE, measured by Phadia ImmnunoCAP, was analyzed as a continuous and a
binary variable. The association of each SNP with the 2 outcomes was tested using
tobit and logistic regression models, respectively, with adjustment for pertinent
covariates, ancestral proportion, and multiple testing. Ethnic heterogeneity and 
gene-gene interactions were also explored.
RESULTS: Three SNPs (rs1800925, rs2069743, and rs1295686) in the IL13 gene were
significantly associated with CBIgE concentration (P = 6 × 10(-4), FDR-corrected 
P < .05). These SNPs jointly influenced CBIgE in a dose-response manner (P for
trend = 9 × 10(-8)). Significant associations also were observed for SNPs in the 
IL-13 receptor a1 (rs5956080) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 6 (rs11172106) genes. Ethnicity-specific genetic effects were
observed for SNPs in the IL5 and GATA3 genes. Several gene-gene interactions
(including IL13-IL4 receptor and IL13-signal transducer and activator of
transcription 6 interactions) were detected in relation to CBIgE.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that multiple SNPs were individually and
jointly associated with CBIgE, with evidence of gene-gene interactions and ethnic
heterogeneity. These findings suggest that genetic regulation of IgE may begin in
utero.

Copyright © 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3020083
PMID: 21050946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Genet. 2010 Dec;42(12):1126-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.696. Epub 2010 Oct 31.

A genome-wide association study of Hodgkin's lymphoma identifies new
susceptibility loci at 2p16.1 (REL), 8q24.21 and 10p14 (GATA3).

Enciso-Mora V(1), Broderick P, Ma Y, Jarrett RF, Hjalgrim H, Hemminki K, van den 
Berg A, Olver B, Lloyd A, Dobbins SE, Lightfoot T, van Leeuwen FE, Försti A,
Diepstra A, Broeks A, Vijayakrishnan J, Shield L, Lake A, Montgomery D, Roman E, 
Engert A, von Strandmann EP, Reiners KS, Nolte IM, Smedby KE, Adami HO, Russell
NS, Glimelius B, Hamilton-Dutoit S, de Bruin M, Ryder LP, Molin D, Sorensen KM,
Chang ET, Taylor M, Cooke R, Hofstra R, Westers H, van Wezel T, van Eijk R,
Ashworth A, Rostgaard K, Melbye M, Swerdlow AJ, Houlston RS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.

To identify susceptibility loci for classical Hodgkin's lymphoma (cHL), we
conducted a genome-wide association study of 589 individuals with cHL (cases) and
5,199 controls with validation in four independent samples totaling 2,057 cases
and 3,416 controls. We identified three new susceptibility loci at 2p16.1
(rs1432295, REL, odds ratio (OR) = 1.22, combined P = 1.91 × 10(-8)), 8q24.21
(rs2019960, PVT1, OR = 1.33, combined P = 1.26 × 10(-13)) and 10p14 (rs501764,
GATA3, OR = 1.25, combined P = 7.05 × 10(-8)). Furthermore, we confirmed the role
of the major histocompatibility complex in disease etiology by revealing a strong
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) association (rs6903608, OR = 1.70, combined P =
2.84 × 10(-50)). These data provide new insight into the pathogenesis of cHL.

PMCID: PMC4268499
PMID: 21037568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):919-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144949. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Inhibition of suppressive T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) isoforms in naive CD4+ T cells 
is mediated by IL-4/STAT6 signaling.

Maier E(1), Hebenstreit D, Posselt G, Hammerl P, Duschl A, Horejs-Hoeck J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Wnt pathway transcription factor T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) plays essential
roles in the control of several developmental processes, including T cell
development in the thymus. Although previously regarded as being required only
during early T cell development, recent studies demonstrate an important role for
TCF-1 in T helper 2 (Th2) cell polarization. TCF-1 was shown to activate
expression of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) and
thus to promote the development of IL-4-producing Th2 cells independent of STAT6 
signaling. In this study, we show that TCF-1 is down-regulated in human naive
CD4(+) T cells cultured under Th2-polarizing conditions. The down-regulation is
largely due to the polarizing cytokine IL-4 because IL-4 alone is sufficient to
substantially inhibit TCF-1 expression. The IL-4-induced suppression of TCF-1 is 
mediated by STAT6, as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and STAT6 knockdown experiments. Moreover, we found that
IL-4/STAT6 predominantly inhibits the shorter, dominant-negative TCF-1 isoforms, 
which were reported to inhibit IL-4 transcription. Thus, this study provides a
model for an IL-4/STAT6-dependent fine tuning mechanism of TCF-1-driven T helper 
cell polarization.

PMCID: PMC3019123
PMID: 20980261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Dec;12(6):699-707. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0040. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Nuclear transfer-specific defects are not apparent during the second week of
embryogenesis in cattle.

Smith CS(1), Berg DK, Berg M, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Campus, Hamilton, New Zealand.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT)-specific effects on postblastocyst early
cattle embryogenesis were investigated by comparison to in vitro-produced (IVP)
embryos grown under identical conditions to embryonic days (E) 14 and 15.
Recipient effects were excluded by transferring mixed batches of NT and IVP
embryos into each cow. Embryo recovery rates, proportions with an epiblast and
embryo, as well as epiblast dimensions did not differ between NT and IVP embryos.
A developmental expression profile was determined for nine trophoblast markers,
two inner cell mass (ICM)/epiblast markers, and E-cadherin at nine time points
between E7 and E26, providing a molecular gene signature assay for developmental 
progression. Gene expression levels for these genes (Cdx2, Elf5, Mash2, Ifn-tau, 
Furin, Kunitz1, Pag11, Gata3, Oct4 and Ifitm3) were equal in NT and IVP embryos
of equivalent length. Furthermore, the average residual deviation of all 10 genes
did not differ significantly suggesting an overall "normality" in gene expression
of E14/15 NT embryos. The absence of NT-specific defects during the second,
highly selective, week of cattle embryogenesis is interpreted as supportive for
the view that NT-associated defects are predominantly of an epigenetic nature.

PMID: 20973678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Immunol Rev. 2010 Nov;238(1):110-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2010.00954.x.

From the cradle to the grave: activities of GATA-3 throughout T-cell development 
and differentiation.

Hosoya T(1), Maillard I, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

GATA family transcription factors play multiple vital roles in hematopoiesis in
many cell lineages, and in particular, T cells require GATA-3 for execution of
several developmental steps. Transcriptional activation of the Gata3 gene is
observed throughout T-cell development and differentiation in a stage-specific
fashion. GATA-3 has been described as a master regulator of T-helper 2 (Th2) cell
differentiation in mature CD4(+) T cells. During T-cell development in the
thymus, its roles in the CD4 versus CD8 lineage choice and at the ß-selection
checkpoint are the best characterized. In contrast, its importance prior to
ß-selection has been obscured both by the developmental heterogeneity of double
negative (DN) 1 thymocytes and the paucity of early T-lineage progenitors (ETPs),
a subpopulation of DN1 cells that contains the most immature thymic progenitors
that retain potent T-lineage developmental potential. By examining multiple lines
of in vivo evidence procured through the analysis of Gata3 mutant mice, we have
recently demonstrated that GATA-3 is additionally required at the earliest stage 
of thymopoiesis for the development of the ETP population. Here, we review the
characterized functions of GATA-3 at each stage of T-cell development and discuss
hypothetical molecular pathways that mediate these functions.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC2965564
PMID: 20969588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Immunol Rev. 2010 Nov;238(1):93-109. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2010.00957.x.

E proteins and the regulation of early lymphocyte development.

de Pooter RF(1), Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Lymphopoiesis generates mature B, T, and NK lymphocytes from hematopoietic stem
cells via a series of increasingly restricted developmental intermediates. The
transcriptional networks that regulate these fate choices are composed of both
common and lineage-specific components, which combine to create a cellular
context that informs the developmental response to external signals. E proteins
are an important factor during lymphopoiesis, and E2A in particular is required
for normal T- and B-cell development. Although the other E proteins, HEB and
E2-2, are expressed during lymphopoiesis and can compensate for some of E2A's
activity, E2A proteins have non-redundant functions during early T-cell
development and at multiple checkpoints throughout B lymphopoiesis. More
recently, a role for E2A has been demonstrated in the generation of
lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitors and shown to favor their specification
toward lymphoid over myeloid lineages. This review summarizes both our current
understanding of the wide-ranging functions of E proteins during the development 
of adaptive lymphocytes and the novel functions of E2A in orchestrating a
lymphoid-biased cellular context in early multipotent progenitors.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC2992984
PMID: 20969587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Proteome Res. 2010 Dec 3;9(12):6696-704. doi: 10.1021/pr100843x. Epub 2010 Nov 
9.

Comparison of strong cation exchange and SDS-PAGE fractionation for analysis of
multiprotein complexes.

Das S(1), Bosley AD, Ye X, Chan KC, Chu I, Green JE, Issaq HJ, Veenstra TD,
Andresson T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Proteomics and Analytical Technologies, SAIC-Frederick, Inc,
NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, United States.

Affinity purification of protein complexes followed by identification using
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is a robust method to study
the fundamental process of protein interaction. Although affinity isolation
reduces the complexity of the sample, fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis is
still necessary to maximize protein coverage. In this study, we compared the
protein coverage obtained via LC-MS/MS analysis of protein complexes
prefractionated using two commonly employed methods, SDS-PAGE and strong cation
exchange chromatography (SCX). The two complexes analyzed focused on the nuclear 
proteins Bmi-1 and GATA3 that were expressed within the cells at low and high
levels, respectively. Prefractionation of the complexes at the peptide level
using SCX consistently resulted in the identification of approximately 3-fold
more proteins compared to separation at the protein level using SDS-PAGE. The
increase in the number of identified proteins was especially pronounced for the
Bmi-1 complex, where the target protein was expressed at a low level. The data
show that prefractionation of affinity isolated protein complexes using SCX prior
to LC-MS/MS analysis significantly increases the number of identified proteins
and individual protein coverage, particularly for target proteins expressed at
low levels.

PMCID: PMC3707127
PMID: 20968308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Exp Med. 2010 Oct 25;207(11):2493-506. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100760. Epub 2010 Oct
18.

STAT6-mediated displacement of polycomb by trithorax complex establishes
long-term maintenance of GATA3 expression in T helper type 2 cells.

Onodera A(1), Yamashita M, Endo Y, Kuwahara M, Tofukuji S, Hosokawa H, Kanai A,
Suzuki Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) and trithorax group (TrxG) complexes exert opposing effects 
on the maintenance of the transcriptional status of the developmentally regulated
Hox genes. In this study, we show that activation of STAT6 induces displacement
of the PcG complex by the TrxG complex at the upstream region of the gene
encoding GATA3, a transcription factor essential for T helper type 2 (Th2) cell
differentiation. Once Th2 cells differentiate, TrxG complex associated with the
TrxG component Menin binds to the whole GATA3 gene locus, and this binding is
required for the long-term maintenance of expression of GATA3 and Th2 cytokine.
Thus, STAT6-mediated displacement of PcG by the TrxG complex establishes
subsequent STAT6-independent maintenance of GATA3 expression in Th2 cells via the
recruitment of the Menin-TrxG complex.

PMCID: PMC2964576
PMID: 20956546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):5983-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001255. Epub 2010 
Oct 13.

An intrinsic mechanism predisposes Foxp3-expressing regulatory T cells to Th2
conversion in vivo.

Wang Y(1), Souabni A, Flavell RA, Wan YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Naturally occurring regulatory T (nTreg) cells express Foxp3 and were originally 
discovered as immune suppressors critical for self-tolerance and immune
homeostasis. Through yet-to-be-defined mechanisms, nTreg cells were recently
shown to convert into proinflammatory cells. Particularly, attenuation of Foxp3
expression led to Th2 conversion of nTreg cells in vivo. In this paper, we
demonstrated an nTreg-specific mechanism controlling their Th2 conversion. We
found that wild-type nTreg cells expressing reduced levels of Foxp3 but not those
expressing no Foxp3 produced the Th2 cytokine IL-4. Intriguingly, IL-4 production
by converted nTreg cells is required for Th2 differentiation of coexisting naive 
CD4 T cells in vivo, suggesting that Th2 conversion of nTreg cells might be
critical for directing Th2 immune responses. Th2 conversion of nTreg cells was
not due to their inability to become Th1 cells, because IFN-<U+03B3> was produced by
Foxp3-low-expressing cells when IL-4/STAT-6 signaling was abrogated.
Surprisingly, however, unlike naive CD4 T cells whose IL-4 production is
dependent on STAT-6, Foxp3-low-expressing cells generated IL-4 independent of
STAT-6, indicating an intrinsic mechanism that favors nTreg-to-Th2
differentiation. Indeed, compared with naive CD4 T cells, nTreg expressed
elevated levels of GATA-3 independent of STAT-6. And GATA-3 was required for
nTreg-to-Th2 conversion. Foxp3 may account for this GATA-3 upregulation in nTreg 
cells, because ectopic expression of Foxp3 preferentially promoted GATA-3 but not
T-bet expression. Thus, we have identified an intrinsic mechanism that imposes a 
Th2/Th1 imbalance and predisposes Foxp3-expressing cells to IL-4 production
independent of STAT-6 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2974034
PMID: 20944002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Feb;76(2):178-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.09.011.

Bidirectional immunoregulation of calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus on FOXP3
transcription?

Shen Z(1), Song Q, Chen L, Zhong B, Tang S, Hao F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China. zhushencq@gmail.com

The imbalance between regulatory T cells (Treg) and effector T cells is important
for maintaining of psoriasis vulgaris. FOXP3 is a master control transcription
factor for the development and function of Tregs and is critical for
transcriptional repression. Tacrolimus is effective in treatment of psoriasis
vulgaris. Data show that tacrolimus has multiple impacts on FOXP3, but the exact 
pharmacological mechanism of tacrolimus on FOXP3 have yet to be elucidated. We
herein suggest the bidirectional immunoregulation of tacrolimus on FOXP3. High
concentration of tacrolimus renders the cooperation of NFAT with STAT6 and NF-<U+03BA>B 
to activate GATA3 transcription. On the contrary, low concentration of tacrolimus
results in higher nucleus level of NFAT, which directly binds to FOXP3 enhancer
and/or cooperates with Smad3 to activate FOXP3 transcription. Further studies
using loss of function and over-expression methods are needed to determine the
detailed molecules involved in this bidirectional immunoregulation of tacrolimus 
on FOXP3.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20937549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BMC Genomics. 2010 Oct 11;11:553. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-553.

Dynamic transcriptomic profiles of zebrafish gills in response to zinc
supplementation.

Zheng D(1), Kille P, Feeney GP, Cunningham P, Handy RD, Hogstrand C.

Author information: 
(1)Mineral Metabolism Group, Nutritional Sciences Division, King's College
London, London SE1 9NH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dietary zinc supplementation may help to promote growth, boost the
immune system, protect against diabetes, and aid recovery from diarrhoea. We
exploited the zebrafish (Danio rerio) gill as a unique vertebrate ion
transporting epithelium model to study the time-dependent regulatory networks of 
gene-expression leading to homeostatic control during zinc supplementation. This 
organ forms a conduit for zinc uptake whilst exhibiting conservation of zinc
trafficking components.
RESULTS: Fish were maintained with either zinc supplemented water (4.0 µM) and
diet (2023 mg zinc kg-1) or water and diet containing Zn2+ at 0.25 µM and 233 mg 
zinc kg-1, respectively. Gill tissues were harvested at five time points (8 hours
to 14 days) and transcriptome changes analysed in quintuplicate using a 16 K
microarray with results anchored to gill Zn2+ influx and whole body nutrient
composition (protein, carbohydrate, lipid, elements). The number of regulated
genes increased up to day 7 but declined as the fish acclimated. In total 525
genes were regulated (having a fold-change more than 1.8 fold change and an
adjusted P-value less than 0.1 which is controlling a 10% False discovery rate,
FDR) by zinc supplementation, but little overlap was observed between genes
regulated at successive time-points. Many genes displayed cyclic expression,
typical for homeostatic control mechanisms. Annotation enrichment analysis
revealed strong overrepresentation of "transcription factors", with specific
association evident with "steroid hormone receptors". A suite of genes linked to 
"development" were also statistically overrepresented. More specifically, early
regulation of genes was linked to a few key transcription factors (e.g. Mtf1,
Jun, Stat1, Ppara, Gata3) and was followed by hedgehog and bone morphogenic
protein signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that zinc supplementation reactivated
developmental pathways in the gill and stimulated stem cell differentiation, a
response likely reflecting gill remodelling in response to its altered
environment. This provides insight to the role of zinc during cell
differentiation and illustrates the critical nature of maintaining zinc status.
The study also highlights the importance of temporal transcriptomics analysis in 
order resolve the discrete elements of biological processes, such as zinc
acclimation.

PMCID: PMC3091702
PMID: 20937081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Exp Med. 2010 Oct 25;207(11):2479-91. doi: 10.1084/jem.20101376. Epub 2010 Oct 
4.

A novel subset of CD4(+) T(H)2 memory/effector cells that produce inflammatory
IL-17 cytokine and promote the exacerbation of chronic allergic asthma.

Wang YH(1), Voo KS, Liu B, Chen CY, Uygungil B, Spoede W, Bernstein JA, Huston
DP, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
yui_hsi.wang@cchmc.org

The inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-17 is involved in the pathogenesis of 
allergic diseases. However, the identity and functions of IL-17-producing T cells
during the pathogenesis of allergic diseases remain unclear. Here, we report a
novel subset of T(H)2 memory/effector cells that coexpress the transcription
factors GATA3 and ROR<U+03B3>t and coproduce T(H)17 and T(H)2 cytokines. Classical T(H)2
memory/effector cells had the potential to produce IL-17 after stimulation with
proinflammatory cytokines IL-1ß, IL-6, and IL-21. The number of IL-17-T(H)2 cells
was significantly increased in blood of patients with atopic asthma. In a mouse
model of allergic lung diseases, IL-17-producing CD4(+) T(H)2 cells were induced 
in the inflamed lung and persisted as the dominant IL-17-producing T cell
population during the chronic stage of asthma. Treating cultured bronchial
epithelial cells with IL-17 plus T(H)2 cytokines induced strong up-regulation of 
chemokine eotaxin-3, Il8, Mip1b, and Groa gene expression. Compared with
classical T(H)17 and T(H)2 cells, antigen-specific IL-17-producing T(H)2 cells
induced a profound influx of heterogeneous inflammatory leukocytes and
exacerbated asthma. Our findings highlight the plasticity of T(H)2 memory cells
and suggest that IL-17-producing T(H)2 cells may represent the key pathogenic
T(H)2 cells promoting the exacerbation of allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC2964570
PMID: 20921287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):4993-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002273. Epub 2010 Oct
1.

Cutting edge: Thymic NK cells develop independently from T cell precursors.

Ribeiro VS(1), Hasan M, Wilson A, Boucontet L, Pereira P, Lesjean-Pottier S,
Satoh-Takayama N, Di Santo JP, Vosshenrich CA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunité Innée, Institut Pasteur, INSERM U668, Paris, France.

Although NK cells in the mouse are thought to develop in the bone marrow, a small
population of NK cells in the thymus has been shown to derive from a
GATA3-dependent pathway. Characteristically, thymic NK cells express CD127 and
few Ly49 molecules and lack CD11b. Because these NK cells develop in the thymus, 
the question of their relationship to the T cell lineage has been raised. Using
several different mouse models, we find that unlike T cells, thymic NK cells are 
not the progeny of Rorc-expressing progenitors and do not express Rag2 or
rearrange the TCR<U+03B3> locus. We further demonstrate that thymic NK cells develop
independently of the Notch signaling pathway, supporting the idea that thymic NK 
cells represent bona fide NK cells that can develop independently of all T cell
precursors.

PMID: 20889548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 23;6(9):e1001133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001133.

Identification of early requirements for preplacodal ectoderm and sensory organ
development.

Kwon HJ(1), Bhat N, Sweet EM, Cornell RA, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.

Preplacodal ectoderm arises near the end of gastrulation as a narrow band of
cells surrounding the anterior neural plate. This domain later resolves into
discrete cranial placodes that, together with neural crest, produce paired
sensory structures of the head. Unlike the better-characterized neural crest,
little is known about early regulation of preplacodal development. Classical
models of ectodermal patterning posit that preplacodal identity is specified by
readout of a discrete level of Bmp signaling along a DV gradient. More recent
studies indicate that Bmp-antagonists are critical for promoting preplacodal
development. However, it is unclear whether Bmp-antagonists establish the proper 
level of Bmp signaling within a morphogen gradient or, alternatively, block Bmp
altogether. To begin addressing these issues, we treated zebrafish embryos with a
pharmacological inhibitor of Bmp, sometimes combined with heat shock-induction of
Chordin and dominant-negative Bmp receptor, to fully block Bmp signaling at
various developmental stages. We find that preplacodal development occurs in two 
phases with opposing Bmp requirements. Initially, Bmp is required before
gastrulation to co-induce four transcription factors, Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1, and 
Gata3, which establish preplacodal competence throughout the nonneural ectoderm. 
Subsequently, Bmp must be fully blocked in late gastrulation by dorsally
expressed Bmp-antagonists, together with dorsally expressed Fgf and Pdgf, to
specify preplacodal identity within competent cells abutting the neural plate.
Localized ventral misexpression of Fgf8 and Chordin can activate ectopic
preplacodal development anywhere within the zone of competence, whereas dorsal
misexpression of one or more competence factors can activate ectopic preplacodal 
development in the neural plate. Conversely, morpholino-knockdown of competence
factors specifically ablates preplacodal development. Our work supports a
relatively simple two-step model that traces regulation of preplacodal
development to late blastula stage, resolves two distinct phases of Bmp
dependence, and identifies the main factors required for preplacodal competence
and specification.

PMCID: PMC2944784
PMID: 20885782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1233-9.

Loss of ERa and FOXA1 expression in a progression model of luminal type breast
cancer: insights from PyMT transgenic mouse model.

McCune K(1), Mehta R, Thorat MA, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

The classification of breast cancer into multiple molecular subtypes has
necessitated the need for biomarkers that can assess tumor progression and the
effects of chemopreventive agents on specific breast cancer subtypes. The goal of
this study was to identify biomarkers whose expression are altered along with
estrogen receptor a (ERa) in the polyoma middle-T antigen (PyMT) transgenic model
of breast cancer and to investigate the chemopreventive activity of phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC). The diet of PyMT female mice was fortified with PEITC (8 
mmol/kg) and the mammary streak and/or gross tumors and metastases in lungs were 
subjected to immunohistochemical analyses for ERa, FOXA1, and GATA-3. FOXA1 is
associated with luminal type A cancers, while GATA-3 is a marker of luminal
progenitor cell differentiation. In both control and PEITC-treated groups, there 
was a progressive loss of ERa and FOXA1 but persistence of GATA-3 expression
indicating that the tumors retain luminal phenotype. Overall, the PyMT induced
tumors exhibited the entire gamut of phenotypes from ERa+/FOXA1+/GATA-3+ tumors
in the early stage to ERa±/FOXA1-/GATA-3+ in the late stage. Thus, PyMT model
serves as an excellent model for studying progression of luminal subtype tumors. 
PEITC treated animals had multiple small tumors, indicating delay in tumor
progression. Although these tumors were histologically similar to those in
controls, there was a lower expression of these biomarkers in normal luminal
cells indicating delay in tumor initiation. In in vitro studies, PEITC depleted
AldeFluor-positive putative stem/progenitor cells, which may partly be
responsible for the delay in tumor initiation.

PMCID: PMC2948410
PMID: 20878115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;30(22):5348-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00353-09. Epub 2010 Sep 
20.

Cooperative action of multiple cis-acting elements is required for N-myc
expression in branchial arches: specific contribution of GATA3.

Potvin E(1), Beuret L, Cadrin-Girard JF, Carter M, Roy S, Tremblay M, Charron J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, 9 rue McMahon,
Québec, QC, Canada.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;32(24):5152-3.

The precise expression of the N-myc proto-oncogene is essential for normal
mammalian development, whereas altered N-myc gene regulation is known to be a
determinant factor in tumor formation. Using transgenic mouse embryos, we show
that N-myc sequences from kb -8.7 to kb +7.2 are sufficient to reproduce the
N-myc embryonic expression profile in developing branchial arches and limb buds. 
These sequences encompass several regulatory elements dispersed throughout the
N-myc locus, including an upstream limb bud enhancer, a downstream somite
enhancer, a branchial arch enhancer in the second intron, and a negative
regulatory element in the first intron. N-myc expression in the limb buds is
under the dominant control of the limb bud enhancer. The expression in the
branchial arches necessitates the interplay of three regulatory domains. The
branchial arch enhancer cooperates with the somite enhancer region to prevent an 
inhibitory activity contained in the first intron. The characterization of the
branchial arch enhancer has revealed a specific role of the transcription factor 
GATA3 in the regulation of N-myc expression. Together, these data demonstrate
that correct N-myc developmental expression is achieved via cooperation of
multiple positive and negative regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC2976382
PMID: 20855530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Exp Med. 2010 Sep 27;207(10):2141-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100745. Epub 2010 Sep 
20.

NKX3.1 is a direct TAL1 target gene that mediates proliferation of
TAL1-expressing human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kusy S(1), Gerby B, Goardon N, Gault N, Ferri F, Gérard D, Armstrong F, Ballerini
P, Cayuela JM, Baruchel A, Pflumio F, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de recherche sur la Réparation et la Transcription dans les
cellules Souches, Direction des Sciences du Vivant, Commissariat à l'Energie
Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

TAL1 (also known as SCL) is expressed in >40% of human T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALLs). TAL1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
that can interfere with the transcriptional activity of E2A and HEB during T cell
leukemogenesis; however, the oncogenic pathways directly activated by TAL1 are
not characterized. In this study, we show that, in human TAL1-expressing T-ALL
cell lines, TAL1 directly activates NKX3.1, a tumor suppressor gene required for 
prostate stem cell maintenance. In human T-ALL cell lines, NKX3.1 gene activation
is mediated by a TAL1-LMO-Ldb1 complex that is recruited by GATA-3 bound to an
NKX3.1 gene promoter regulatory sequence. TAL1-induced NKX3.1 activation is
associated with suppression of HP1-a (heterochromatin protein 1 a) binding and
opening of chromatin on the NKX3.1 gene promoter. NKX3.1 is necessary for T-ALL
proliferation, can partially restore proliferation in TAL1 knockdown cells, and
directly regulates miR-17-92. In primary human TAL1-expressing leukemic cells,
the NKX3.1 gene is expressed independently of the Notch pathway, and its
inactivation impairs proliferation. Finally, TAL1 or NKX3.1 knockdown abrogates
the ability of human T-ALL cells to efficiently induce leukemia development in
mice. These results suggest that tumor suppressor or oncogenic activity of NKX3.1
depends on tissue expression.

PMCID: PMC2947082
PMID: 20855495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mult Scler. 2011 Jan;17(1):57-66. doi: 10.1177/1352458510381256. Epub 2010 Sep
16.

Transcriptional characteristics of CD4+ T cells in multiple sclerosis: relative
lack of suppressive populations in blood.

Edström M(1), Mellergård J, Mjösberg J, Jenmalm M, Vrethem M, Press R, Dahle C,
Ernerudh J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Division of
Clinical Immunology, Unit of Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Linköping
University, Sweden. mans.edstrom@liu.se

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is hypothetically caused by autoreactive Th1 
and Th17 cells, whereas Th2 and regulatory T cells may confer protection. The
development of Th subpopulations is dependant on the expression of
lineage-specific transcription factors.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the balance of CD4(+)T cell
populations in relapsing-remitting MS.
METHODS: Blood mRNA expression of TBX21, GATA3, RORC, FOXP3 and EBI3 was assessed
in 33 patients with relapsing-remitting MS and 20 healthy controls. In addition, 
flow cytometry was performed to assess T lymphocyte numbers.
RESULTS: In relapsing-remitting MS, diminished expression of FOXP3 (Treg) was
found (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), despite normal numbers of CD4(+)CD25(hi)Treg. Immunoregulatory 
EBI3 and Th2-associated GATA3 ([a-z]+) was also decreased in MS (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005 and
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, respectively). Expression of TBX21 (Th1) and RORC (Th17) did not differ
between patients and controls. Similar changes were observed when analysing
beta-interferon treated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12) or untreated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>21) patients. Analysis of
transcription factor ratios, comparing TBX21/GATA3 and RORC/FOXP3, revealed an
increase in the RORC/FOXP3 ratio in patients with relapsing-remitting MS
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate systemic defects at the mRNA level, involving
downregulation of beneficial CD4(+)phenotypes. This might play a role in disease 
development by permitting activation of harmful T cell populations.

PMID: 20847001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2011 Oct;294(10):1615-23. doi: 10.1002/ar.21248. Epub 2010
Sep 3.

Genetic models of serotonin (5-HT) depletion: what do they tell us about the
developmental role of 5-HT?

Trowbridge S(1), Narboux-Nême N, Gaspar P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR-S, Paris, France.

A large number of hyposerotonergic genetic models have been generated over the
past few years. Serotonin (5-HT) depletion has been obtained via targeting of
genes involved in 5-HT synthesis (Tph1 and Tph2), specification and determination
of the 5-HT phenotype during development (GATA3, Pet1, and Lmx1b), and 5-HT
storage or clearance (Vmat2 and SERT). Here we review these various models from a
developmental perspective, beginning with a description of the sources of 5-HT
during development. We then summarize the neurological and behavioral alterations
that have been observed in the genetic hyposerotonergic models. Although these
models appear to have normal brain development and do not exhibit any gross
morphological defects, problems in somatic growth and physiological functions
have been observed. Abnormal adult behavior is also seen, although whether it
results from depletion of 5-HT during development or functional 5-HT deficiencies
in adult life remains unclear. Evidence from these hyposerotonergic models
suggests that the developing brain may not need 5-HT for the establishment of
general organization and structure. However, central 5-HT appears to be necessary
for postnatal body growth, maturation of respiratory and vegetative control, and 
possibly for the development of normal adult behavior.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20818612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Sep;40(9):2372-5. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040844.

Directing traffic on the NKT-cell highway: a key role for ThPOK.

Chakravarti S(1), Godfrey DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia. sumonec@unimelb.edu.au

CD1d-restricted NKT cells include CD4(+) and DN subsets, with an additional
CD8(+) subset that is present in humans but not in mice. The molecular regulation
of CD4/CD8 expression by NKT cells, and differentiation of these NKT-cell
subsets, is poorly understood. The transcription factors GATA3 and ThPOK regulate
lineage commitment of conventional MHC class II-restricted CD4(+) T cells;
however, their role in CD4/CD8 expression by CD1d-restricted NKT cells is less
clear. A new study in this issue of the European Journal of Immunology
demonstrates a key role for ThPOK in differentiation of NKT-cell subsets. This
study reveals that GATA3 and ThPOK are necessary for the development of CD4(+)
NKT cells. Furthermore, ThPOK-deficient mice generate an unusual population of
CD8(+) NKT cells, which are absent in control mice. This study sheds new light on
the underlying molecular events leading to the emergence of distinct NKT-cell
subsets.

PMID: 20809492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Virchows Arch. 2010 Oct;457(4):451-6. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0961-1. Epub 2010
Aug 31.

Differences in the T-bet and GATA-3 expression patterns between lymphocytic
colitis and coeliac disease.

Jöhrens K(1), Grünbaum M, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Medical University
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Lymphocytic colitis (LC) is a disease of unknown aetiology. Among other
pathogenetic possibilities, an abnormal reaction to a luminal antigen has been
discussed. To clarify this fact, we characterized the inflammatory infiltrate in 
LC and compared it with the Th1 response-related coeliac disease (CD). Biopsies
from 10 LC and 10 CD patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for detection
of T-bet, the master regulator of Th1 response and its antagonist GATA-3 in T
cells employing double labellings. In LC, 10-20% of intraepithelial lymphocytes
(IEL) expressed GATA-3 and the remaining T-bet, whereas in CD, all IEL were
T-bet-positive. The T cells in the lamina propria of LC (65-70% CD4+; 30-35%
CD8+) showed a mixed expression pattern of T-bet and GATA-3. The majority of the 
CD4+ T cells were GATA-3+, while T-bet and GATA-3 were expressed at a similar
frequency by the CD8+ T cells. Most of the T cells in the lamina propria of CD
specimens were CD4+, showing a predominant T-bet expression. Also, most of the
CD8+ lamina propria T cells in CD were T-bet+. We conclude that in contrast to
CD, which exhibits immunophenotypical features of a Th1-response, LC shows
features of a mixed Th1/Th2 immune response.

PMID: 20809338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO J. 2010 Oct 6;29(19):3421-33. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.214. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

NBR1 is a new PB1 signalling adapter in Th2 differentiation and allergic airway
inflammation in vivo.

Yang JQ(1), Liu H, Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Allergic airway inflammation is a disease in which T helper 2 (Th2) cells have a 
critical function. The molecular mechanisms controlling Th2 differentiation and
function are of paramount importance in biology and immunology. Recently, a
network of PB1-containing adapters and kinases has been shown to be essential in 
this process owing to its function in regulating cell polarity and the activation
of critical transcription factors. Here, we show in vivo data showing that
T-cell-specific NBR1-deficient mice show impaired lung inflammation and have
defective Th2 differentiation ex vivo with alterations in T-cell polarity and the
selective inhibition of Gata3 and nuclear factor of activated T c1 activation.
These results establish NBR1 as a novel PB1 adapter in Th2 differentiation and
asthma.

PMCID: PMC2957215
PMID: 20808283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;684:1-10.

Memory Th1/Th2 cell generation controlled by Schnurri-2.

Nakayama T(1), Kimura MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan. tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Schnurri (Shn) is a large zinc-finger containingprotein, which plays a critical
role in cell growth, signal transduction and lymphocyte development. There are
three orthologues (Shn-1, Shn-2 and Shn-3) in vertebrates. In Shn-2-deficient
mice, the activation of NF-kappaB in CD4 T cells is upregulated and their ability
to differentiate into Th2 cells is enhanced in part through the increased
expression of GATA3. Shn-2 is found to compete with p50 NF-kappaB for binding to 
a consensus NF-kappaB motif and inhibit the NF-kappaB-driven promoter activity.
In addition, Th2-driven allergic airway inflammation was enhanced in
Shn-2-deficient mice. Therefore, Shn-2 appears to negatively control the
differentiation of Th2 cells and Th2 responses through the repression of
NF-kappaB function. Memory Th1/Th2 cells are not properly generated from
Shn-2-deficient effector Th1/Th2 cells. The expression levels of CD69 and the
number ofapoptotic cells are selectively increased in Shn-2-deficient Thl/Th2
cells when they are transferred into syngeneic host animals, in which memoryh
Th1/Th2 cells are generated within a month. In addition, an increased
susceptibility to apoptotic cell death is also observed in vitro accompanied with
the increased expression of FasL, one of the NF-kappaB-dependent genes. Th2
effector cells overexpressing the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB demonstrate a
decreased cell survival particularly in the lymph node. These results indicate
that Shn-2-mediated repression of NF-kappaB is required for cell survival and the
successful generation of memory Th1/Th2 cells. This may point to the possibility 
that after antigen clearance the recovery of the quiescent state in effector Th
cells is required for the generation of memory Th cells. A repressor molecule
Shn-2 plays an important role in this process.

PMID: 20795536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Eur J Haematol. 2010 Dec;85(6):508-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2010.01519.x.

Identification of DeltaEF1 as a novel target that is negatively regulated by LMO2
in T-cell leukemia.

Sun W(1), Yang S, Shen W, Li H, Gao Y, Zhu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, Nankai University,
Tianjin, China.

The lmo2 gene is a specific oncogene in T-cell leukemia, for its ectopic
expression causes both increased pro-T-cell proliferation and differentiation
arrest, leading to the onset of leukemia. Notably, DeltaEF1 (also known as ZEB1),
a member of zinc finger-homeodomain family transcription factor, also exhibits
crucial function in promoting T-cell differentiation. In this study, we found
that DeltaEF1 was positively regulated by T-lineage-specific transcriptional
regulator GATA3, while ectopically expressed LMO2 targeted to DeltaEF1 promoter
by interaction with GATA3 and inhibited DeltaEF1 expression in transcriptional
level. Moreover, LMO2 interacted with the N-terminal zinc finger domain of
DeltaEF1 protein and inhibited its positive transcriptional regulatory function
by this interaction. Taken together, our findings revealed that ectopically
expressed LMO2 impaired the function of DeltaEF1 in both transcriptional and
protein levels and identified DeltaEF1 as a novel pathogenic target of LMO2 in
T-cell leukemia.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20731704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pathologica. 2010 Feb;102(1):33-5.

The use of placental S100 (S100P), GATA3 and napsin A in the differential
diagnosis of primary adenocarcinoma of the bladder and bladder metastasis from
adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Raspollini MR(1), Comin CE, Crisci A, Chilosi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Florence, Italy.
mariarosaria.raspollini@unifi.it

Primary bladder adenocarcinoma accounts for 0.5-2% of all malignant bladder
tumours. Literature data indicate the bladder as the second most common site of
metastatic genitourinary tumours, with the kidney as the most frequent location. 
Secondary tumours of the bladder account for about 2.3% of all bladder
malignancies encountered in surgical specimens. Herein, we describe an
adenocarcinoma deeply infiltrating the bladder wall, with no morphologic features
of transitional cell carcinoma, in a patient with a previous diagnosis of primary
lung adenocarcinoma, mixed subtype. In this case, the use of a limited
immunohistochemical panel including napsin A, a recently described highly
sensitive marker for lung adenocarcinoma, GATA3 and S100P, two novel markers of
urothelial differentiation, was of crucial importance in differentiating between 
lung adenocarcinoma metastatic to the bladder and primary bladder adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20731252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2010 Nov 25;116(22):4523-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-267542. Epub 2010 
Aug 20.

Interleukin-25: a cytokine linking eosinophils and adaptive immunity in
Churg-Strauss syndrome.

Terrier B(1), Bièche I, Maisonobe T, Laurendeau I, Rosenzwajg M, Kahn JE, Diemert
MC, Musset L, Vidaud M, Sène D, Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Le Thi-Huong D, Amoura Z, 
Klatzmann D, Cacoub P, Saadoun D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory I3, Immunology, Immunopathology, Immunotherapy, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 7211, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U959,
France.

Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) is characterized by systemic vasculitis and blood
and tissue eosinophilia. Blood eosinophilia correlates with disease activity, and
activated T cells from CSS patients are predominantly T helper 2 (Th2).
Interleukin (IL)-25 has been shown to link innate and adaptive immunity by
enhancing Th2 cytokine production. We sought to determine the involvement of
IL-25 and its receptor IL-17RB in the pathogenesis of CSS. We found increased
levels of IL-25 in the serum of active CSS patients (952 ± 697 vs 75 ± 49 pg/mL
in inactive patients and 47 ± 6 pg/mL in healthy donors). IL-25 was correlated
with disease activity and eosinophil level. Eosinophils were the main source of
IL-25, whereas activated CD4(+) memory T cells were the IL-17RB-expressing cells 
in CSS. IL-25 enhanced the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 by activated
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. IL-25 and IL-17RB were observed within the
vasculitic lesions of patients with CSS, and IL-17RB colocalized with T cells.
Increased expression of IL-17RB, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor
6, and JunB in vasculitic lesions of CSS underscored the IL-25-mediated
activation, whereas up-regulation of GATA3 and IL-10 supported Th2
differentiation. Our findings suggest that eosinophils, through the production of
IL-25, exert a critical role in promoting Th2 responses in target tissues of CSS.

PMID: 20729468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Oct;12(5):617-25. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0017.

Aberrant expression patterns of genes involved in segregation of inner cell mass 
and trophectoderm lineages in bovine embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear
transfer.

Fujii T(1), Moriyasu S, Hirayama H, Hashizume T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Iwate University, Japan.

High rates of embryonic, fetal, or placental abnormalities have consistently been
observed in bovine cloning. Segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) lineages in early embryos is an important process for fetal
and placental formation. In mouse embryos, differentiation of ICM and TE is
regulated by various transcription factors, such as OCT-4, CDX2, and TEAD4, but
molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation in bovine embryos remain
unknown. To clarify gene transcripts involved in segregation of ICM and TE
lineages in bovine embryos, we examined the relative abundances of OCT-4, CDX2,
TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, and FGF4 transcripts in blastocyst embryos derived from in
vitro fertilization (IVF). Furthermore, transcript levels of such genes in bovine
embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT-SC) and in vivo (Vivo)
were also compared. OCT-4, NANOG, and FGF4 transcript levels in IVF embryos were 
significantly higher in ICM than in TE. In contrast, the CDX2 transcript level
was lower in ICM than in TE. In NT-SC embryos at the blastocyst stage, transcript
levels of all genes except CDX2 were lower than that in Vivo embryos. In the
elongated stage, expression levels of the six genes did not differ between NT-SC 
and Vivo embryos. We observed aberrant expression patterns of various genes
involved in segregation of ICM and TE lineages in bovine NT-SC embryos. These
results raise the possibility that abnormalities in the cloned fetus and placenta
are related to the aberrant expression of genes involved in segregation and
differentiation process in the early developmental stage.

PMID: 20726774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Nov;118(1):318; author reply 319. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq248.
Epub 2010 Aug 18.

Cobalt-Induced lung injury and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha.

Inoue K, Kiyono M, Sone Y, Takano H.

Comment on
    Toxicol Sci. 2010 Aug;116(2):673-81.

PMID: 20719750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Sep;19(9):2152-63. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0389. Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Genetic polymorphisms in adaptive immunity genes and childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chang JS(1), Wiemels JL, Chokkalingam AP, Metayer C, Barcellos LF, Hansen HM,
Aldrich MC, Guha N, Urayama KY, Scélo G, Green J, May SL, Kiley VA, Wiencke JK,
Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. jeffreychang@nhri.org.tw

BACKGROUND: Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has been hypothesized to
have an infection- and immune-related etiology. The lack of immune priming in
early childhood may result in abnormal immune responses to infections later in
life and increase ALL risk.
METHODS: The current analyses examined the association between childhood ALL and 
208 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of 29 adaptive immune function genes
among 377 ALL cases and 448 healthy controls. Single SNPs were analyzed with a
log-additive approach using logistic regression models adjusted for sex, age,
Hispanic ethnicity, and race. Sliding window haplotype analyses were done with
haplotypes consisting of 2 to 6 SNPs.
RESULTS: Of the 208 SNPs, only rs583911 of IL12A, which encodes a critical
modulator of T-cell development, remained significant after accounting for
multiple testing (odds ratio for each copy of the variant G allele, 1.52; 95%
confidence interval, 1.25-1.85; P = 2.9 x 10(-5)). This increased risk was
stronger among firstborn children of all ethnicities and among non-Hispanic
children with less day care attendance, consistent with the hypothesis about the 
role of early immune modulation in the development of childhood ALL. Haplotype
analyses identified additional regions of CD28, FCGR2, GATA3, IL2RA, STAT4, and
STAT6 associated with childhood ALL.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of genes on the adaptive immunity pathway are
associated with childhood ALL risk.
IMPACT: Results of this study support an immune-related etiology of childhood
ALL. Further confirmation is required to detect functional variants in the
significant genomic regions identified in this study, in particular for IL12A.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3257312
PMID: 20716621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Sep;40(9):2385-90. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040534.

The sequential activity of Gata3 and Thpok is required for the differentiation of
CD1d-restricted CD4+ NKT cells.

Wang L(1), Carr T, Xiong Y, Wildt KF, Zhu J, Feigenbaum L, Bendelac A, Bosselut
R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research (CCR), NCI, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4259, USA.

While most CD4(+) T cells are MHC class II-restricted, a small subset, including 
the CD1d-restricted 'invariant' NKT (iNKT) cells, are selected on non-classical
MHC-I or MHC-I-like molecules. We previously showed that the sequential activity 
of two zinc finger transcription factors, Gata3 and Thpok, promotes the
differentiation of conventional, MHC II-restricted thymocytes into CD4(+) T
cells. In the current study, we show that a Gata3-Thpok cascade is required for
the differentiation of CD4(+) iNKT cells. Gata3 is required for iNKT cells to
express Thpok, whereas Thpok is needed for proper NKT cell differentiation, and
notably for NKT cells to maintain CD4 and terminate CD8 expression. These
findings identify the sequential activity of Gata3 and Thpok as a hallmark of
CD4(+) T-cell differentiation, regardless of MHC restriction.

PMCID: PMC3321374
PMID: 20706986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 15;285(42):32405-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141317. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

GATA proteins work together with friend of GATA (FOG) and C-terminal binding
protein (CTBP) co-regulators to control adipogenesis.

Jack BH(1), Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 
2006, Australia.

GATA transcription factors have been implicated in controlling adipogenesis in
Drosophila and in mammals. In mammals, both GATA2 and GATA3 have been shown to be
present in preadipocytes, and their silencing allows the onset of adipogenesis.
Overexpression of GATA proteins blocks adipogenesis in cellular assays. GATA
factors have been found to operate through recruiting cofactors of the Friend of 
GATA (FOG) family. FOG proteins, in turn, recruit co-regulators, including
C-terminal binding proteins (CTBPs). We have investigated whether FOGs and CTBPs 
influence adipogenesis. We found that both FOG1 and FOG2 are expressed in cells
prior to adipogenesis but are down-regulated as adipogenesis proceeds.
Overexpression of FOG1 or FOG2 interferes with adipogenesis. Mutant versions of
FOG2 unable to bind CTBP or GATA proteins are impaired in their inability to
inhibit adipogenesis. Finally, a mutant version of GATA2, unable to associate
with FOGs, also displays abnormal activity and causes enhanced cell
proliferation. These results implicate FOGs and CTBPs as partners of GATA
proteins in the control of adipocyte proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2952242
PMID: 20705609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 11;30(32):10833-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010.

The Gata3 transcription factor is required for the survival of embryonic and
adult sympathetic neurons.

Tsarovina K(1), Reiff T, Stubbusch J, Kurek D, Grosveld FG, Parlato R, Schütz G, 
Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, 60528 Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The transcription factor Gata3 is essential for the development of sympathetic
neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells. As Gata3 expression is maintained up to the
adult stage, we addressed its function in differentiated sympathoadrenal cells at
embryonic and adult stages by conditional Gata3 elimination. Inactivation of
Gata3 in embryonic DBH-expressing neurons elicits a strong reduction in neuron
numbers due to apoptotic cell death and reduced proliferation. No selective
effect on noradrenergic gene expression (TH and DBH) was observed. Interestingly,
Gata3 elimination in DBH-expressing neurons of adult animals also results in a
virtually complete loss of sympathetic neurons. In the Gata3-deficient
population, the expression of anti-apoptotic genes (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and NFkappaB) 
is diminished, whereas the expression of pro-apoptotic genes (Bik, Bok, and Bmf) 
was increased. The expression of noradrenergic genes (TH and DBH) is not
affected. These results demonstrate that Gata3 is continuously required for
maintaining survival but not differentiation in the sympathetic neuron lineage up
to mature neurons of adult animals.

PMID: 20702712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3209-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902544. Epub 2010
Aug 9.

TCR-dependent translational control of GATA-3 enhances Th2 differentiation.

Cook KD(1), Miller J.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into the Th2 subset is controlled by the
transcription factor GATA-3. GATA-3 is both necessary and sufficient for Th2
differentiation and works through the induction of chromatin remodeling at the
Th2 effector cytokine loci. We show in this study that IL-4 stimulation induces
GATA-3 mRNA upregulation, but the level of GATA-3 protein induced is insufficient
for Th2 differentiation. The levels of GATA-3 protein and Th2 differentiation are
enhanced by concomitant TCR signaling through the PI3K/mammalian target of
rapamycin pathway. The PI3K-mediated increase in GATA-3 protein occurs without
increasing the GATA-3 mRNA level. Rather, TCR signaling through PI3K specifically
enhances the translation rate of GATA-3 without affecting the protein stability. 
Importantly, this role of TCR signaling is independent of the effects of TCR
signaling in T cell survival and expansion. Thus, TCR signaling through PI3K may 
play a critical role in Th2 differentiation by the specific enhancement of GATA-3
translation.

PMCID: PMC3993005
PMID: 20696860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;30(4):383-7.

[Inhibitory effects of apigenin on the expression of GATA-3 and Th2 cytokines in 
asthmatic mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Pang LL(1), Li RR, Zhou LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the inhibitory effects and mechanism of apigenin (APG) 
on dominant response of Th2 cells in asthma model of mice.
METHODS: Thirty-two 6-week-old healthy BALB/c mice, SPF grade, were randomly
divided into four groups equally, the normal control group (A), the asthma model 
group (B), and the two APG groups (C and D) consisted of asthma model mice
treated respectively with high-dose (20 mg/kg per day) and low-dose (2 mg/kg per 
day) APG given by dissolving in 1% dimethyl sulphoxide via intraperitoneal
injection. The murine asthma model was established by ovalbumin (OVA)
sensitization and provocation. Twenty-four hours after the last airway
provocation, acetylcholine (Ach) was administered via caudalis vein for measuring
airway resistance by pulmonary function detector; levels of IL- 4 and IL-13 in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and total IgE in serum were determined by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); total and differential cell counts in 
BALF were measured by light microscopy; the airway inflammatory infiltration was 
detected by haematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining; and the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (GATA-3) in the lung tissue was determined by
Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: As compared with Group A, the airway hyper-reactivity, airway
inflammation, cell count and eosinophil percentage in BALF, levels of total serum
IgE and BALF IL-4 and IL-13, and GATA-3 protein expression in the lung tissue
were significantly increased in Group B (P < 0.05). As compared with Group B, all
the above-mentioned indices in Group C and D were lower, showing respective
significant difference (P < 0.05), and significant difference was also shown
between the two APG treated groups (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: APG could reduce the airway inflammation and hyper-reactivity by
down-regulating the expressions of pulmonary GATA-3 and Th, cytokines, which is a
potential drug for asthma therapy.

PMID: 20669675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2011 Mar;26(3):1087-93. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfq453. Epub
2010 Jul 28.

T-cell phenotype in protocol renal biopsy from transplant recipients treated with
belatacept-mediated co-stimulatory blockade.

Grimbert P(1), Audard V, Diet C, Matignon M, Plonquet A, Mansour H, Desvaux D,
Durrbach A, Cohen JL, Lang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Transplantation, Institut Mondor de Recherche
Biomédicale INSERM U955, CHU Henri Mondor and Université Paris XII, Association
pour lUtilisation du Rein Artificiel, Créteil, France.
philippe.grimbert@hmn.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Belatacept is thought to disrupt the interaction between CD80/86 and 
CD28, thus preventing T-cell activation by blocking the co-stimulatory second
signal. However, the consequences on the T-cell profile in human renal transplant
cases have not been determined.
METHODS: In this study, we analysed intra-graft levels of the mRNAs for Treg
(FOXP3), cytotoxic CD8 T cells (Granzyme B), Th1 (INF<U+03B3>, Tbet), Th2 (GATA3) and
Th17 (ROR<U+03B3>t and IL-17) in protocol biopsies obtained 12 months after renal
transplantation in recipients treated with Belatacept or calcineurin inhibitor
(CNI).
RESULTS: Only the intra-graft abundance of FOXP3 mRNA was significantly lower (P 
< 0.001) in the Belatacept group than the CNI group. Conclusions. These results
are in agreement with in vitro data suggesting that CD28 is a major
co-stimulatory signal of both Tregs development and peripheral homeostasis but
contrast with clinical trials showing a better 1-year graft function and a lower 
incidence of chronic allograft nephropathy in patients receiving Belatacept than 
patients treated with CNI. They suggest that immune benefits induced by
Belatacept are not mediated by Treg expansion and that FOXP3 is not by itself a
prognostic marker of long-term graft function in a non-inflammatory context.
These results have to be, however, considered as preliminary since the size of
our study population is limited.

PMID: 20667993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4202-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-265827. Epub 2010 
Jul 26.

Mechanisms of aberrant GATA3 expression in classical Hodgkin lymphoma and its
consequences for the cytokine profile of Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cells.

Stanelle J(1), Döring C, Hansmann ML, Küppers R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School, Essen,
Germany.

The transcription factor network in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) represents a unique
composition of proteins found in no other hematopoietic cell. Among these
factors, an aberrant expression of the T-cell transcription factor GATA3 is
observed in B cell-derived Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg (HRS) tumor cells. Herein, 
we elucidate the regulation and function of this factor in HL. We demonstrate
binding of NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1, 2 factors with deregulated activity in HL to GATA3
promoter elements. Interference with NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1 activity led to decreased
GATA3 expression, indicating a dependency of deregulated GATA3 expression on
these transcription factors. Down-regulation of GATA3 in HL cell lines
demonstrated its role in the regulation of IL-5, IL-13, STAT4, and other genes. A
correlation between GATA3 and IL-13 expression was confirmed for HRS cells in HL 
tissues. Thus, GATA3 shapes the cytokine expression and signaling that is typical
of HL. Conclusively, aberrant GATA3 expression in HRS cells is stimulated by the 
deregulated constitutive activity of NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1, indicating a complex
network of deregulated transcription factors in these cells. GATA3 activity
significantly contributes to the typical cytokine secretion of and signaling in
HRS cells, which presumably plays an essential role in HL pathogenesis.

PMID: 20660789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3622-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-283648. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

FLT3 internal tandem duplication associates with adverse outcome and gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures in patients 60 years of age or older with primary 
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B
study.

Whitman SP(1), Maharry K, Radmacher MD, Becker H, Mrózek K, Margeson D, Holland
KB, Wu YZ, Schwind S, Metzeler KH, Wen J, Baer MR, Powell BL, Carter TH, Kolitz
JE, Wetzler M, Moore JO, Stone RM, Carroll AJ, Larson RA, Caligiuri MA, Marcucci 
G, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

The clinical impact of FLT3-internal tandem duplications (ITDs), an adverse
prognostic marker in adults aged < 60 years with primary cytogenetically normal
acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML), requires further investigation in older
patients. In CN-AML patients aged = 60 years treated on Cancer and Leukemia Group
B frontline trials, we found that FLT3-ITD remained associated with shorter
disease-free survival (P < .001; hazard ratio = 2.10) and overall survival (P <
.001; hazard ratio = 1.97) in multivariable analyses. This impact on shorter
disease-free survival and overall survival was in patients aged 60-69 (P < .001, 
each) rather than in those aged = 70 years. An FLT3-ITD-associated
gene-expression signature revealed overexpression of FLT3, homeobox genes (MEIS1,
PBX3, HOXB3), and immunotherapeutic tar-gets (WT1, CD33) and underexpression of
leukemia-associated (MLLT3, TAL1) and erythropoiesis-associated (GATA3, EPOR,
ANK1, HEMGN) genes. An FLT3-ITD-associated microRNA-expression signature included
overexpressed miR-155 and underexpressed miR-144 and miR-451. FLT3-ITD identifies
older CN-AML patients with molecular high risk and is associated with gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures that provide biologic insights for novel
therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2981481
PMID: 20656931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 15;9(14):2830-5. Epub 2010 Jul 3.

In vivo depletion of T lymphocyte-specific transcription factors by RNA
interference.

Tesniere A(1), Abermil N, Schlemmer F, Casares N, Kepp O, Pequignot M, Michaud M,
Martins I, Senovilla L, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U848, Villejuif, France.

The generation of specific T lymphocyte subsets is under the strict control of
specific transcription factors, as this has been shown by knockout experiments in
mice. Here, we show that siRNAs that specifically target the transcription factor
Gata3 (which is required for the development of T helper 1 cells) or T-Bet (which
is required for the development of T helper 2 cells) can be effective in vivo.
Thus, the intraperitoneal injection of siRNAs specific for Gata3 or t-Bet leads
to the specific depletion of their target gene products in vivo, in the spleen
and in the lymph nodes of mice. The immunomodulatory action of these siRNAs was
validated in a model of anti-tumor vaccination in which colorectal cancer cells
that succumb to anthracyclin-induced immunogenic cell death were injected
subcutaneously into one flank, in the absence of any adjuvant and live tumor
cells were injected simultaneously in the opposite flank of immunocompetent mice.
In this setting, the siRNA targeting t-Bet was able to accelerate tumor growth
while the siRNA targeting Gata3 significantly reduced the proliferation of cancer
cells in vivo. These effects were dependent on the immune response elicited by
dying tumor cells because both siRNAs failed to modulate the growth of tumors in 
non-vaccinated mice. The immune response-dependent anticancer effect of the
Gata3-specific siRNA was not due to the induction of class I interferons and
could be fully abolished by co-injection of t-Bet-specific siRNA. These results
demonstrate the possibility to use siRNAs for immunomodulaton in vivo and
illustrate the antagonistic implication of distinct T helper populations in
anti-cancer immune responses.

PMID: 20647758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Clin Transplant. 2011 Jan-Feb;25(1):40-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2010.01311.x.

Discontinuation of calcineurin inhibitors treatment allows the development of
FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells in patients after kidney transplantation.

van de Wetering J(1), Koumoutsakos P, Peeters A, van der Mast BJ, de Kuiper P,
IJzermans JN, Weimar W, Baan CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

This study investigated specific gene expression profiles in patients with
donor-specific cytotoxic-hyporesponsiveness, reflected by cytotoxic T-lymphocyte 
precursor frequency (CTLpf). The effect of calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) withdrawal
was studied on markers for cytotoxicity (perforin, granzyme B), apoptosis
(Fas,FasL), Th1 and Th2 cytokines (IL-2, IL-10), Th1 and Th2 transcription
factors (T-bet, GATA 3), Th17 transcription factor and cytokine (ROR<U+03B3>t, IL-17),
and for immune regulation/activation (CD25, FOXP3). Peripheral blood samples from
renal allograft recipients (n = 18) more than two yr after transplantation with
stable renal function were analyzed before and four months after CNI withdrawal. 
Additionally, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, cholesterol, serum
creatinine and proteinuria were evaluated, and no significant differences were
measured before and after CNI withdrawal. However, CNIs' discontinuation
influenced peripheral gene expression profiles. After CNI withdrawal, the mRNA
expression of Granzyme B, Perforin, Fas, FasL, T-bet, GATA3 and CD25 were
significantly lower than during CNI treatment. After CNI discontinuation,
donor-specific CTLpf decreased, while FOXP3 expression discriminated between
detectable and non-detectable donor-specific cytolysis reactivity; FOXP3
transcript values were highest in absence of donor-specific cytotoxicity (p <
0.01). Our study shows CNI withdrawal in stable kidney transplant recipients two 
yr after transplantation is safe. Moreover, discontinuation of CNIs' treatment
allows FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells development, resulting in a significant decrease
of anti-donor immune reactivity.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20636406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Jan;41(1):116-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03571.x.

Blockade of cysteinyl leukotriene-1 receptors suppresses airway remodelling in
mice overexpressing GATA-3.

Kiwamoto T(1), Ishii Y, Morishima Y, Yoh K, Kikuchi N, Haraguchi N, Masuko H,
Kawaguchi M, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Takahashi S, Hizawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: We demonstrated previously that GATA-3 overexpression markedly
enhanced allergen-induced airway inflammation and airway remodelling, including
subepithelial fibrosis, and smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, in transgenic mice.
OBJECTIVE: Because cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs) have been shown to be involved
in such structural changes, the effects of a specific cysLT1 receptor antagonist,
montelukast, were evaluated in a mouse model of chronic asthma.
METHODS: GATA-3-overexpressing mice and wild-type Balb/c mice were sensitized and
repeatedly challenged by ovalbumin (OVA) or saline. The effects of montelukast on
the development of airway remodelling were compared between the two mouse
genotypes.
RESULTS: CysLTs in the lung were increased after repeated allergen challenges,
and significantly enhanced in GATA-3-overexpressing mice. The enhanced cysLT
levels were accompanied by the development of eosinophilia, smooth muscle cell
hyperplasia, and increased stromal cell-derived factor-1 gene expression with a
small increase in pro-collagen gene expression in OVA-challenged
GATA-3-overexpressing mice, but not in wild-type mice. Montelukast significantly 
decreased lung cysLT levels and inhibited the GATA-3-overexpression-related
airway remodelling, potently preventing smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, but
partially suppressed the increased pro-collagen gene expression and eosinophilic 
inflammation. Increases in the levels of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and eotaxin in
bronchial lavage and TGF-ß gene expression in the lungs were induced by OVA in
both mouse genotypes. Montelukast treatment also significantly reduced these
levels to the levels seen after saline challenges in GATA-3-overexpressing mice.
CONCLUSION: Montelukast efficaciously prevented airway inflammation and
remodelling in a GATA-3-overexpression antigen challenge mouse model by
decreasing the cysLT-driven Th2 cytokine cycle of amplification of airway
pathologies.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20636401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Immunology. 2010 Sep;131(1):50-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03271.x. Epub
2010 Jul 16.

GATA-binding protein-3 regulates T helper type 2 cytokine and ifng loci through
interaction with metastasis-associated protein 2.

Hwang SS(1), Lee S, Lee W, Lee GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea.

GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3) regulates the T helper type 2 (Th2) cytokine
locus through induction of chromatin remodelling. However, the molecular
mechanism for this is poorly understood. To understand this mechanism better, we 
screened GATA-3 interacting proteins using affinity purification and mass
spectrometry. We found that GATA-3 bound to metastasis-associated protein 2
(MTA-2), a component of the NuRD chromatin remodelling complex. GATA-3 and MTA-2 
in turn bound to several regulatory regions of the Th2 cytokine locus and the
ifng promoter. Cell transfection assay showed that MTA-2 acted as an antagonist
with GATA-3 in the expression of Th2 cytokines, but co-operated with GATA-3 in
the repression of the ifng gene expression. These results suggest that GATA-3
interacts with MTA-2 to co-ordinately regulate Th2 cytokine and ifng loci during 
T helper cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2966757
PMID: 20636338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2010 Nov;29(5):705-15. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2010.06.016.
Epub 2010 Jul 13.

Sequence and expression analysis of two T helper master transcription factors,
T-bet and GATA3, in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss and analysis of their
expression during bacterial and parasitic infection.

Wang T(1), Holland JW, Martin SA, Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, Institute of Biological and
Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 2TZ, UK.

The polarization of naïve CD4+ T cells to T helper (Th)1 or Th2 cells is
specified by two master transcription factors, T-bet and GATA3, and is an
essential feature of mammalian adaptive immune responses to pathogens and the
development of long-lasting immunity. We report here the cloning of rainbow trout
Oncorhynchus mykiss T-bet and GATA3, to allow the future evaluation of the
existence of Th1 and Th2 cells in salmonid fish. The trout T-bet translation
shares high amino acid identities to other fish T-bet molecules (71-72%) but low 
identities to mammalian T-bet genes (41-42%), although the middle T-box DNA
binding domain is highly conserved among all the T-bet proteins from fish and
mammals. The trout GATA3 has high amino acid sequence identities (73-88%) to all 
known vertebrate molecules, with two highly conserved zinc finger motifs. The
identity of the trout T-bet and GATA3 molecules was confirmed by phylogenetic
tree analysis. A comparable expression level of T-bet and GATA3 was seen in the
spleen, head kidney and muscle in healthy trout, but a higher expression level of
GATA3 was seen in the gills, brain, skin and intestine relative to that of T-bet.
T-bet and GATA3 expression was modulated by different stimulants. The T cell
stimulant PHA up-regulated the expression of both T-bet and GATA3 in splenocytes,
suggesting that they may be mainly expressed by activated T cells. The expression
of T-bet and GATA3 in the spleen was increased by acute stress, but their
expression was inhibited by bacterial (Yersinia ruckeri) infection. In a
parasitic infection model, Tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae infection induced a
biased gene expression profile where a large increase in the expression of T-bet,
IFN-gamma and IL-2 was seen, suggesting that a Th1-like response is likely
induced by this disease. A better understanding of pathogen modulated expression 
of T-bet and GATA3, and the potential underlying host immune responses elicited
as a consequence of their expression, may allow novel future control measures
against disease in fish to be developed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;49(4):316-9.

[Expression of interleukin-18 and interleukin-18 receptor alpha chain of the
peripheral white blood cells in immune thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Zhan FX, Shan NN, Hou M, Yang XJ, Lu N, Wang HC, Zhang XL, Ji XB, Ji
CY.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of interleukin (IL)-18 of the peripheral
blood cells and IL-18 receptor alpha chain (IL-18Ralpha) on the surface of
CD(3)(+) cells in patients newly diagnosed as immune thrombocytopenia (ITP)
before medication and to explore the roles of IL-18 and IL-18Ralpha in the
development of ITP.
METHODS: Eighteen out-patients or inpatients with acute ITP accepting treatment
in Qilu Hospital were enrolled in this study and 15 matching healthy subjects
were taken as control. Plasma IL-18 level was detected with enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the expression of IL-18Ralpha on CD(3)(+)
lymphocytes and total lymphocytes were measured with flow cytometry;T-bet and
GATA-3 mRNA were measured with reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The expression of IL-18 in acute ITP plasma was (468.57 + or - 141.62)
ng/L and IL-18Ralpha on the surface of CD(3)(+) cells and lymphocytes were (8.50 
+ or - 3.16)% and (9.16 + or - 2.98)% respectively. The levels of IL-18 and
IL-18Ralpha were increased in active ITP patients as compared with those in the
controls (P < 0.05). The levels of IL-18 mRNA (0.12 + or - 0.02) and T-bet mRNA
(0.07 + or - 0.02) were significantly increased in patients with active ITP as
compared with those in the controls (P < 0.05), while GATA-3 mRNA (0.0039 + or - 
0.0014) were significantly decreased in patients with active ITP (P < 0.05). The 
balance between T-bet and GATA-3 was significantly disturbed in ITP.
CONCLUSIONS: Through the variation of the levels of gene and protein, our study
showed that IL-18 and IL-18Ralpha might upregulate the expression of
Th1-cytokines in ITP patients. It is also suggested that IL-18 has potential
association with the development of ITP. Especially, it may provide a new
treatment method for ITP by regulating the ratio of T-bet and GATA-3 and resuming
the balance of Th1/Th2.

PMID: 20627039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Immunity. 2010 Jun 25;32(6):743-53. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.06.002.

Mammalian target of rapamycin protein complex 2 regulates differentiation of Th1 
and Th2 cell subsets via distinct signaling pathways.

Lee K(1), Gudapati P, Dragovic S, Spencer C, Joyce S, Killeen N, Magnuson MA,
Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Jun 25;32(6):727-9.

Many functions of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1)
have been defined, but relatively little is known about the biology of an
alternative mTOR complex, mTORC2. We showed that conditional deletion of rictor, 
an essential subunit of mTORC2, impaired differentiation into T helper 1 (Th1)
and Th2 cells without diversion into FoxP3(+) status or substantial effect on
Th17 cell differentiation. mTORC2 promoted phosphorylation of protein kinase B
(PKB, or Akt) and PKC, Akt activity, and nuclear NF-kappaB transcription factors 
in response to T cell activation. Complementation with active Akt restored only
T-bet transcription factor expression and Th1 cell differentiation, whereas
activated PKC-theta reverted only GATA3 transcription factor and the Th2 cell
defect of mTORC2 mutant cells. Collectively, the data uncover vital mTOR-PKC and 
mTOR-Akt connections in T cell differentiation and reveal distinct pathways by
which mTORC2 regulates development of Th1 and Th2 cell subsets.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911434
PMID: 20620941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2010 Aug;137(16):2713-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.048470. Epub 2010 Jul 7.

Regulatory interactions specifying Kolmer-Agduhr interneurons.

Yang L(1), Rastegar S, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Karlsruhe, Germany.

In the zebrafish spinal cord, two classes of neurons develop from the lateral
floor plate: Kolmer-Agduhr' (KA') and V3 interneurons. We show here that the
differentiation of the correct number of KA' cells depends on the activity of the
homeobox transcription factor Nkx2.9. This factor acts in concert with Nkx2.2a
and Nkx2.2b. These factors are also required for the expression of the
zinc-finger transcription factor Gata2 in the lateral floor plate. In turn, Gata2
is necessary for expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Tal2 that acts upstream of the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamic acid
decarboxylase 67 gene (gad67) in KA' cells. Expression of the transcription
factor Sim1, which marks the V3 interneurons in the lateral floor plate, depends 
also on the three Nkx2 factors. sim1 expression does not require, however, gata2 
and tal2. KA' cells of the lateral floor plate and the KA' cells located more
dorsally in the spinal cord share expression of transcription factors. The
functional connections between the different regulatory genes, however, differ in
the two GABAergic cell types: although gata2 and tal2 are expressed in KA' cells,
they are dispensable for gad67 expression in these cells. Instead, olig2 and
gata3 are required for the differentiation of gad67-expressing KA' cells. This
suggests that the layout of regulatory networks is crucially dependent on the
lineage that differs between KA' and KA' cells.

PMID: 20610488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Infect Dis. 2010 Aug 15;202(3):406-15. doi: 10.1086/653829.

T-bet, GATA-3, and Foxp3 expression and Th1/Th2 cytokine production in the
clinical outcome of human infection with Leishmania (Viannia) species.

Díaz YR(1), Rojas R, Valderrama L, Saravia NG.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e Investigaciones Médicas (CIDEIM),
Cali, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: T cell differentiation determines susceptibility and resistance to
experimental cutaneous leishmaniasis, yet mixed T1/Th2 responses characterize the
clinical spectrum of human infection with Leishmania (Viannia) species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To discern the interrelationship of T cell differentiation
and outcome of human infection, we examined factors that regulate T cell
differentiation and Th1/Th2 cytokine responses in asymptomatic infection, active 
and historical chronic and recurrent cutaneous leishmaniasis. T-bet, GATA-3,
Foxp3, and cytokine gene expression were quantified by real-time polymerase chain
reaction and correlated with interleukin 2, interferon gamma, tumor necrosis
factor alpha, interleukin 4, interleukin 13, and interleukin 10 secretion during 
in vitro response to live Leishmania panamensis.
RESULTS: Higher GATA-3 expression than T-bet expression occurred throughout the
15 days of coculture with promastigotes; however, neither transcription nor
secretion of interleukin 4 was detected. A sustained inverse correlation between 
GATA-3 expression and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines interferon gamma and
tumor necrosis factor alpha was observed in asymptomatic infection. In contrast, 
higher T-bet expression and a higher ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 characterized
active recurrent disease. Down-regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 expression and
increased interleukin 2 secretion, compared with control subjects, was directly
correlated with Foxp3 expression and interleukin 13 secretion in chronic disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Regulation of the inflammatory response rather than biased Th1/Th2
response distinguished asymptomatic and recalcitrant outcomes of infection with
Leishmnania viannia species.

PMID: 20583921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cytokine. 2010 Sep;51(3):259-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.05.011. Epub 2010 Jun
26.

The modulative effect of Cyperi Rhizoma on Th1/Th2 lineage development.

Bae H(1), Park N, Kim Y, Hong M, Shin M, Kim SH, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University
#1 Hoeki-dong Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

To evaluate the direct effects of Cyperi Rhizoma (CR), a plant water extract, on 
Th1/Th2 lineage development in vitro, this study was conducted. Sorted CD4(+) T
cells obtained from the splenocytes of BALB/c mice were activated with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 and then cultured in medium that contained CR medium under Th1
inducing or Th2 inducing conditions. Subsequently, IFN-gamma or IL-4 secreting
cells were quantitated using flow cytometry analysis. In addition, IFN-gamma and 
IL-4 protein secretions were detected by ELISA analysis, after which, IFN-gamma
and T-bet transcripts, key players in the Th1 immune function, and also, IL-4 and
GATA-3, which are primary components in the Th2 immune mechanism, were
quantitated by real-time RT-PCR. CR had no mitogenic effects on un-stimulated
CD4(+) T cells, however, it increased the CD4(+) T cell population. Th1/Th2
polarization experiments revealed that CR enhanced IFN-gamma secretion in Th1
cells, but reduced the IL-4 in Th2 cells, and this occurred in a dose-dependent
manner and showed significances. In addition, under Th1/Th2 skewed conditions,
the transcription levels of IFN-gamma and T-bet were considerably increased,
while the expressions of IL-4 and GATA-3 were relatively decreased with CR
treatment. These findings suggest that CR enhances Th1 lineage development by
increasing Th1 specific cytokine expression and secretion and reduces Th2 lineage
development by repressing Th2 specific cytokine productions. Therefore, CR
extract may be useful for preventing the onset of allergies or improving allergic
symptoms.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Jun 23;2(37):37ra44. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000813.

Nuclear role of WASp in the pathogenesis of dysregulated TH1 immunity in human
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Taylor MD(1), Sadhukhan S, Kottangada P, Ramgopal A, Sarkar K, D'Silva S,
Selvakumar A, Candotti F, Vyas YM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The clinical symptomatology in the X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), a
combined immunodeficiency and autoimmune disease resulting from WAS protein
(WASp) deficiency, reflects the underlying coexistence of an impaired T helper 1 
(TH1) immunity alongside intact TH2 immunity. This suggests a role for WASp in
patterning T(H) subtype immunity, yet the molecular basis for the TH1-TH2
imbalance in human WAS is unknown. We have discovered a nuclear role for WASp in 
the transcriptional regulation of the TH1 regulator gene TBX21 at the chromatin
level. In primary TH1-differentiating cells, a fraction of WASp is found in the
nucleus, where it is recruited to the proximal promoter locus of the TBX21 gene, 
but not to the core promoter of GATA3 (a TH2 regulator gene) or RORc (a TH17
regulator gene). Genome-wide mapping demonstrates association of WASp in vivo
with the gene-regulatory network that orchestrates TH1 cell fate choice in the
human TH cell genome. Functionally, nuclear WASp associates with H3K4
trimethyltransferase [RBBP5 (retinoblastoma-binding protein 5)] and H3K9/H3K36
tridemethylase [JMJD2A (Jumonji domain-containing protein 2A)] proteins, and
their enzymatic activity in vitro and in vivo is required for achieving
transcription-permissive chromatin dynamics at the TBX21 proximal promoter in
primary differentiating TH1 cells. During TH1 differentiation, the loss of WASp
accompanies decreased enrichment of RBBP5 and, in a subset of WAS patients, also 
of filamentous actin at the TBX21 proximal promoter locus. Accordingly, human
WASp-deficient TH cells, from natural mutation or RNA interference-mediated
depletion, demonstrate repressed TBX21 promoter dynamics when driven under
TH1-differentiating conditions. These chromatin derangements accompany deficient 
T-BET messenger RNA and protein expression and impaired TH1 function, defects
that are ameliorated by reintroducing WASp. Our findings reveal a previously
unappreciated role of WASp in the epigenetic control of T-BET transcription and
provide a new mechanism for the pathogenesis of WAS by linking aberrant histone
methylation at the TBX21 promoter to dysregulated adaptive immunity.

PMCID: PMC2943146
PMID: 20574068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):998-1004. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903372. Epub 2010 
Jun 18.

IFN-gamma inhibits IL-4-induced type 2 cytokine expression by CD8 T cells in vivo
and modulates the anti-tumor response.

Apte SH(1), Groves P, Olver S, Baz A, Doolan DL, Kelso A, Kienzle N.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Simon.Apte@qimr.edu.au

Activation of naive CD8 T cells in vitro in the presence of IL-4 induces type 2
cytokine expression, loss of CD8 expression, and reduced cytolytic potential.
This represents a major shift from the canonical phenotype of effector CD8 T
cells. It has not been established, however, whether IL-4 can induce
comprehensive type 2 cytokine expression by CD8 T cells in vivo, nor whether the 
effects of IL-4 on type 2 cytokine production by CD8 T cells can be inhibited by 
IFN-gamma. Furthermore, disparate results have been reported regarding the
anti-tumor ability of type 2 polarized effector CD8 T cells, and the effects of
IFN-gamma in this respect remain unknown. To address these questions, wild-type
or IFN-gamma-deficient OVA-specific CD8(+) T cells were activated in RAG-2(-/-)
gamma c(-/-) recipients with control or IL-4-expressing OVA(+) tumor cells, and
then transferred to secondary recipients for tumor challenge. Tumor-derived IL-4 
induced the expression of type 2 cytokines and the transcription factor GATA-3 by
responding CD8 T cells while reducing their CD8 coreceptor expression and ability
to eliminate a secondary tumor challenge. Each of these effects of IL-4 was
exaggerated in IFN-gamma-deficient, compared with wild-type, CD8 T cells. The
results demonstrate that endogenous IFN-gamma counteracts the induction of type 2
cytokines and the downregulation of both CD8 coreceptor levels and the anti-tumor
response in CD8 T cells exposed to IL-4 during activation in vivo. These findings
may explain the anomalies in the reported functional phenotype of type 2
polarized CD8 T cells.

PMID: 20562261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):813-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000469. Epub 2010 Jun
16.

Cutting edge: Type I IFN reverses human Th2 commitment and stability by
suppressing GATA3.

Huber JP(1), Ramos HJ, Gill MA, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9093, USA.

T helper 2 cells regulate inflammatory responses to helminth infections while
also mediating pathological processes of asthma and allergy. IL-4 promotes Th2
development by inducing the expression of the GATA3 transcription factor, and the
Th2 phenotype is stabilized by a GATA3-dependent autoregulatory loop. In this
study, we found that type I IFN (IFN-alpha/beta) blocked human Th2 development
and inhibited cytokine secretion from committed Th2 cells. This negative
regulatory pathway was operative in human but not mouse CD4(+) T cells and was
selective to type I IFN, as neither IFN-gamma nor IL-12 mediated such inhibition.
IFN-alpha/beta blocked Th2 cytokine secretion through the inhibition of GATA3
during Th2 development and in fully committed Th2 cells. Ectopic expression of
GATA3 via retrovirus did not overcome IFN-alpha/beta-mediated inhibition of Th2
commitment. Thus, we demonstrate a novel role for IFN-alpha/beta in blocking Th2 
cells, suggesting its potential as a promising therapy for atopy and asthma.

PMCID: PMC2927323
PMID: 20554961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2010;152 Suppl 1:47-53. doi: 10.1159/000312125. Epub
2010 Jun 4.

Role of Th2 cells in IgG4-related lacrimal gland enlargement.

Kanari H(1), Kagami S, Kashiwakuma D, Oya Y, Furuta S, Ikeda K, Suto A, Suzuki K,
Hirose K, Watanabe N, Okamoto Y, Yamamoto S, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lacrimal gland enlargement (LGE) is one of the characteristics of
Mikulicz's disease (MD). Recently, marked serum IgG4 elevation and infiltration
of IgG4-positive plasmacytes in the enlarged exocrine glands have been reported
in MD patients. However, little is known about the role of CD4+ T cells and their
cytokines in IgG4-related diseases. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
characteristics of CD4+ T cells in patients with IgG4-related diseases.
METHODS: We investigated the clinical characteristics of 9 patients with LGE and 
elevated serum IgG4 levels (named IgG4-related LGE). We also examined mRNA
expression of cytokines and transcription factors of peripheral blood CD4+ T
cells in patients with IgG4-related LGE.
RESULTS: All patients with IgG4-related LGE showed elevated serum IgE levels. In 
addition, 5 of 9 patients with IgG4-related LGE exhibited eosinophilia and
asthma-like symptoms. In patients with IgG4-related LGE, mRNA expression of IL-4,
IL-5, IL-10 and GATA-3 but not IFN-gamma or T-bet was enhanced on CD4+ T cells
compared with that in healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Th2 cells may be involved in the pathogenesis of IgG4-related
diseases.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20523063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood. 2010 Sep 2;116(9):1443-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-252205. Epub 2010
Jun 3.

SATB1 dictates expression of multiple genes including IL-5 involved in human T
helper cell differentiation.

Ahlfors H(1), Limaye A, Elo LL, Tuomela S, Burute M, Gottimukkala KV, Notani D,
Rasool O, Galande S, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Finland.

Special AT-rich binding protein 1 (SATB1) is a global chromatin organizer and a
transcription factor regulated by interleukin-4 (IL-4) during the early T helper 
2 (Th2) cell differentiation. Here we show that SATB1 controls multiple IL-4
target genes involved in human Th cell polarization or function. Among the genes 
regulated by SATB1 is that encoding the cytokine IL-5, which is predominantly
produced by Th2 cells and plays a key role in the development of eosinophilia in 
asthma. We demonstrate that, during the early Th2 cell differentiation, IL-5
expression is repressed through direct binding of SATB1 to the IL-5 promoter.
Furthermore, SATB1 knockdown-induced up-regulation of IL-5 is partly counteracted
by down-regulating GATA3 expression using RNAi in polarizing Th2 cells. Our
results suggest that a competitive mechanism involving SATB1 and GATA3 regulates 
IL-5 transcription, and provide new mechanistic insights into the stringent
regulation of IL-5 expression during human Th2 cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2938835
PMID: 20522714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010757.

Immunological basis for the gender differences in murine Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis infection.

Pinzan CF(1), Ruas LP, Casabona-Fortunato AS, Carvalho FC, Roque-Barreira MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brasil.

This study aimed to investigate the immunological mechanisms involved in the
gender distinct incidence of paracoccidioidomycosis (pcm), an endemic systemic
mycosis in Latin America, which is at least 10 times more frequent in men than in
women. Then, we compared the immune response of male and female mice to
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis infection, as well as the influence in the gender
differences exerted by paracoccin, a P. brasiliensis component with carbohydrate 
recognition property. High production of Th1 cytokines and T-bet expression have 
been detected in the paracoccin stimulated cultures of spleen cells from infected
female mice. In contrast, in similar experimental conditions, cells from infected
males produced higher levels of the Th2 cytokines and expressed GATA-3.
Macrophages from male and female mice when stimulated with paracoccin displayed
similar phagocytic capability, while fungicidal activity was two times more
efficiently performed by macrophages from female mice, a fact that was associated
with 50% higher levels of nitric oxide production. In order to evaluate the role 
of sexual hormones in the observed gender distinction, we have utilized mice that
have been submitted to gonadectomy followed by inverse hormonal reconstitution.
Spleen cells derived from castrated males reconstituted with estradiol have
produced higher levels of IFN-gamma (1291+/-15 pg/mL) and lower levels of IL-10
(494+/-38 pg/mL), than normal male in response to paracoccin stimulus. In
contrast, spleen cells from castrated female mice that had been treated with
testosterone produced more IL-10 (1284+/-36 pg/mL) and less IFN-gamma (587+/-14
pg/mL) than cells from normal female. In conclusion, our results reveal that the 
sexual hormones had a profound effect on the biology of immune cells, and
estradiol favours protective responses to P. brasiliensis infection. In addition,
fungal components, such as paracoccin, may provide additional support to the
gender dimorphic immunity that marks P. brasiliensis infection.

PMCID: PMC2873977
PMID: 20505765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2010 May 18;5(5):e10696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010696.

Pathway signature and cellular differentiation in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma.

Tun HW(1), Marlow LA, von Roemeling CA, Cooper SJ, Kreinest P, Wu K, Luxon BA,
Sinha M, Anastasiadis PZ, Copland JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common kidney
cancer. The purpose of this study is to define a biological pathway signature and
a cellular differentiation program in ccRCC.
METHODOLOGY: We performed gene expression profiling of early-stage ccRCC and
patient-matched normal renal tissue using Affymetrix HG-U133a and HG-U133b
GeneChips combined with a comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, including pathway
analysis. The results were validated by real time PCR and IHC on two independent 
sample sets. Cellular differentiation experiments were performed on ccRCC cell
lines and their matched normal renal epithelial cells, in differentiation media, 
to determine their mesenchymal differentiation potential.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified a unique pathway signature with three major
biological alterations-loss of normal renal function, down-regulated metabolism, 
and immune activation-which revealed an adipogenic gene expression signature
linked to the hallmark lipid-laden clear cell morphology of ccRCC. Culturing
normal renal and ccRCC cells in differentiation media showed that only ccRCC
cells were induced to undergo adipogenic and, surprisingly, osteogenic
differentiation. A gene expression signature consistent with epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) was identified for ccRCC. We revealed significant
down-regulation of four developmental transcription factors (GATA3, TFCP2L1,
TFAP2B, DMRT2) that are important for normal renal development.
CONCLUSIONS: ccRCC is characterized by a lack of epithelial differentiation,
mesenchymal/adipogenic transdifferentiation, and pluripotent mesenchymal stem
cell-like differentiation capacity in vitro. We suggest that down-regulation of
developmental transcription factors may mediate the aberrant differentiation in
ccRCC. We propose a model in which normal renal epithelial cells undergo
dedifferentiation, EMT, and adipogenic transdifferentiation, resulting in ccRCC. 
Because ccRCC cells grown in adipogenic media regain the characteristic ccRCC
phenotype, we have identified a new in vitro ccRCC cell model more resembling
ccRCC tumor morphology.

PMCID: PMC2872663
PMID: 20502531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):2045-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.043299.

FOXA1 is an essential determinant of ERalpha expression and mammary ductal
morphogenesis.

Bernardo GM(1), Lozada KL, Miedler JD, Harburg G, Hewitt SC, Mosley JD, Godwin
AK, Korach KS, Visvader JE, Kaestner KH, Abdul-Karim FW, Montano MM, Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

FOXA1, estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and GATA3 independently predict
favorable outcome in breast cancer patients, and their expression correlates with
a differentiated, luminal tumor subtype. As transcription factors, each functions
in the morphogenesis of various organs, with ERalpha and GATA3 being established 
regulators of mammary gland development. Interdependency between these three
factors in breast cancer and normal mammary development has been suggested, but
the specific role for FOXA1 is not known. Herein, we report that Foxa1 deficiency
causes a defect in hormone-induced mammary ductal invasion associated with a loss
of terminal end bud formation and ERalpha expression. By contrast, Foxa1 null
glands maintain GATA3 expression. Unlike ERalpha and GATA3 deficiency, Foxa1 null
glands form milk-producing alveoli, indicating that the defect is restricted to
expansion of the ductal epithelium, further emphasizing the novel role for FOXA1 
in mammary morphogenesis. Using breast cancer cell lines, we also demonstrate
that FOXA1 regulates ERalpha expression, but not GATA3. These data reveal that
FOXA1 is necessary for hormonal responsiveness in the developing mammary gland
and ERalpha-positive breast cancers, at least in part, through its control of
ERalpha expression.

PMCID: PMC2875844
PMID: 20501593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Oct;25(10):2193-204. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.121.

GATA-3 transduces survival signals in osteoblasts through upregulation of
bcl-x(L) gene expression.

Chen RM(1), Lin YL, Chou CW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. rmchen@tmu.edu.tw

GATA-3, a transcription factor, participates in regulating cell development,
proliferation, and death. This study was aimed at evaluating the roles of GATA-3 
in protecting osteoblasts against oxidative stress-induced apoptotic insults and 
their possible mechanisms. Pretreatment with nitric oxide (NO) for 24 hours
protected osteoblasts, prepared from neonatal rat calvaria, against oxidative
stress-induced apoptotic insults. Such protection involved enhancement of
Bcl-X(L) messenger mRNA and protein syntheses and the translocation of this
antiapoptotic protein from the cytoplasm to mitochondria. GATA-3 was detected in 
rat osteoblasts, and GATA-3-specific DNA-binding elements exist in the promoter
region of the bcl-x(L) gene. NO preconditioning attenuated oxidative
stress-caused suppression of GATA-3 mRNA and protein synthesis and the
translocation of this transcription factor from the cytoplasm to nuclei.
Application of GATA-3 small interfering siRNA into osteoblasts decreased the
levels of this transcription factor and simultaneously inhibited Bcl-X(L) mRNA
synthesis. Pretreatment with NO lowered the oxidative stress-caused alteration in
the binding of GATA-3 to its specific DNA motifs. Oxidative stress-inhibited
Runx2 mRNA expression, but NO preconditioning decreased such inhibition. NO
pretreatment time-dependently enhanced the association of GATA-3 with Runx2.
Knocking down the translation of GATA-3 using RNA interference significantly
decreased the protection of NO preconditioning against oxidative stress-induced
alterations of cell morphologies, DNA fragmentation, and cell apoptosis. In
comparison, overexpression of GATA-3 could promote NO preconditioning-involved
Bcl-X(L) expression and cell survival. Therefore, this study shows that GATA-3
plays critical roles in mediating survival signals in osteoblasts, possibly
through upregulating bcl-x(L) gene expression.

PMID: 20499358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 1;185(1):79-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901488. Epub 2010 May 
24.

Phenotypic alterations of dendritic cells are involved in suppressive activity of
trichosanthin-induced CD8+CD28- regulatory T cells.

Wang B(1), Jiao Z, Shao X, Lu L, Yang N, Zhou X, Xin L, Zhou Y, Chou KY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The nature and differentiation of regulatory CD8(+)CD28(-) T cells are poorly
understood. In this study, we demonstrate that native Ag trichosanthin (Tk), a
highly purified linear peptide isolated from a Chinese medicinal herb, is able to
induce strong suppression of OVA-specific lymphoproliferation at low
concentrations via activation of IL-4/IL-10-secreting CD8(+)CD28(-) regulatory T 
cells (Tregs). To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we firstly identified two 
types of mouse inbred strains, high susceptible (HS) and low susceptible, for the
Tk-related suppression. They are H-2(d) (or H-2(b)) and H-2(k), respectively. The
suppression is evoked only if bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BDCs) instead 
of purified T cells are treated with Tk in an OVA-specific T-BDC interaction.
Moreover, a special pattern of cytokine/transcription factors
(IL-4(+)IL-10(+)IFN-gamma(-)Gata3(+)T-bet(-)) during suppressed OVA-specific T
cell proliferation was observed in HS C57BL/6 but not in low-susceptible C3H/He
mice. Consistently, the percentage of CD8(+)CD28(-) Tregs preferentially expanded
from 5.5 to 26.1% in the presence of Tk, an occurrence that was also detected
only in HS C57BL/6 mice. These expanded Tregs were able to induce a strong
inhibition of one-way MLCs, which indicated that the Tk-induced hyporeaction and 
the activation of CD8(+)CD28(-) Tregs might be under the influence of different
genetic backgrounds. Additionally, obvious alterations of phenotypic parameters
of BDCs after Tk stimulation were also identified, including enhanced production 
of IL-10, decreased secretion of IL-12, and detection of Jagged1, a Notch ligand 
on BDCs. Collectively, our data suggest that the changed APC-related factors are 
essential, at least in part, for the activation and differentiation of Tk-induced
CD8(+)CD28(-) Tregs.

PMID: 20498361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Infect Immun. 2010 Aug;78(8):3454-64. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01407-09. Epub 2010 May
24.

Protective Toxoplasma gondii-specific T-cell responses require T-cell-specific
expression of protein kinase C-theta.

Nishanth G(1), Sakowicz-Burkiewicz M, Händel U, Kliche S, Wang X, Naumann M,
Deckert M, Schlüter D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, OvG Universität Magdeburg,
Leipzigerstrasse 44, Magdeburg 39120, Germany.

Protein kinase C-theta (PKC-theta) is important for the activation of
autoreactive T cells but is thought to be of minor importance for T-cell
responses in infectious diseases, suggesting that PKC-theta may be a target for
the treatment of T-cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. To explore the function of 
PKC-theta in a chronic persisting infection in which T cells are crucial for
pathogen control, we infected BALB/c PKC-theta(-/-) and PKC-theta(+/+) wild-type 
mice with Toxoplasma gondii. The PKC-theta(-/-) mice succumbed to necrotizing
Toxoplasma encephalitis due to an insufficient parasite control up to day 40,
whereas the wild-type mice survived. The number of T. gondii-specific CD4 and CD8
T cells was significantly reduced in the PKC-theta(-/-) mice, resulting in the
impaired production of protective cytokines (gamma interferon, tumor necrosis
factor) and antiparasitic effector molecules (inducible nitric oxide, gamma
interferon-induced GTPase) in the spleen and brain. In addition, Th2-cell numbers
were reduced in infected the PKC-theta(-/-) mice, paralleled by the diminished
GATA3 expression of PKC-theta(-/-) CD4 T cells and reduced T. gondii-specific IgG
production in serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Western blot analysis of splenic CD4
and CD8 T cells revealed an impaired activation of the NF-kappaB, AP-1, and MAPK 
pathways in T. gondii-infected PKC-theta(-/-) mice. Adoptive transfer of
wild-type CD4 plus CD8 T cells significantly protected PKC-theta(-/-) mice from
death by increasing the numbers of gamma interferon-producing T. gondii-specific 
CD4 and CD8 T cells, illustrating a cell-autonomous, protective function of
PKC-theta in T cells. These findings imply that PKC-theta inhibition drastically 
impairs T. gondii-specific T-cell responses with fatal consequences for
intracerebral parasite control and survival.

PMCID: PMC2916261
PMID: 20498263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Acta Paediatr. 2010 Oct;99(10):1584-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2010.01881.x.

Potential Th1/Th2 predominance in children with newly diagnosed IgA nephropathy.

Tsuruga K(1), Oki E, Aizawa-Yashiro T, Yoshida H, Imaizumi T, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, Japan.

PMID: 20491699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jun;120(6):2144-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI42021. Epub 2010 May 17.

Gata3-deficient mice develop parathyroid abnormalities due to dysregulation of
the parathyroid-specific transcription factor Gcm2.

Grigorieva IV(1), Mirczuk S, Gaynor KU, Nesbit MA, Grigorieva EF, Wei Q, Ali A,
Fairclough RJ, Stacey JM, Stechman MJ, Mihai R, Kurek D, Fraser WD, Hough T,
Condie BG, Manley N, Grosveld F, Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism (OCDEM),
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Heterozygous mutations of GATA3, which encodes a dual zinc-finger transcription
factor, cause hypoparathyroidism with sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia.
Here, we have investigated the role of GATA3 in parathyroid function by
challenging Gata3+/- mice with a diet low in calcium and vitamin D so as to
expose any defects in parathyroid function. This led to a higher mortality among 
Gata3+/- mice compared with Gata3+/+ mice. Compared with their wild-type
littermates, Gata3+/- mice had lower plasma concentrations of calcium and
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and smaller parathyroid glands with a reduced Ki-67
proliferation rate. At E11.5, Gata3+/- embryos had smaller parathyroid-thymus
primordia with fewer cells expressing the parathyroid-specific gene glial cells
missing 2 (Gcm2), the homolog of human GCMB. In contrast, E11.5 Gata3-/- embryos 
had no Gcm2 expression and by E12.5 had gross defects in the third and fourth
pharyngeal pouches, including absent parathyroid-thymus primordia.
Electrophoretic mobility shift, luciferase reporter, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that GATA3 binds specifically to a functional
double-GATA motif within the GCMB promoter. Thus, GATA3 is critical for the
differentiation and survival of parathyroid progenitor cells and, with GCM2/B,
forms part of a transcriptional cascade in parathyroid development and function.

PMCID: PMC2877956
PMID: 20484821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Blood. 2010 Aug 26;116(8):1280-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-223255. Epub 2010
May 18.

c-Myb, Menin, GATA-3, and MLL form a dynamic transcription complex that plays a
pivotal role in human T helper type 2 cell development.

Nakata Y(1), Brignier AC, Jin S, Shen Y, Rudnick SI, Sugita M, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA19104, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Aug 26;116(8):1190-1.

GATA-3 and c-Myb are core elements of a transcriptionally active complex
essential for human Th2 cell development and maintenance. We report herein
mechanistic details concerning the role of these transcription factors in human
peripheral blood Th2 cell development. Silencing c-Myb in normal human naive
CD4(+) cells under Th2 cell-promoting conditions blocked up-regulation of GATA-3 
and interleukin-4, and in effector/memory CD4(+) T cells, decreased expression of
GATA-3 and Th2 cytokines. In primary T cells, c-Myb allows GATA-3 to autoactivate
its own expression, an event that requires the direct interaction of c-Myb and
GATA-3 on their respective binding sites in promoter of GATA-3.
Immunoprecipitation revealed that the c-Myb/GATA-3 complex contained Menin and
mixed lineage leukemia (MLL). MLL recruitment into the c-Myb-GATA-3-Menin complex
was associated with the formation Th2 memory cells. That MLL-driven epigenetic
changes were mechanistically important for this transition was suggested by the
fact that silencing c-Myb significantly decreased the methylation of histone H3K4
and the acetylation of histone H3K9 at the GATA-3 locus in developing Th2 and
CD4(+) effector/memory cells. Therefore, c-Myb, GATA-3, and Menin form a core
transcription complex that regulates GATA-3 expression and, with the recruitment 
of MLL, Th2 cell maturation in primary human peripheral blood T cells.

PMCID: PMC2938238
PMID: 20484083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul;16(7):729-37. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.53. Epub 2010 May 18.

Maternal warmth buffers the effects of low early-life socioeconomic status on
pro-inflammatory signaling in adulthood.

Chen E(1), Miller GE, Kobor MS, Cole SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. echen@psych.ubc.ca

The notion that family support may buffer individuals under adversity from poor
outcomes has been theorized to have important implications for mental and
physical health, but little is known about the biological mechanisms that explain
these links. We hypothesized that adults who grew up in low socioeconomic status 
(SES) households but who experienced high levels of maternal warmth would be
protected from the pro-inflammatory states typically associated with low SES. A
total of 53 healthy adults (aged 25-40 years) low in SES early in life were
assessed on markers of immune activation and systemic inflammation. Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling also was conducted. Low early-life SES individuals who 
had mothers, who expressed high warmth toward them, exhibited less Toll-like
receptor-stimulated production of interleukin 6, and reduced bioinformatic
indications of pro-inflammatory transcription factor activity (NF-<U+03BA>B) and immune 
activating transcription factor activity (AP-1) compared to those who were low in
SES early in life but experienced low maternal warmth. To the extent that such
effects are causal, they suggest the possibility that the detrimental immunologic
effects of low early-life SES environments may be partly diminished through
supportive family climates.

PMCID: PMC2925055
PMID: 20479762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Nat Prod. 2010 Jun 25;73(6):1033-7. doi: 10.1021/np900690z.

Diosgenin, a plant-derived sapogenin, enhances regulatory T-cell immunity in the 
intestine of mice with food allergy.

Huang CH(1), Liu DZ, Jan TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Graduate Institute of Veterinary Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan 106, Republic of China.

It was hypothesized that the suppressive effect of diosgenin (1) on the
intestinal T helper (Th)2 responses is associated with an enhancement of the
regulatory T-cell immunity. Ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized BALB/c mice were gavaged
daily with 1 and received repeatedly oral OVA challenges to induce intestinal
allergic responses. The expression of Th2- and Treg-related cytokines and
transcription factors was examined by immunohistochemical staining and RT-PCR.
Administration of 1 markedly attenuated the intestinal expression of interleukin 
(IL)-4 and GATA3. In addition, administration of 1 reversed the diminished
density of intestinal Foxp3(+) cells induced by OVA oral challenges and enhanced 
the expression of IL-10 by Foxp3(+) cells markedly. These results suggest that
the suppressive effect of 1 on allergen-induced intestinal Th2 responses is
closely associated with an up-regulation of the regulatory T-cell immunity in the
inflammatory site.

PMID: 20465230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 May;125(5):1077-1083.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2010.02.038.

Immunologic features of infants with milk or egg allergy enrolled in an
observational study (Consortium of Food Allergy Research) of food allergy.

Sicherer SH(1), Wood RA, Stablein D, Burks AW, Liu AH, Jones SM, Fleischer DM,
Leung DY, Grishin A, Mayer L, Shreffler W, Lindblad R, Sampson HA.

Author information: 
(1)Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Division of Allergy and
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10029-6574, USA. scott.sicherer@mssm.edu

BACKGROUND: Immune features of infants with food allergy have not been
delineated.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to explore the basic mechanisms responsible for food
allergy and identify biomarkers, such as skin prick test (SPT) responses,
food-specific IgE levels, and mononuclear cell responses, in a cohort of infants 
with likely milk/egg allergy at increased risk of peanut allergy.
METHODS: Infants aged 3 to 15 months were enrolled with a positive SPT response
to milk or egg and either a corresponding convincing clinical history of allergy 
to milk or egg or moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. Infants with known peanut
allergy were excluded.
RESULTS: Overall, 512 infants (67% male) were studied, with 308 (60%) having a
history of a clinical reaction. Skin test responses, detectable food-specific
IgE, or both revealed sensitization as follows: milk, 78%; egg, 89%; and peanut, 
69%. SPT responses and food-specific IgE levels were discrepant for peanut (15%
for IgE > or = 0.35 kU(A)/L and negative SPT response vs 8% for positive SPT
response and IgE <0.35 kU(A)/L, P = .001). Mononuclear cell allergen stimulation 
screening for CD25, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH), forkhead
box protein 3 (FOXP3), GATA3, IL10, IL4, IFNG, and T-box transcription factor
(TBET) expression by using casein, egg white, and peanut revealed that only
allergen-induced IL4 expression was significantly increased in those with
clinical allergy to milk (compared with nonallergic subjects) and in those
sensitized to peanut, despite the absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Infants with likely milk/egg allergy are at considerably high risk
of having increased peanut-specific IgE levels (potential allergy).
Peanut-specific serum IgE levels were a more sensitive indicator of sensitization
than SPT responses. Allergen-specific IL4 expression might be a marker of
allergic risk. Absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression suggests that
allergen-specific IL-4 might not be of T-cell origin.

Copyright 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2868273
PMID: 20451041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Vaccine. 2010 Jun 17;28(27):4402-10. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.04.046. Epub
2010 Apr 29.

Paclitaxel acts as an adjuvant to promote both Th1 and Th2 immune responses
induced by ovalbumin in mice.

Yuan L(1), Wu L, Chen J, Wu Q, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310029, China.

Paclitaxel, a diterpenoid isolated from the bark of the Taxus cuspidate cv. Nana,
was evaluated for its adjuvant effect on the immune responses in a mouse model.
Fifty-six mice were randomly distributed into seven groups with 8 mice in each.
Animals were subcutaneously immunized on days 1 and 21 with 100microg of
paclitaxel, 10microg of ovalbumin (OVA), OVA with paclitaxel (50, 100 or
200microg) or with aluminum hydroxide (alum). Two weeks after the primary and
boost immunizations, blood samples were collected for measurement of serum
antibodies. Splenocytes were separated for detection of lymphocyte proliferation 
in responses to concanavalin A (Con A), lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and OVA, and
mRNA expression of Th1 cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-12), Th2 cytokines (IL-10 and 
IL-5) and transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 (Th1/Th2 switcher). Results showed
that coadministration of OVA with paclitaxel induced significantly higher IgG,
IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3 and IgM responses than when OVA was used alone. In
addition, up-regulated T-bet/GATA-3 together with significantly increased mRNA
expression of IL-4, IL-10, IFN-gamma and IL-12 by splenocytes, as well as the
proliferative responses of splenocytes to Con A, LPS and OVA were observed in
paclitaxel-adjuvanted groups. Incubation of a murine macrophage-like cell line
with paclitaxel significantly increased TNF-alpha and -10 released from the cells
and expression of microRNAs such as miR-155, miR-147, miR-146a and miR-132.
Therefore, paclitaxel activated both Th1 and Th2 responses. Considering its
unique adjuvant effect demonstrated in this study and a safe record clinically
used as an antineoplastic agent, paclitaxel could be an ideal adjuvant candidate 
when mixed Th1/Th2 immune responses are needed.

PMID: 20434553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.017. Epub 2010
Apr 27.

Maternally and zygotically provided Cdx2 have novel and critical roles for early 
development of the mouse embryo.

Jedrusik A(1), Bruce AW, Tan MH, Leong DE, Skamagki M, Yao M, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QN, UK.

Divisions of polarised blastomeres that allocate polar cells to outer and apolar 
cells to inner positions initiate the first cell fate decision in the mouse
embryo. Subsequently, outer cells differentiate into trophectoderm while inner
cells retain pluripotency to become inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst.
Elimination of zygotic expression of trophectoderm-specific transcription factor 
Cdx2 leads to defects in the maintenance of the blastocyst cavity, suggesting
that it participates only in the late stage of trophectoderm formation. However, 
we now find that mouse embryos also have a maternally provided pool of Cdx2 mRNA.
Moreover, depletion of both maternal and zygotic Cdx2 from immediately after
fertilization by three independent approaches, dsRNAi, siRNAi and morpholino
oligonucleotides, leads to developmental arrest at much earlier stages than
expected from elimination of only zygotic Cdx2. This developmental arrest is
associated with defects in cell polarisation, reflected by expression and
localisation of cell polarity molecules such as Par3 and aPKC and cell compaction
at the 8- and 16-cell stages. Cells deprived of Cdx2 show delayed development
with increased cell cycle length, irregular cell division and increased incidence
of apoptosis. Although some Cdx2-depleted embryos initiate cavitation, the cavity
cannot be maintained. Furthermore, expression of trophectoderm-specific genes,
Gata3 and Eomes, and also the trophectoderm-specific cytokeratin intermediate
filament, recognised by Troma1, are greatly reduced or undetectable. Taken
together, our results indicate that Cdx2 participates in two steps leading to
trophectoderm specification: appropriate polarisation of blastomeres at the 8-
and 16-cell stage and then the maintenance of trophectoderm lineage-specific
differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2954319
PMID: 20430022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cytokine. 2010 Jul;51(1):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.03.018. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Differential effects of lactacystin on cytokine production in activated Jurkat
cells and murine splenocytes.

Rockwell CE(1), Qureshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, School of Medicine, and Shock/Trauma
Research Center, University of Missouri Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
crockwell@kumc.edu

Previous studies have demonstrated that the proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin,
suppresses cytokine production and induction of other inflammatory mediators by
LPS-stimulated macrophages. The purpose of the present studies was to determine
the effect of lactacystin upon the function of activated human Jurkat T cells and
murine splenocytes. Lactacystin treatment suppressed interleukin (IL)-2,
interferon (IFN)gamma, and IL-13 production similarly in both activated Jurkat
cells and primary splenocytes. Interestingly, lactacystin produced differential
effects on IL-4 transcription in the two models. While lactacystin inhibited IL-4
mRNA transcription in primary splenocytes, it induced IL-4 mRNA in a
concentration-dependent manner in Jurkat cells. The increase in IL-4 mRNA levels 
by lactacystin did not correlate with increases in T(H2)-specific transcription
factors, avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma AS42 oncogene homolog (c-maf) or
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3). In addition, the binding of both GATA-3 and
t-bet to their respective response elements was essentially unchanged by
lactacystin treatment in both splenocytes and Jurkat T cells, suggesting the
induction of IL-4 is due to other mechanisms. Collectively, the current studies
suggest proteasomal activity has differential effects on IL-4 transcription in
activated Jurkat cells and primary splenocytes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911229
PMID: 20427199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 May;152A(5):1233-43. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33366.

Molecular and clinical characterization of patients with overlapping 10p
deletions.

Lindstrand A(1), Malmgren H, Verri A, Benetti E, Eriksson M, Nordgren A, Anderlid
BM, Golovleva I, Schoumans J, Blennow E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. anna.lindstrand@ki.se

Chromosome 10p terminal deletions have been associated with DiGeorge phenotype,
and within the same genomic region haploinsufficiency of GATA3 causes the HDR
syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, renal dysplasia). We have
performed detailed molecular analysis of four patients with partial overlapping
10p deletions by using FISH-mapping, array-CGH, and custom-designed
high-resolution oligonucleotide array. All four patients had mental retardation
and speech impairment and three of them showed variable signs of HDR syndrome. In
addition, two patients had autistic behaviors and had similar dysmorphic features
giving them a striking physical resemblance. A review of the literature
identified 10 previously published cases with similar 10p deletions and reliable 
molecular or molecular cytogenetic mapping data. The combined information of
present and previous cases suggests that partial deletions of 10p14-p15 represent
a syndrome with a distinct and more severe phenotype than previously assumed. The
main characteristics include severe mental retardation, language impairment,
autistic behavior, and characteristic clinical features. A critical region
involved in mental retardation and speech impairment is defined within 1.6 Mb in 
10p15.3. In addition, deletion of 4.3 Mb within 10p14 is associated with autism
and characteristic clinical findings.

PMID: 20425828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 27;10:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-42.

Pre-gastrula expression of zebrafish extraembryonic genes.

Hong SK(1), Levin CS, Brown JL, Wan H, Sherman BT, Huang da W, Lempicki RA,
Feldman B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many species form extraembryonic tissues during embryogenesis, such
as the placenta of humans and other viviparous mammals. Extraembryonic tissues
have various roles in protecting, nourishing and patterning embryos. Prior to
gastrulation in zebrafish, the yolk syncytial layer - an extraembryonic nuclear
syncytium - produces signals that induce mesoderm and endoderm formation.
Mesoderm and endoderm precursor cells are situated in the embryonic margin, an
external ring of cells along the embryo-yolk interface. The yolk syncytial layer 
initially forms below the margin, in a domain called the external yolk syncytial 
layer (E-YSL).
RESULTS: We hypothesize that key components of the yolk syncytial layer's
mesoderm and endoderm inducing activity are expressed as mRNAs in the E-YSL. To
identify genes expressed in the E-YSL, we used microarrays to compare the
transcription profiles of intact pre-gastrula embryos with pre-gastrula embryonic
cells that we had separated from the yolk and yolk syncytial layer. This
identified a cohort of genes with enriched expression in intact embryos. Here we 
describe our whole mount in situ hybridization analysis of sixty-eight of them.
This includes ten genes with E-YSL expression (camsap1l1, gata3, znf503, hnf1ba, 
slc26a1, slc40a1, gata6, gpr137bb, otop1 and cebpa), four genes with expression
in the enveloping layer (EVL), a superficial epithelium that protects the embryo 
(zgc:136817, zgc:152778, slc14a2 and elovl6l), three EVL genes whose expression
is transiently confined to the animal pole (elovl6l, zgc:136359 and clica), and
six genes with transient maternal expression (mtf1, wu:fj59f04, mospd2, rftn2,
arrdc1a and pho). We also assessed the requirement of Nodal signaling for the
expression of selected genes in the E-YSL, EVL and margin. Margin expression was 
Nodal dependent for all genes we tested, including the concentrated margin
expression of an EVL gene: zgc:110712. All other instances of EVL and E-YSL
expression that we tested were Nodal independent.
CONCLUSION: We have devised an effective strategy for enriching and identifying
genes expressed in the E-YSL of pre-gastrula embryos. To our surprise, maternal
genes and genes expressed in the EVL were also enriched by this strategy. A
number of these genes are promising candidates for future functional studies on
early embryonic patterning.

PMCID: PMC2873407
PMID: 20423468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 11;107(19):8742-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911756107. Epub 2010 Apr 26.

Conversion of Th2 memory cells into Foxp3+ regulatory T cells suppressing
Th2-mediated allergic asthma.

Kim BS(1), Kim IK, Park YJ, Kim YS, Kim YJ, Chang WS, Lee YS, Kweon MN, Chung Y, 
Kang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of
Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Genetic and epigenetic programming of T helper (Th) cell subsets during their
polarization from naive Th cells establishes long-lived memory Th cells that
stably maintain their lineage signatures. However, whether memory Th cells can be
redifferentiated into another Th lineage is unclear. In this study, we show that 
Ag-specific memory Th cells were redifferentiated into Foxp3(+) T cells by
TGF-beta when stimulated in the presence of all-trans retinoic acid and
rapamycin. The "converted" Foxp3(+) T cells that were derived from Th2 memory
cells down-regulated GATA-3 and IRF4 and produced little IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13.
Instead, the converted Foxp3(+) T cells suppressed the proliferation and cytokine
production of Th2 memory cells. More importantly, the converted Foxp3(+) T cells 
efficiently accumulated in the airways and significantly suppressed Th2 memory
cell-mediated airway hyperreactivity, eosinophilia, and allergen-specific IgE
production. Our findings reveal the plasticity of Th2 memory cells and provide a 
strategy for adoptive immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic diseases.

PMCID: PMC2889331
PMID: 20421479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Mar;71(3):176-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02363.x.

New production of eosinophils and the corresponding TH1/TH2 balance in the lungs 
after allergen exposure in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice.

Lu Y(1), Sjöstrand M, Malmhäll C, Rådinger M, Jeurink P, Lötvall J, Bossios A.

Author information: 
(1)Krefting Research Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of
Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Allergic asthma is associated with eosinophilic inflammation in the airways.
Animal models commonly used to elucidate allergic inflammation mechanisms include
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. Our aim was to evaluate lung eosinophilia and the
corresponding Th1/Th2 balance in the two strains after allergen exposure. BALB/c 
and C57BL/6 mice were subjected to ovalbumin-induced allergic airway inflammation
using BrdU to label newly produced cells. The numbers of new eosinophils were
evaluated by differential cell count and immunocytochemistry (MBP+BrdU+).
Proliferation rate of lung eosinophils was measured by analysis of
CD45+CCR3+BrdU+ cells by FACS. Distribution of newly produced eosinophils in the 
lung and the Th1/Th2 (CD4+T-bet+/CD4+GATA-3+) balance was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. Allergen challenge with ovalbumin induced comparable
eosinophilia in bone marrow (BM), blood and lung tissue in both strains of mice
compared to phosphate-buffered saline controls, which was confirmed by
immunocytochemistry. There was a small increase in the number of lung MBP+BrdU(-)
eosinophils in C57BL/6 mice compared to BALB/c mice, which suggests a basal
increase in this strain following sensitization. While there was no difference in
eosinophilic proliferation in the lung, the distribution of the newly produced
eosinophils differs between the two strains. BALB/c mice showed staining
primarily around vessels and airways, whereas C57BL/6 mice showed a more even
distribution in the lung tissue. No difference in the Th1/Th2 balance was
observed between two strains. This study shows that there is a difference in the 
distribution of eosinophils in the lung between the C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice, but 
no difference in eosinophil production or Th1/Th2 balance.

PMID: 20415783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):500-1. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.006.

Antisocial networking in T helper cells.

Pham D(1), Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut St. Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):507-17.

T helper cell differentiation is controlled by a network of transcription
factors. In this issue of Immunity, Yagi et al. (2010) describe the opposing
effects of transcription factors Runx3 and GATA3 in the network promoting T
helper 1 cell development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20412760  [PubMed]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(13):3310-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01215-09. Epub 2010 Apr 
19.

The transcription factor TCFAP2C/AP-2gamma cooperates with CDX2 to maintain
trophectoderm formation.

Kuckenberg P(1), Buhl S, Woynecki T, van Fürden B, Tolkunova E, Seiffe F, Moser
M, Tomilin A, Winterhager E, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn D-53127, Germany.

In mammals, cell lineage specification is established at the blastocyst stage. At
this stage, transcription factor Cdx2 represses pluripotency genes, thus
promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate. Recently, transcription factor Gata3
was shown to act in a parallel pathway in promoting trophoblast cell fate,
suggesting that there are more factors working in the trophoblast lineage. Here, 
we report that the transcription factor Tcfap2c is expressed at a high level in
the trophectoderm and is able to induce trophoblast fate in embryonic stem cells.
Trophoblast fate induced by Tcfap2c does not require Cdx2 and vice versa,
suggesting that the molecules act in alternative pathways. However, both Tcfap2c 
and Cdx2 are required for the upregulation of Elf5, a marker of trophoblast stem 
cell maintenance, suggesting that both factors are required for stable
trophoblast induction. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like cells are stable in
long-term culture, indicating that they are capable of self-renewal.
Tcfap2c-controlled trophoblast maintenance involves the induction of Cdx2 and the
repression of the pluripotency factor Nanog. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like
cells differentiate to trophoblast derivatives in vitro and contribute to the
trophectoderm in blastocysts in vivo. Taken together, these observations suggest 
that Tcfap2c and Cdx2 cooperate to override the pluripotency program and
establish the extraembryonic trophoblast maintenance program in murine embryos.

PMCID: PMC2897582
PMID: 20404091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):507-17. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.004. Epub 2010 
Apr 15.

The transcription factor GATA3 actively represses RUNX3 protein-regulated
production of interferon-gamma.

Yagi R(1), Junttila IS, Wei G, Urban JF Jr, Zhao K, Paul WE, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):500-1.

The transcription factor GATA3 is crucial for the differentiation of naive CD4(+)
T cells into T helper 2 (Th2) cells. Here, we show that deletion of Gata3 allowed
the appearance of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-producing cells in the absence of 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IFN-gamma. Such IFN-gamma production was transcription
factor T-bet independent. Another T-box-containing transcription factor Eomes,
but not T-bet, was induced both in GATA3-deficient CD4(+) T cells differentiated 
under Th2 cell conditions and in Th2 cells with enforced Runx3 expression,
contributing to IFN-gamma production. GATA3 overexpression blocked Runx3-mediated
Eomes induction and IFN-gamma production, and GATA3 protein physically interacted
with Runx3 protein. Furthermore, we found that Runx3 directly bound to multiple
regulatory elements of the Ifng gene and that blocking Runx3 function in either
Th1 or GATA3-deficient "Th2" cells results in diminished IFN-gamma production by 
these cells. Thus, the Runx3-mediated pathway, actively suppressed by GATA3,
induces IFN-gamma production in a STAT4- and T-bet-independent manner.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2867662
PMID: 20399120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Jun;22(3):286-92. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.03.006.

Synergistic and combinatorial control of T cell activation and differentiation by
transcription factors.

Sundrud MS(1), Nolan MA.

Author information: 
(1)Tempero pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
msundrud@temperopharma.com

Naïve CD4(+) T cells are educated in the thymus to survey the periphery for
cognate antigen while ignoring self or commensal antigens. T cell antigen
receptor (TCR) cross-linking initiates signaling cascades that integrate
information from co-stimulatory receptors and locally available cytokines to
chart the course of inflammation. The dynamic composition of transcription
factors acting within a given T cell drive clonal expansion and specify
differentiation into a growing array of effector and regulatory T cell subsets.
The classical gamma-interferon (IFNgamma)-secreting T helper type (Th)-1 and
IL-4-producing Th2 cell subsets utilize T-bet or GATA3 as master lineage
regulators. It is now understood that naïve T cells also differentiate into
pro-inflammatory Th17 or tissue-protective inducible T regulatory (iTreg) cells
under the respective guidance of RORgammat or FOXP3. Emerging data highlight the 
reoccurring theme that these Th17 and iTreg master regulators prescribe T cell
lineage commitment through interactions with each other, as well as with a
broader network of auxiliary transcription factors.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;45(2):133-8.

[Effects of garlicin on the expression of transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3
in blood lymph cells in rats with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen D(1), Li YX, Li TY, Wen WP, Shi JB, He XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, First Affiliated Hospital of SUN Yet-san
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of garlicin on the expression of
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in blood lymph cells of experimental rats 
with allergic rhinitis.
METHODS: Thirty healthy SD rats were randomly divided into 3 groups, with 10 rats
for each. Ten rats (pharmacological group) were sensitized and intranasally
challenged by ovalbumin (OVA), aluminium hydroxide hydrate gel and Bordetella
pertussis (B. pertussis) inactive microorganism suspension adjuvants, as the
allergic rhinitis models, and then injection of garlicin (0.4 ml)
intraperitoneally per day for 10 days. Ten rats in the control group were
immunized as the pharmacological group, and then injection of physiological
saline as equal volume as garlicin. Ten rats in the negative control group were
investigated using physiological saline only. Plasma and lymph cells were
separated from 2 ml blood which was extracted from rat heart. Enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was utilized to detect the levels of plasma IL-4 and 
IFN-<U+03B3>, and RT-PCR was utilized to detect the expression of T-bet and GATA-3.
RESULTS: The levels of IL-4 (x(-) ± s) were (6.292 ± 1.734), (14.252 ± 1.971),
(4.916 ± 0.600) pg/ml, respectively, and the levels of IFN-<U+03B3> were (24.338 ±
2.375), (12.364 ± 1.749), (16.136 ± 2.012) pg/ml, respectively, among the
pharmacological, control and negative control groups. The plasma level of IL-4 in
the pharmacological group rats was lower than that of control group rats (t =
4.23, P < 0.05), while there was no significant difference between the
pharmacological and negative control group rats (t = 1.01, P > 0.05). The plasma 
level of IFN-<U+03B3> was increased significantly in the pharmacological group rats when
compared with the value of control group rats (t = 4.61, P < 0.05) and with the
negative control group (t = 5.79, P < 0.05), respectively. There was no
significant difference (t = 1.17, P > 0.05) in plasma level of IFN-<U+03B3> in the
control group rats when compared with the negative control group. Relative
quantization of expression of GATA-3 (median) was 0.826, 1.029 and 0.474, and
those of T-bet (median) were 1.245, 0.280 and 0.544, respectively, among the
pharmacological, control and negative control groups. There were significant
difference among 3 groups (chi² = 6.599, P = 0.019; chi² = 9.884, P = 0.007,
respectively). Relative quantization of expression of GATA-3 in the control group
rats was significantly higher than that in the negative control group and
pharmacological group rats (chi² value were 10.113 and 2.384, respectively, all P
< 0.05), and that of GATA-3 in the pharmacological group rats was increased as
compared to the negative control group rats (chi² = 3.784, P < 0.05). The level
of expression of T-bet in pharmacological group rats was elevated markedly with a
significant difference as compared to both control (chi² = 16.021, P < 0.05) and 
negative control groups (chi² = 14.103, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Garlicin may upregulate the expression of T-bet dramatically and
downregulate the expression of transcription factor GATA-3 in the experimental
models of allergic rhinitis.

PMID: 20398510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Apr 13;6:359. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.13.

Short-term memory in gene induction reveals the regulatory principle behind
stochastic IL-4 expression.

Mariani L(1), Schulz EG, Lexberg MH, Helmstetter C, Radbruch A, Löhning M, Höfer 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Modeling of Biological Systems, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany. luca.mariani@ifom-ieo-campus.it

Although cell-to-cell variability has been recognized as an unavoidable
consequence of stochasticity in gene expression, it may also serve a functional
role for tuning physiological responses within a cell population. In the immune
system, remarkably large variability in the expression of cytokine genes has been
observed in homogeneous populations of lymphocytes, but the underlying molecular 
mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here, we study the interleukin-4 gene
(il4) in T-helper lymphocytes, combining mathematical modeling with the
experimental quantification of expression variability and critical parameters. We
show that a stochastic rate-limiting step upstream of transcription initiation,
but acting at the level of an individual allele, controls il4 expression. Only a 
fraction of cells reaches an active, transcription-competent state in the
transient time window determined by antigen stimulation. We support this finding 
by experimental evidence of a previously unknown short-term memory that was
predicted by the model to arise from the long lifetime of the active state. Our
analysis shows how a stochastic mechanism acting at the chromatin level can be
integrated with transcriptional regulation to quantitatively control cell-to-cell
variability.

PMCID: PMC2872609
PMID: 20393579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):435-41. doi: 10.1038/ni.1865. Epub 2010 Apr 11.

The transcription factor c-Myb primes CD4+CD8+ immature thymocytes for selection 
into the iNKT lineage.

Hu T(1), Simmons A, Yuan J, Bender TP, Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Type I invariant NKT cells (iNKT cells) are a subset of alphabeta T cells
characterized by the expression of an invariant alpha-chain variable region
14-alpha-chain joining region 18 (V(alpha)14J(alpha)18) T cell antigen receptor
(TCR) alpha-chain. The iNKT cells derive from CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP)
thymocytes, and their generation requires a long half-life of DP thymocytes to
allow V(alpha)14-J(alpha)18 rearrangements, expression of glycolipid-loaded CD1d 
on DP thymocytes, and signaling through the signaling-activation molecule
SLAM-adaptor SAP pathway. Here we show that the transcription factor c-Myb has a 
central role in priming DP thymocytes to enter the iNKT lineage by simultaneously
regulating CD1d expression, the half-life of DP cells and expression of SLAMF1,
SLAMF6 and SAP.

PMCID: PMC2857587
PMID: 20383148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Neurochem. 2010 Jun;113(6):1659-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06725.x. Epub
2010 Mar 31.

The exceptional properties of 9-methyl-beta-carboline: stimulation, protection
and regeneration of dopaminergic neurons coupled with anti-inflammatory effects.

Polanski W(1), Enzensperger C, Reichmann H, Gille G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Beta-carbolines (BCs) are potential endogenous and exogenous neurotoxins that may
contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. However, we recently
demonstrated protective and stimulatory effects of 9-methyl-BC (9-me-BC) in
primary dopaminergic culture. In the present study, treatment with 9-me-BC
unmasked a unique tetrad of effects. First, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression 
was stimulated in pre-existing dopa decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons and
several TH-relevant transcription factors (Gata2, Gata3, Creb1, Crebbp) were
up-regulated. Neurite outgrowth of TH immunoreactive (THir) neurons was likewise 
stimulated. The interaction with tyrosine kinases (protein kinase A and C,
epidermal growth factor-receptor, fibroblast growth factor-receptor and neural
cell adhesion molecule) turned out to be decisive for these observed effects.
Second, 9-me-BC protected in acute toxicity models THir neurons against
lipopolysaccharide and 2,9-dime-BC(+) toxicity. Third, in a chronic toxicity
model when cells were treated with 9-me-BC after chronic rotenone administration,
a pronounced regeneration of THir neurons was observed. Fourth, 9-me-BC inhibited
the proliferation of microglia induced by toxin treatment and installed an
anti-inflammatory environment by decreasing the expression of inflammatory
cytokines and receptors. Finally, 9-me-BC lowered the content of alpha-synuclein 
protein in the cultures. The presented results warrant the exploration of 9-me-BC
as a novel potential anti-parkinsonian medication, as 9-me-BC interferes with
several known pathogenic factors in Parkinson's disease as outlined above.
Further investigations are currently under way.

PMID: 20374418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Mar 20;123(6):739-44.

GATA3 siRNA inhibits the binding of NFAT1 to interleukin-13 promoter in human T
cells.

Yao X(1), Yang Y, He HY, Wang M, Yin KS, Huang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-13 (IL-13) is recognized to be a key modulator in the
pathogenesis of Th2-induced allergic inflammation. Transcription factors GATA3
and NFAT1 have been both implicated in the regulation of Th2 cytokines. We
previously demonstrated the GATA3-NFAT1 association during human T cell
activation. However, the function of the GATA3-NFAT1 complex in Th2 cytokines
regulation is still unknown. Small interference RNA (siRNA) was constructed to
knock down GATA3 expression in Hut-78 cells to investigate the possible role of
GATA3-NFAT1 complex in IL-13 transcription.
METHODS: Cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies to mimic
in vivo antigen-mediated co-stimulation; the expression of IL-13 mRNA was
determined by real-time PCR; chromation immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assay was
employed to investigate the NFAT1 binding to IL-13 promoter.
RESULTS: GATA3 siRNA suppressed the expression of GATA3 both in mRNA and protein 
levels in Hut-78 cells. The binding of NFAT1 to IL-13 promoter was inhibited by
GATA3 siRNA in activated T cells, which was followed by the reduction of IL-13
transcription.
CONCLUSION: GATA3-NFAT1 complex may play an important role in the regulation of
IL-13 transcription in human T cells.

PMID: 20368097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Respirology. 2010 May;15(4):629-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2010.01721.x. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

Gender differences in transcriptional regulation of IL-5 expression by bronchial 
lymph node cells in a mouse model of asthma.

Wada K(1), Okuyama K, Ohkawara Y, Takayanagi M, Ohno I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, Sendai,
Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The severity of asthma after puberty is higher in women
than in men. Increased numbers of eosinophils in the airways of female mice after
antigen challenge was associated with increased levels of T helper (Th)2
cytokines at the site of inflammation, and in human and mouse studies, the
profile of cytokines produced by immune cells from women showed greater Th2
predominance. The aim of this study was to investigate gender differences in the 
development of Th2 immune responses.
METHODS: Male and female C57BL/6 mice were sensitized with ovalbumin. Cells
prepared from bronchial lymph nodes were cultured in the absence or presence of
ovalbumin. Cytokine concentrations in the culture supernatants were measured, and
IL-5 and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) gene expression were evaluated. T-cell
subsets were analysed using specific surface markers.
RESULTS: The concentrations of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13 and IL-10, but not
interferon-gamma or transforming growth factor-beta(1), were higher in cell
supernatants from female mice than in those from male mice. IL-5 and GATA-3 gene 
expressions were higher in cells from women than in cells from men. The numbers
of CD3(+)CD4(+)T1/ST2(+) cells, but not CD3(+)CD4(+) or CD4(+)CD25(+) cells, were
significantly higher in cells from women than in cells from men.
CONCLUSIONS: Greater antigen-induced Th2 cytokine production by bronchial lymph
node cells from female mice was associated with enhanced Th2 cell differentiation
and increased expression of the Th2-specific transcription factor, GATA-3.

PMID: 20337994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jun;87(6):1011-8. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1209772. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Regulation of the T helper cell type 2 (Th2)/T regulatory cell (Treg) balance by 
IL-4 and STAT6.

Chapoval S(1), Dasgupta P, Dorsey NJ, Keegan AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Vascular and
Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA.

During the development of immune responses to pathogens, self-antigens, or
environmental allergens, naive CD4(+) T cells differentiate into subsets of
effector cells including Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells. The differentiation into these
subsets is controlled by specific transcription factors. The activity of these
effector cells is limited by nTregs and iTregs, whose differentiation and
maintenance are dependent on the transcription factor Foxp3. The regulation of
autoimmune diseases mediated by Th1 and Th17 cells by Tregs has been studied and 
reviewed extensively. However, much less has been presented about the interplay
between Tregs and Th2 cells and their contribution to allergic disease. In this
perspective, we discuss the regulation of Th2 cells by Tregs and vice versa,
focusing on the interplay between the IL-4-activated STAT6/GATA3 pathway and
Foxp3.

PMCID: PMC2872539
PMID: 20335310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 Sep;302(7):517-23. doi: 10.1007/s00403-010-1048-1. Epub
2010 Mar 24.

Expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription factors, T-bet and
GATA-3, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and skin lesions of patients with
psoriasis vulgaris.

Zhu K(1), Ye J, Wu M, Cheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Psoriasis is considered as a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease, and the Th1
response has been established as the major immune agent in its pathomechanisms.
The relative expression of Th1 and Th2 transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3,
resulting in a swing in the Th1/Th2 pendulum, has been implicated in a number of 
immunological diseases. However, their expression and correlation with psoriasis 
has not yet been studied. Our aim was to evaluate the expression of T-bet and
GATA-3 in psoriatic patients and determine their correlation with serum levels of
IFN-gamma and IL-4. Sera, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and skin
lesions were taken from 23 patients with psoriasis vulgaris. Serum levels of
IFN-gamma and IL-4 were measured by ELISA. T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression in
PBMCs was analyzed by RT-PCR. Lesional expression and distribution of CD4, CD8,
T-bet and GATA-3 were assessed by immunohistochemistry. Blood and skin samples of
healthy individuals served as controls. A markedly higher IFN-gamma and lower
IL-4 concentration in the serum of psoriatic patients was found. A significantly 
higher expression of T-bet mRNA and a lower expression of GATA-3 mRNA in PBMCs,
and consequently, a much higher T-bet/GATA-3 ratio in patients than in controls
were shown. T-bet mRNA expression was strongly correlated with serum IFN-gamma
secretion in patients; furthermore, the correlation between T-bet/GATA-3 ratio
and IFN-gamma/IL-4 ratio was revealed. We also observed a significant increase in
CD4+ cells and T-bet positive cells in psoriatic lesions. These results suggested
that T-bet and GATA-3 might be regulator genes for psoriasis via the Th1/Th2
balance, and the Th1-specific transcription factor, T-bet, may play an important 
role in the development and maintenance of psoriasis.

PMID: 20333526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genome Inform. 2010 Jan;22:84-94.

Prediction of regulatory transcription factors in T helper cell differentiation
and maintenance.

Lee YH(1), Benary M, Baumgrass R, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt University of Berlin,
Invalidenstr. 43, 10115 Berlin, Germany. yuehien@gmail.com

Naive T-helper (Th) cells differentiate into distinct lineages including Th1,
Th2, Th17 and regulatory T (Treg) cells. Each of these Th-lineages has specific
functions in immune defense and T cell homeostasis. Th cell fate decisions and
commitment are dependent on the kind and strength of T cell stimulation and the
subsequent gene expression profiles. Our analysis targeted the identification of 
new regulatory transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoter regions
of up- and down-regulated genes in Treg cell differentiation and lineage
maintenance. For this approach we compared different gene groups from global gene
expression studies with background models of randomly selected genes to identify 
significantly overrepresented TFBSs. Results of our analysis suggest that Ets and
IRF family members contribute to the regulation of the initial induction of Treg 
cells. Furthermore, we identified the overrepresented TFBS-pairs Runx-NFAT and
GATA3-Foxp3 in Treg specific genes and Foxp3 dependent genes, respectively.
Interestingly, previous studies have observed functional interactions of both
TFBS-pairs in T cells. This study provides a starting point for further
investigations to elucidate the transcriptional network in Treg cells.

PMID: 20238421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar-Apr;88(3):235. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.7.

Th2 immunity: a step closer to completion.

Min B.

PMID: 20237482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4178-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901282. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

Lck mediates Th2 differentiation through effects on T-bet and GATA-3.

Kemp KL(1), Levin SD, Bryce PJ, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The Src family kinase Lck has been shown to be crucial in T cell signaling and
development. However, its role in Th effector functions is not well understood.
Lck has previously been shown to play a role in the cytokine expression of Th2
cells, but the mechanism by which Lck influences Th2 effector functions is
unknown. Using a mouse model, we report that Lck is important in regulating the
expression of IL-4 in Th2 skewed cells but is not as necessary for the expression
of Th2 cytokines IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13. Furthermore, in the absence of Lck,
T-bet and GATA-3 expression is aberrant. Moreover, this atypical expression
pattern of T-bet and GATA-3 correlates with increased histone 3 acetylation at
the Ifng locus and production of the Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma. We find
overexpression of GATA-3 restores IL-4 expression in lck(-/-) Th2 cells; this
indicates that the decreased IL-4 expression is due in part to reduced amounts of
GATA-3. Taken together, these data imply that Lck mediates Th2 differentiation
through effects on T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 20237292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Infect Immun. 2010 May;78(5):2302-11. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01398-09. Epub 2010 Mar
15.

Impairment of host defense against disseminated candidiasis in mice
overexpressing GATA-3.

Haraguchi N(1), Ishii Y, Morishima Y, Yoh K, Matsuno Y, Kikuchi N, Sakamoto T,
Takahashi S, Hizawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Candida species are the most common source of nosocomial invasive fungal
infections. Previous studies have indicated that T-helper immune response is the 
critical host factor for susceptibility to Candida infection. The transcription
factor GATA-3 is known as the master regulator for T-helper type 2 (Th2)
differentiation. We therefore investigated the role of GATA-3 in the host defense
against systemic Candida infection using GATA-3-overexpressing transgenic mice.
The survival of GATA-3-overexpressing mice after Candida infection was
significantly lower than that of wild-type mice. Candida outgrowth was
significantly increased in the kidneys of GATA-3-overexpressing mice, compared
with wild-type mice. The levels of various Th2 cytokines, including interleukin-4
(IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13, were significantly higher while the level of Th1
cytokine gamma interferon was significantly lower in the splenocytes of
GATA-3-overexpressing mice after Candida infection. Recruitment of macrophages
into the peritoneal cavity in response to Candida infection and their phagocytic 
activity were significantly lower in GATA-3-overexpressing mice than in wild-type
mice. Exogenous administration of gamma interferon to GATA-3-overexpressing mice 
significantly reduced Candida outgrowth in the kidney and thus increased the
survival rate. Administration of gamma interferon also increased the recruitment 
of macrophages into the peritoneal cavity in response to Candida infection. These
results indicate that overexpression of GATA-3 modulates macrophage antifungal
activity and thus enhances the susceptibility to systemic Candida infection,
possibly by reducing the production of gamma interferon in response to Candida
infection.

PMCID: PMC2863530
PMID: 20231412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Clin Immunol. 2010 Jul;136(1):16-20. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.02.011. Epub 2010
Mar 15.

Combined T regulatory cell and Th2 expression profile identifies children with
cow's milk allergy.

Savilahti EM(1), Karinen S, Salo HM, Klemetti P, Saarinen KM, Klemola T, Kuitunen
M, Hautaniemi S, Savilahti E, Vaarala O.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

The role of T regulatory cells in spontaneous recovery from cow's milk allergy
(CMA) is unclear. We investigated the mRNA expression of 12 T-cell markers and
the protein expression of CD4, CD25, CD127, FoxP3 after in vitro
beta-lactoglobulin stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
children with persisting CMA (n=16), early recovery (n=20) or no atopy (n=21).
Artificial neural networks with exhaustive search for all marker combinations
revealed that markers FoxP3, Nfat-C2, IL-16 and GATA-3 distinguished patients
with persisting CMA most accurately from other study groups. FoxP3 mRNA
expression following beta-lactoglobulin stimulation was highest in children with 
persisting CMA. Also the FoxP3 intensity in CD4(+) CD25(high)CD127(low) cells was
higher in children with CMA compared with non-atopic children. The expression
profile of both Th2- and T regulatory cell-related genes thus reflects the
clinical activity of CMA. Tolerance, in contrast, is not characterized by
activation of circulating T regulatory cells.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20227920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Shock. 2010 Oct;34(4):358-63. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181dc0977.

Early assessment of leukocyte alterations at diagnosis of septic shock.

Venet F(1), Davin F, Guignant C, Larue A, Cazalis MA, Darbon R, Allombert C,
Mougin B, Malcus C, Poitevin-Later F, Lepape A, Monneret G.

Author information: 
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon, CRB Sepsis, France.

A dramatic decrease in circulating lymphocyte number is regularly described after
septic shock. However, it is unknown how early this alteration develops after
diagnosis of shock and if it remains stable over time. Twenty-one septic shock
patients with no comorbidities were included within 2 h after the beginning of
vasopressive treatment. Flow cytometry phenotyping of circulating leukocyte
subpopulations and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction of T-bet,
GATA-3, FOXP3, and ROR<U+03B3> mRNA were performed in patients from the diagnosis of
shock and every 6 h during the subsequent 48 h. From their admission in the
intensive care unit, patients present with major alterations of circulating
leukocyte count (leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and major lymphopenia). The numbers 
of every lymphocyte subpopulations (T, B, and natural killer cells) were
diminished. Gene expression analysis of transcription factors specific for TH1,
TH2, CD4CD25 regulatory, and TH17 lymphocytes showed a severe decrease in
comparison with healthy individuals' values. These alterations remain stable
during the first 48 h after inclusion in the protocol despite early and
aggressive resuscitation and antibiotherapy administered in patients. At the time
of diagnosis of shock and admission in the intensive care unit, septic patients
already present with severe lymphopenia involving every lymphocyte subsets
including CD4 T-cell subpopulations. No significant variation could be detected
within the first 48 h. This should be taken into account in the forthcoming
clinical trials testing immunomodulating therapies in septic shock patients.

PMID: 20220566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2010 May 20;29(20):2905-15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.64. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

Loss of type III transforming growth factor-beta receptor expression is due to
methylation silencing of the transcription factor GATA3 in renal cell carcinoma.

Cooper SJ(1), Zou H, Legrand SN, Marlow LA, von Roemeling CA, Radisky DC, Wu KJ, 
Hempel N, Margulis V, Tun HW, Blobe GC, Wood CG, Copland JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mayo
Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Loss of transforming growth factor-beta receptor III (TbetaRIII) correlates with 
loss of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) responsiveness and suggests a 
role for dysregulated TGF-beta signaling in clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC) progression and metastasis. Here we identify that for all stages of ccRCC
TbetaRIII expression is downregulated in patient-matched tissue samples and cell 
lines. We find that this loss of expression is not due to methylation of the gene
and we define GATA3 as the first transcriptional factor to positively regulate
TbetaRIII expression in human cells. We localize GATA3's binding to a 10-bp
region of the TbetaRIII proximal promoter. We demonstrate that GATA3 mRNA is
downregulated in all stages, of ccRCC, mechanistically show that GATA3 is
methylated in ccRCC patient tumor tissues as well as cell lines, and that
inhibiting GATA3 expression in normal renal epithelial cells downregulates
TbetaRIII mRNA and protein expression. These data support a sequential model
whereby loss of GATA3 expression through epigenetic silencing decreases TbetaRIII
expression during ccRCC progression.

PMCID: PMC3472631
PMID: 20208565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Immunogenet. 2010 Apr;37(2):111-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2010.00899.x.
Epub 2010 Feb 19.

The mutations of Th1 cell-specific T-box transcription factor may be associated
with a predominant Th2 phenotype in gastric cancers.

Yang P(1), Qiu G, Wang S, Su Z, Chen J, Wang S, Kong F, Lu L, Ezaki T, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China.

Gastric cancer is a serious public health cancer and causes nearly 1 million
deaths a year worldwide. Th1 cells play critical roles in orchestrating the
adaptive immune responses against gastric cancer. T-bet, a member of the T-box
family of transcription factors, is the Th1 master regulator and up-regulated
during Th1 differentiation. Polymorphisms have also been shown to exist in T-bet.
Some reports indicated that some tumours were associated with the drift of Th1
and Th2. In the present work, we investigated the drift of Th1/Th2 by detecting
the expression levels of T-bet, IFN-gamma, IL-4, and GATA-3 in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell of gastric cancer patients by real-time PCR, explored the
relationship between the polymorphism of T-bet gene and drift of Th1/Th2 by gene 
sequence, western blot, and gene transfection. Our results indicated that a
predominant Th2 phenotype was existence. T-bet gene mutations may be associated
with Th2-dominated condition in gastric cancers.

PMID: 20193034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Allergy. 2010 Sep;65(9):1149-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2010.02340.x. Epub 2010
Feb 26.

Inflammatory profiles in nasal mucosa of patients with persistent vs intermittent
allergic rhinitis.

Liu F(1), Zhang J, Liu Y, Zhang N, Holtappels G, Lin P, Liu S, Bachert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, West China Medical School, Sichuan
University, China.

BACKGROUND: To date there is little information on the inflammatory profiles of
patients suffering from persistent (PER) and intermittent allergic rhinitis
(IAR). Also, it is not clear whether differences exist in eosinophilic
inflammation and/or T-helper cell sub-populations and their markers. The aim of
this study was to primarily evaluate the inflammatory profiles of patients with
moderate/severe PER and IAR.
METHODS: Inferior nasal turbinate tissue was obtained from 12 PER, 12 IAR and 12 
nonallergic nonrhinitic (control) patients, and symptoms (visual analogue scales,
VAS) and impairment of life was monitored. All tissues were assessed for
eosinophil and mast cell numbers by immunohistochemistry; IL-5, ECP and IgE
concentrations by immunoassay; mRNA for transcription factors GATA-3, T-bet,
FOXP3 and RORc by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; and
IgE-induced release of LTC(4)/D(4)/E(4) and PGD(2)in vitro.
RESULTS: Eosinophils and mast cells were significantly increased in patients with
PER and patients with IAR compared to control subjects; by patients with PER
demonstrating even significantly greater increase of both cell types than
patients with IAR. Similarly, ECP IL-5, GATA-3 mRNA expression and IgE-induced
release of LTC4/D(4)/E(4) and PGD(2) from mast cells were significantly increased
in patients with PER compared to patients with IAR. In contrast, the expression
of T-bet, FOXP3 or RORc mRNA was not significantly different in the PER, IAR or
control patients.
CONCLUSION: The findings from the present study suggest that PER is characterized
by a significantly greater eosinophilic and predominantly Th2 cell-mediated nasal
inflammatory profile compared to IAR.

PMID: 20192943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):14042-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.105262. Epub
2010 Feb 26.

GATA3 inhibits breast cancer metastasis through the reversal of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Yan W(1), Cao QJ, Arenas RB, Bentley B, Shao R.

Author information: 
(1)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, University of Massachusetts,
Springfield, Massachusetts 01107, USA.

GATA3, a transcription factor that regulates T lymphocyte differentiation and
maturation, is exclusively expressed in early stage well differentiated breast
cancers but not in advanced invasive cancers. However, little is understood
regarding its activity and the mechanisms underlying this differential expression
in cancers. Here, we employed GATA3-positive, non-invasive (MCF-7) and
GATA3-negative, invasive (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cells to define its role in
the transformation between these two distinct phenotypes. Ectopic expression of
GATA3 in MDA-MB-231 cells led to a cuboidal-like epithelial phenotype and reduced
cell invasive activity. These cells also increased E-cadherin expression but
decreased levels of vimentin, N-cadherin, and MMP-9. Further, MDA-MB-231 cells
expressing GATA3 grew smaller primary tumors without metastasis compared with
larger metastatic tumors derived from control MDA-MB-231 cells in xenografted
mice. GATA3 was found to induce E-cadherin expression through binding GATA-like
motifs located in the E-cadherin promoter. Blockade of GATA3 using small
interfering RNA gene knockdown in MCF-7 cells triggered fibroblastic
transformation and cell invasion, resulting in distant metastasis. Studies of
human breast cancer showed that GATA3 expression correlated with elevated
E-cadherin levels, ER expression, and long disease-free survival. These data
suggest that GATA3 drives invasive breast cancer cells to undergo the reversal of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, leading to the suppression of cancer
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2859565
PMID: 20189993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2010 Jun;30(6):399-406. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0028.

All-trans retinoic acid ameliorates trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis
by shifting Th1 to Th2 profile.

Bai A(1), Lu N, Zeng H, Li Z, Zhou X, Chen J, Liu P, Peng Z, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang
University, Nanchang City, People's Republic of China. baiap@163.com

Inflammatory bowel disease is characterized with uncontrolled immune response in 
inflamed mucosa, with dominance of Th1 cells. Recently, all-trans retinoic acid
has been shown that can lead T-cell response by suppressing Th17 development via 
retinoic acid receptor (RAR), but it is still unknown whether all-trans retinoic 
acid can modulate Th1 response of inflammatory bowel disease. In the experiment, 
we investigated the effect of all-trans retinoic acid on trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (TNBS)-induced murine colitis, and the possible mechanism. Mice were
intraperitoneally treated daily with all-trans retinoic acid (the agonist of
RAR-alpha) or LE135 (the antagonist of RAR-alpha) or medium, and sacrificed 6
days later. Colon was collected for histological analysis and myeloperoxidase
(MPO) activity measurement. Lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) were
isolated, cultured, and assayed for the expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 by the
use of Western blot and for cytokine levels by the use of ELISA. All-trans
retinoic acid treatment inhibited inflammatory responses as shown by lower
histological inflammatory scores and MPO activity, compared with LE135 and medium
groups. Furthermore, in LPMCs culture supernatants, the levels of Th1 cytokines
(INF-gamma, IL-12, and TNF-alpha) were decreased while those of Th2 cytokines
(IL-4 and IL-10) were increased significantly in all-trans retinoic acid-treated 
mice. In addition, T-bet expression in LPMCs was inhibited and GATA-3 expression 
was up-regulated in all-trans retinoic acidtreated mice. On the contrary, LE135
showed the reverse effects in colon inflammation and cytokine profile. By
shifting Th1 to Th2 profile in inflamed mucosa, all-trans retinoic acid
down-regulates inflammatory response and ameliorates acute TNBS-induced colitis, 
which suggests the ligand of RAR-alpha-based pharmaceutical strategies for
managing inflammatory bowel disease.

PMID: 20187766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Genome Res. 2010 Apr;20(4):458-72. doi: 10.1101/gr.101469.109. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Examination of transcriptional networks reveals an important role for TCFAP2C,
SMARCA4, and EOMES in trophoblast stem cell maintenance.

Kidder BL(1), Palmer S.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Serono Research Institute, Inc., Rockland, MA 02370, USA.
benjamin.kidder@emdserono.com

Trophoblast stem cells (TS cells), derived from the trophectoderm (TE) of
blastocysts, require transcription factors (TFs) and external signals (FGF4,
INHBA/NODAL/TGFB1) for self-renewal. While many reports have focused on TF
networks that regulate embryonic stem cell (ES cell) self-renewal and
pluripotency, little is know about TF networks that regulate self-renewal in TS
cells. To further understand transcriptional networks in TS cells, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA microarray hybridization (ChIP-chip)
analysis to investigate targets of the TFs-TCFAP2C, EOMES, ETS2, and GATA3-and a 
chromatin remodeling factor, SMARCA4. We then evaluated the transcriptional
states of target genes using transcriptome analysis and genome-wide analysis of
histone H3 acetylation (AcH3). Our results describe previously unknown
transcriptional networks in TS cells, including TF occupancy of genes involved in
ES cell self-renewal and pluripotency, co-occupancy of TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES at a significant number of genes, and transcriptional regulatory circuitry 
within the five factors. Moreover, RNAi depletion of Tcfap2c, Smarca4, and Eomes 
transcripts resulted in a loss of normal colony morphology and down-regulation of
TS cell-specific genes, suggesting an important role for TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES in TS cell self-renewal. Through genome-wide mapping and global expression 
analysis of five TF target genes, our data provide a comprehensive analysis of
transcriptional networks that regulate TS cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2847749
PMID: 20176728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3008-15. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903615. Epub 2010
Feb 17.

Transfusion of nonobese diabetic mice with allogeneic newborn blood ameliorates
autoimmune diabetes and modifies the expression of selected immune response
genes.

Jayaraman S(1), Patel T, Patel V, Ajani S, Garza R, Jayaraman A, Kwon S, Singh R,
Rondelli D, Prabhakar BS, Holterman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. anue2468@uic.edu

Although allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been shown to prevent
autoimmune diabetes in heavily irradiated nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, a similar
procedure is not suitable for the treatment of patients with type 1 diabetes
because of associated severe side effects. Therefore, we evaluated whether mouse 
newborn blood (NBB), equivalent to human umbilical cord blood, could be used for 
diabetes prevention without recipient preconditioning. To test this hypothesis,
unconditioned, prediabetic female NOD mice were given a single injection of whole
NBB derived from the allogeneic diabetes-resistant mouse strain C57BL/6.
Transfusion of allogeneic NBB but not adult blood prevented diabetes incidence in
a majority of treated mice for a prolonged period of time. This was accompanied
by the release of insulin in response to a challenge with glucose. Invasive
cellular infiltration of islets was also substantially reduced in these mice.
Although NBB transfusion induced a low level of hematopoietic microchimerism, it 
did not strictly correlate with amelioration of diabetes. Induction of genes
implicated in diabetes, such as Il18, Tnfa, and Inos but not Il4, Il17 or Ifng,
was repressed in splenocytes derived from protected mice. Notably, expression of 
the transcription factor Tbet/Tbx21 but not Gata3 or Rorgt was upregulated in
protected mice. These data indicate that allogeneic NBB transfusion can prevent
diabetes in NOD mice associated with modulation of selected cytokine genes
implicated in diabetes manifestation. The data presented in this study provide
the proof of principle for the utility of allogeneic umbilical cord blood
transfusion to treat patients with autoimmune diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3779363
PMID: 20164427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar-Apr;88(3):236-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.2. Epub 2010
Feb 16.

What determines Th2 differentiation, in vitro and in vivo?

Paul WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1892, USA.
wpaul@niaid.nih.gov

We have known since 1991 how to induce naive CD4 T cells to differentiate in
vitro into Th2 cells and, over the ensuing years, a comprehensive picture of the 
molecules involved in this important process has emerged. GATA3 and STAT5 are
both essential for in vitro differentiation, stimulating naive cells through a
process involving induction, which is T-cell receptor (TCR) dependent but
interleukin (IL)-4 independent, and commitment, which is IL-4 dependent. Th2
differentiation in vivo appears more complex. GATA3 and probably STAT5 are
required in vivo but, at least for certain helminth infections, the
IL-4/IL-4Ra/STAT6 pathway is dispensable. The role of thymic stromal
lymphopoietin and of low TCR signal strength and the participation of basophils
in establishing a Th2-baising in vivo environment have achieved considerable
attention. Here I discuss the major players in Th2 differentiation particularly
as they may exert their effects in vivo.

PMID: 20157328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Oncogene. 2010 May 6;29(18):2739-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.21. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

Cyclin D1 is a direct transcriptional target of GATA3 in neuroblastoma tumor
cells.

Molenaar JJ(1), Ebus ME, Koster J, Santo E, Geerts D, Versteeg R, Caron HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.j.molenaar@amc.uva.nl

Almost all neuroblastoma tumors express excess levels of Cyclin D1 (CCND1)
compared to normal tissues and other tumor types. Only a small percentage of
these neuroblastoma tumors have high-level amplification of the Cyclin D1 gene.
The other neuroblastoma tumors have equally high Cyclin D1 expression without
amplification. Silencing of Cyclin D1 expression was previously found to trigger 
differentiation of neuroblastoma cells. Overexpression of Cyclin D1 is therefore 
one of the most frequent mechanisms with a postulated function in neuroblastoma
pathogenesis. The cause for the Cyclin D1 overexpression is unknown. Here we show
that Cyclin D1 overexpression results from transcriptional upregulation. To
identify upstream regulators, we searched in mRNA profiles of neuroblastoma tumor
series for transcription factors with expression patterns correlating to Cyclin
D1. GATA3 most consistently correlated to Cyclin D1 in four independent data
sets. We identified a highly conserved GATA3 binding site 27 bp upstream of the
Cyclin D1 transcriptional start. Chromatin immune precipitation confirmed binding
of GATA3 to the Cyclin D1 promoter. Overexpression of GATA3 induced Cyclin D1
promoter activity, which decreased after site-directed mutagenesis of the GATA3
binding site in the Cyclin D1 promoter. Silencing of GATA3 resulted in reduced
Cyclin D1 promoter activity and reduced Cyclin D1 mRNA and protein levels.
Moreover, GATA3 silencing caused differentiation that was similar to that caused 
by Cyclin D1 inhibition. These finding implicate GATA3 in Cyclin D1
overexpression in neuroblastoma.

PMID: 20154722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Allergy. 2010 Oct;65(10):1282-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2010.02328.x. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Lifestyle and parental allergen sensitization are reflected in the intrauterine
environment at gene expression level.

Joerink M(1), Oortveld MA, Stenius F, Rindsjö E, Alm J, Scheynius A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Solna, Clinical Allergy Research Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Maaike.Joerink@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Environmental factors, including the intrauterine environment, can
influence the risk of allergy development. In the present study, we investigated 
whether lifestyle and parental allergen sensitization status are reflected at
gene expression level in the intrauterine environment.
METHODS:   mRNA expression of 17 genes was determined by means of quantitative
real-time PCR in term placenta of 36 families participating in the ALADDIN study 
(Assessment of Lifestyle and Allergic Disease During Infancy). Data were analysed
using a linear regression model to estimate the influence of lifestyle and
parental allergen sensitization on the relative mRNA expression levels.
Immunohistochemistry on placenta biopsies was used to verify protein expression.
RESULTS: Significant differences in mRNA expression levels were detected at the
foetal side of the placenta, where CD14 was expressed at higher levels in
placentas from families living on a farm compared to not living on a farm, and
IL-12(p40) was expressed at lower levels when the father was sensitized compared 
to nonsensitized. At the maternal side of the placenta, higher expression of
STAT4 and lower expression of GATA3 were detected in families with sensitized
compared to nonsensitized mothers, and IL-12(p40) was lower expressed when the
families were living on a farm compared to not living on a farm.
Immunohistochemistry performed for STAT4 and GATA3 showed that protein and mRNA
levels correlated well.
CONCLUSION: Living on a farm and parental allergen sensitization are reflected in
the intrauterine environment at the gene expression level.

PMID: 20146730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Mar;15(3):535-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01023.x.

Gene expression signatures differentiate ovarian/peritoneal serous carcinoma from
breast carcinoma in effusions.

Davidson B(1), Stavnes HT, Holth A, Chen X, Yang Y, Shih IeM, Wang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway. bend@medisin.uio.no

Ovarian/primary peritoneal carcinoma and breast carcinoma are the gynaecological 
cancers that most frequently involve the serosal cavities.With the objective of
improving on the limited diagnostic panel currently available for the
differential diagnosis of these two malignancies,as well as to define
tumour-specific biological targets, we compared their global gene expression
patterns. Gene expression profiles of 10 serous ovarian/peritoneal and eight
ductal breast carcinoma effusions were analysed using the HumanRef-8 BeadChip
from Illumina.Differentially expressed candidate genes were validated using
quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering using all 54,675 genes in the array separated ovarian from breast
carcinoma samples. We identified 288 unique probes that were significantly
differentially expressed in the two cancers by greater than 3.5-fold, of which 81
and 207 were overexpressed in breast and ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma,
respectively. SAM analysis identified 1078 differentially expressed probes with
false discovery rate less than 0.05. Genes overexpressed in breast carcinoma
included TFF1, TFF3, FOXA1, CA12, GATA3, SDC1, PITX1, TH, EHFD1, EFEMP1, TOB1 and
KLF2. Genes overexpressed in ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma included SPON1, RBP1,
MFGE8, TM4SF12, MMP7, KLK5/6/7, FOLR1/3,PAX8, APOL2 and NRCAM. The differential
expression of 14 genes was validated by quantitative real-time PCR, and
differences in 5 gene products were confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Expression
profiling distinguishes ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma from breast carcinoma and
identifies genes that are differentially expressed in these two tumour types. The
molecular signatures unique to these cancers may facilitate their differential
diagnosis and may provide a molecular basis for therapeutic target discovery.

PMCID: PMC3922375
PMID: 20132413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Apr 1;21(7):1166-77. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-08-0689. Epub 2010 
Feb 3.

Indole-3-carbinol triggers aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent estrogen receptor 
(ER)alpha protein degradation in breast cancer cells disrupting an ERalpha-GATA3 
transcriptional cross-regulatory loop.

Marconett CN(1), Sundar SN, Poindexter KM, Stueve TR, Bjeldanes LF, Firestone GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA.

Estrogen receptor (ER)alpha is a critical target of therapeutic strategies to
control the proliferation of hormone-dependent breast cancers. Preferred clinical
options have significant adverse side effects that can lead to treatment
resistance due to the persistence of active estrogen receptors. We have
established the cellular mechanism by which indole-3-carbinol (I3C), a promising 
anticancer phytochemical from Brassica vegetables, ablates ERalpha expression,
and we have uncovered a critical role for the GATA3 transcription factor in this 
indole-regulated cascade. I3C-dependent activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) initiates Rbx-1 E3 ligase-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal 
degradation of ERalpha protein. I3C inhibits endogenous binding of ERalpha with
the 3'-enhancer region of GATA3 and disrupts endogenous GATA3 interactions with
the ERalpha promoter, leading to a loss of GATA3 and ERalpha expression. Ectopic 
expression of GATA3 has no effect on I3C-induced ERalpha protein degradation but 
does prevent I3C inhibition of ERalpha promoter activity, demonstrating the
importance of GATA3 in this I3C-triggered cascade. Our preclinical results
implicate I3C as a novel anticancer agent in human cancers that coexpress
ERalpha, GATA3, and AhR, a combination found in a large percentage of breast
cancers but not in other critical ERalpha target tissues essential to patient
health.

PMCID: PMC2847521
PMID: 20130088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Apr;40(4):998-1010. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939739.

Impaired CD4+ T-cell proliferation and effector function correlates with
repressive histone methylation events in a mouse model of severe sepsis.

Carson WF 4th(1), Cavassani KA, Ito T, Schaller M, Ishii M, Dou Y, Kunkel SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.
wfcarson@umich.edu

Immunosuppression following severe sepsis remains a significant human health
concern, as long-term morbidity and mortality rates of patients who have
recovered from life-threatening septic shock remain poor. Mouse models of severe 
sepsis indicate this immunosuppression may be partly due to alterations in
myeloid cell function; however, the effect of severe sepsis on subsequent CD4(+) 
T-cell responses remains unclear. In the present study, CD4(+) T cells from mice 
subjected to an experimental model of severe sepsis (cecal ligation and puncture 
(CLP)) were analyzed in vitro. CD4(+)CD62L(+) T cells from CLP mice exhibited
reduced proliferative capacity and altered gene expression. Additionally,
CD4(+)CD62L(+) T cells from CLP mice exhibit dysregulated cytokine production
after in vitro skewing with exogenous cytokines, indicating a decreased
capability of these cells to commit to either the T(H)1 or T(H)2 lineage.
Repressive histone methylation marks were also evident at promoter regions for
the T(H)1 cytokine IFN-gamma and the T(H)2 transcription factor GATA-3 in naïve
CD4(+) T cells from CLP mice. These results provide evidence that CD4(+) T-cell
subsets from post-septic mice exhibit defects in activation and effector
function, possibly due to chromatin remodeling proximal to genes involved in
cytokine production or gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3040412
PMID: 20127677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jan 26;8(1):e1000296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000296.

Global regulator SATB1 recruits beta-catenin and regulates T(H)2 differentiation 
in Wnt-dependent manner.

Notani D(1), Gottimukkala KP, Jayani RS, Limaye AS, Damle MV, Mehta S, Purbey PK,
Joseph J, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune, India.

In vertebrates, the conserved Wnt signalling cascade promotes the stabilization
and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, which then associates with the lymphoid
enhancer factor/T cell factor proteins (LEF/TCFs) to activate target genes.
Wnt/beta -catenin signalling is essential for T cell development and
differentiation. Here we show that special AT-rich binding protein 1 (SATB1), the
T lineage-enriched chromatin organizer and global regulator, interacts with
beta-catenin and recruits it to SATB1's genomic binding sites. Gene expression
profiling revealed that the genes repressed by SATB1 are upregulated upon Wnt
signalling. Competition between SATB1 and TCF affects the transcription of
TCF-regulated genes upon beta-catenin signalling. GATA-3 is a T helper type 2
(T(H)2) specific transcription factor that regulates production of T(H)2
cytokines and functions as T(H)2 lineage determinant. SATB1 positively regulated 
GATA-3 and siRNA-mediated knockdown of SATB1 downregulated GATA-3 expression in
differentiating human CD4(+) T cells, suggesting that SATB1 influences T(H)2
lineage commitment by reprogramming gene expression. In the presence of Dickkopf 
1 (Dkk1), an inhibitor of Wnt signalling, GATA-3 is downregulated and the
expression of signature T(H)2 cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 is
reduced, indicating that Wnt signalling is essential for T(H)2 differentiation.
Knockdown of beta-catenin also produced similar results, confirming the role of
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling in T(H)2 differentiation. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that SATB1 recruits beta-catenin and p300
acetyltransferase on GATA-3 promoter in differentiating T(H)2 cells in a
Wnt-dependent manner. SATB1 coordinates T(H)2 lineage commitment by reprogramming
gene expression. The SATB1:beta-catenin complex activates a number of SATB1
regulated genes, and hence this study has potential to find novel Wnt responsive 
genes. These results demonstrate that SATB1 orchestrates T(H)2 lineage commitment
by mediating Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. This report identifies a new global
transcription factor involved in beta-catenin signalling that may play a major
role in dictating the functional outcomes of this signalling pathway during
development, differentiation, and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2811152
PMID: 20126258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 May;298(5):L670-7. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00399.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Maternal endotoxin exposure attenuates allergic airway disease in infant rats.

Cao L(1), Wang J, Zhu Y, Tseu I, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Biology Research Group, Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, The
Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, Toronto.

Prenatal exposures to immunogenic stimuli, such as bacterial LPS, have shown to
influence the neonatal immune system and lung function. However, no detailed
analysis of the immunomodulatory effects of LPS on postnatal T helper cell
differentiation has been performed. Using a rat model, we investigated the effect
of prenatal LPS exposure on postnatal T cell differentiation and experimental
allergic airway disease. Pregnant rats were injected with LPS on day 20 and 21
(term = 22 days). Some of the offspring were sensitized and challenged with
ovalbumin. Positive control animals were placebo exposed to saline instead of
LPS, whereas negative controls were sensitized with saline. Expression of T
cell-related transcription factors and cytokines was quantified in the lung, and 
airway hyperresponsiveness was measured. Prenatal LPS exposure induced a T helper
1 (T(H)1) immune milieu in the offspring of rats [i.e., increased T-bet and T(H)1
cytokine expression while expression of T(H)2-associated transcription factors
(GATA3 and STAT6) and cytokines was decreased]. Prenatal LPS exposure did not
trigger T(H)17 cell differentiation in the offspring. Furthermore, prenatal LPS
exposure reduced ovalbumin-induced (T(H)2-mediated) airway inflammation,
eosinophilia, and airway responsiveness. Thus, in utero exposure to endotoxin
promotes a T(H)1 immune environment, which suppresses the development of allergic
airway disease later in life.

PMID: 20118299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Jun;34(6):685-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.01.015. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Demonstration of T cell and macrophage progenitors in carp (Cyprinus carpio)
kidney hematopoietic tissues. Development of clonal assay system for carp
hematopoietic cells.

Katakura F(1), Yamaguchi T, Yoshida M, Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

Single hematopoietic cells from carp (Cyprinus carpio) kidney were seeded to each
well of 96-well plates and cultured in the presence of a supporting cell layer
and conditioned media (CM). The CM were obtained from bulk-cultured carp
hematopoietic cells, in which T and macrophage-lineage cells rapidly proliferated
as previously reported. After 2-3 weeks, colony formation was found in 0-4 wells 
of each plate. Three different morphological types of colonies were observed:
"type I colonies", "type II colonies" and "mixed-type colonies". Type I colony
cells were interpreted as composed by macrophage-lineage cells, since they
expressed a specific macrophage marker, M-CSFR/csf1r gene, and most of them
phagocytosed latex particles. Type II colony cells were interpreted as composed
by T lineage cells, since they expressed several T cell marker genes including
gata3, lck and TCRbeta, but did not engulf latex particles. Mixed-type colonies
were interpreted as composed by both macrophages and T lineage cells. They
expressed not only the M-CSFR gene but also a T cell marker gene, gata3, but not 
other T cell markers, such as lck and TCRbeta. These results indicated that the
mixed-type colonies were developed from immature common progenitors of macrophage
and T cell. In contrast, type I and type II colonies were developed from more
mature and mono-potent progenitors of macrophage and T cell, respectively.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20117130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;12(1):29-31.

[Expression of T-bet and GATA3 in children with acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren SM(1), Zhang CX, Li WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Peditrics, Affiliated Hospital of Innner Mongolia Medical
College, Hohhot 010050, China. rensm22@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of transcriptional factors T-bet and GATA3
mRNA and the levels of IFN-gamma and IL-4 in blood in children with acute
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and investigate the tendency of
polarization of Th1/Th2 in children with ITP.
METHODS: Blood T-bet and GATA3 mRNA expression were examined using RT-PCR and
plasma IFN-gamma and IL-4 levels were measured using EIASA in children with acute
ITP in acute (n=30) and remission stages (n=28). Twenty healthy children served
as the controls.
RESULTS: Blood T-bet mRNA expression and IFN-gamma levels in children with ITP in
the acute stage were markedly higher than those in the remission stage and
controls (p<0.01). In contrast, blood GATA3 mRNA expression and IL-4 levels in
children with ITP in the acute stage were significantly lower than those in the
remmission stage and controls (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The high expression of T-bet and IFN-gamma and the low expression of
GATA3 and IL-4 indicate the existence of Th1 polarization in children with acute 
ITP. This might be related to the regulation of T-bet and GATA3.

PMID: 20113630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Horm Cancer. 2010 Feb;1(1):11-20. doi: 10.1007/s12672-010-0006-x. Epub 2010 Feb
20.

Estrogen-induced aurora kinase-A (AURKA) gene expression is activated by GATA-3
in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells.

Jiang S(1), Katayama H, Wang J, Li SA, Hong Y, Radvanyi L, Li JJ, Sen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Aurora-A is a proto-oncogenic mitotic kinase that is frequently overexpressed in 
human epithelial malignancies including in breast and ovarian cancers. The
mechanism of transcriptional upregulation of Aurora-A in human breast cancer is
not yet elucidated. We report herein that Aurora-A transcription is positively
regulated by GATA-3 in response to estrogen in estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive
cells. Transient expression of aurora-A promoter deletion mutants in luciferase
constructs identified a GATA binding sequence motif as a functional regulatory
element in ERa-positive breast cancer cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
identified the binding of regulatory proteins to the GATA element. Anti-GATA-3
antibody generated a supershifted complex. Recruitment of GATA-3 to the aurora-A 
promoter was verified by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis with GATA-3
antibody. Ectopic expression of GATA-3 resulted in elevated expression of
Aurora-A in both ERa-positive and negative cells while siRNA-mediated silencing
led to downregulation of endogenous Aurora-A in ERa-positive cells. Estrogen
treatment of ERa-positive cells induced increased Aurora-A expression with
enhanced recruitment of GATA-3 to the aurora-A promoter. Finally, in the ACI rat 
model of estrogen-induced breast cancer, known to be associated with elevated
Aurora-A expression, we observed increased expression of GATA-3 in preinvasive
and invasive mammary epithelial cells exposed to prolonged estrogen treatment and
in developing breast tumors. These results demonstrate a direct positive role of 
estrogen in regulating Aurora-A expression through activation of the ERa-GATA-3
signaling cascade and suggest that this pathway may be critical in the origin of 
estrogen-stimulated sporadic breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4501777
PMID: 21761347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:505694. doi: 10.1155/2010/505694. Epub 2010 Jan
11.

The unexpected role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor on susceptibility to
experimental toxoplasmosis.

Sanchez Y(1), Rosado Jde D, Vega L, Elizondo G, Estrada-Muñiz E, Saavedra R,
Juárez I, Rodríguez-Sosa M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biomedicina, Facultad de Estudios Superiores-Iztacala, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), CP 54090, o. Tlalnepantla, Edo. de México,
Mexico.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is part of a signaling system that is mainly 
triggered by xenobiotic agents. Increasing evidence suggests that AhR may
regulate immunity to infections. To determine the role of AhR in the outcome of
toxoplasmosis, we used AhR-/- and wild-type (WT) mice. Following an
intraperitoneal infection with Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii), AhR-/- mice
succumbed significantly faster than WT mice and displayed greater liver damage as
well as higher serum levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, nitric oxide
(NO), and IgE but lower IL-10 secretion. Interestingly, lower numbers of cysts
were found in their brains. Increased mortality was associated with reduced
expression of GATA-3, IL-10, and 5-LOX mRNA in spleen cells but higher expression
of IFN-gamma mRNA. Additionally, peritoneal exudate cells from AhR-/- mice
produced higher levels of IL-12 and IFN-gamma but lower TLR2 expression than WT
mice. These findings suggest a role for AhR in limiting the inflammatory response
during toxoplasmosis.

PMCID: PMC2810477
PMID: 20111744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):3076-82. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4122.
Epub 2010 Jan 27.

TSLP and downstream molecules in experimental mouse allergic conjunctivitis.

Zheng X(1), Ma P, de Paiva CS, Cunningham MA, Hwang CS, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Ocular Surface
Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: To explore the potential role of thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and
its downstream molecules in the development of ocular allergic inflammation using
a short ragweed (SRW)-induced mouse model of allergic conjunctivitis (AC).
METHODS: BALB/c mice were topically challenged with SRW pollen after they were
sensitized with SRW in the footpad. After the last SRW challenge, the corneal
epithelium, conjunctiva, and cervical lymph nodes were harvested for total RNA
extraction and gene expression by RT and real-time PCR, and whole eye globes were
collected to make cryosections for immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Repeated topical challenges with SRW allergen generated typical signs of
AC in mice. Compared with the untreated controls, TSLP mRNA expression and
immunoreactivity were significantly increased in the corneal and conjunctival
epithelia of SRW-induced AC mice. CD11c(+) and OX40L(+) immunoreactive cells
largely infiltrated the conjunctiva with increased mRNA levels of CD11c, TSLPR,
and OX40L detected in the corneal epithelium, conjunctiva, and cervical lymph
nodes. CD4(+) Th2 cell infiltration was evidenced by increased levels of mRNA and
immunoreactivity of CD4, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 in the ocular surface, mainly in
the conjunctiva, accompanied by increased expression of OX40, STAT6, and GATA3,
in AC mice. The maturation of immature DCs was observed with the use of TSLP
containing conditioned media from corneal epithelial cultures exposed to polyI:C,
which stimulates TSLP production.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides new findings regarding the role of local mucosal
epithelial cells in the initiation of ocular allergic inflammation by producing a
novel proallergic cytokine, TSLP, which activates dendritic cells to prime Th2
differentiation and allergic inflammation through the TSLP-TSLPR and OX40L-OX40
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2891466
PMID: 20107175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Blood. 2010 Apr 15;115(15):2989-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-233585. Epub 2010 
Jan 26.

NFAT pulls the strings during CD4+ T helper cell effector functions.

Hermann-Kleiter N(1), Baier G.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical 
University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. natascha.kleiter@i-med.ac.at

The Ca(2+) dependent transcription factor family known as nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT) has been shown to be important in T-cell immune
responses. Because NFAT proteins have a weak DNA-binding capacity, they cooperate
with other transcription factors at composite sites within the promoters of
target genes. Recently, NFAT was shown to also be important for the induction of 
specific genetic programs that guide the differentiation and effector or
regulatory activities of CD4(+) T helper subsets via the transcriptional
regulation of their lineage-specific transcription factors, specifically T-bet
(Th1), Gata3 (Th2), RORgammat (Th17), and Foxp3 (iTregs). In addition, the NFAT
family governs the transcription of several signature cytokines, including their 
cytokine receptors. Subsequently, the integration of these complex intracellular 
signal transduction cascades is considered to critically determine the crosstalk 
between the T-cell receptor and receptors that are activated by both the adaptive
and innate immune systems to determine pathways of T helper cell differentiation 
and function. Here, we carefully review the critical role of the established
transcriptional partners and functional outcomes of these NFAT interactions in
regard to the effector responses of these clinically relevant CD4(+) T helper
subsets.

PMID: 20103781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 1;16(3):876-87. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1532.
Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Heterogeneity for stem cell-related markers according to tumor subtype and
histologic stage in breast cancer.

Park SY(1), Lee HE, Li H, Shipitsin M, Gelman R, Polyak K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the expression of stem cell-related markers at the cellular 
level in human breast tumors of different subtypes and histologic stage.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed immunohistochemical analyses of 12 proteins
[CD44, CD24, ALDH1, vimentin, osteonectin, EPCR, caveolin 1, connexin 43,
cytokeratin 18 (CK18), MUC1, claudin 7, and GATA3] selected based on their
differential expression in breast cancer cells with more differentiated and stem 
cell-like characteristics in 47 cases of invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) only,
135 cases of IDC with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 35 cases of DCIS with
microinvasion, and 58 cases of pure DCIS. We also analyzed 73 IDCs with adjacent 
DCIS to determine the differences in the expression of markers by histology
within individual tumors. CD44+/CD24- and CD24-/CD24+ cells were detected using
double immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CD44 and EPCR expression was different among the four histologic groups 
and was lower in invasive compared with in situ tumors, especially in luminal A
subtype. The expression of vimentin, osteonectin, connexin 43, ALDH1, CK18,
GATA3, and MUC1 differed by tumor subtype in some histologic groups.
ALDH1-positive cells were more frequent in basal-like and HER2+ than in luminal
tumors. CD44+/CD24- cells were detected in 69% of all tumors with 100% of the
basal-like and 52% of HER2+ tumors having some of these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that in breast cancer, the frequency of tumor
cells positive for stem cell-like and more differentiated cell markers varies
according to tumor subtype and histologic stage.

PMCID: PMC2818503
PMID: 20103682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Feb;133(2):281-90. doi: 10.1309/AJCP0SBHYVLY5EML.

Expression of master regulators of helper T-cell differentiation in peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, by immunohistochemical analysis.

Matsumoto Y(1), Horiike S, Ohshiro M, Yamamoto M, Sasaki N, Tsutsumi Y, Kobayashi
T, Shimizu D, Uchiyama H, Kuroda J, Nomura K, Shimazaki C, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology and Oncology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kawaramachi Hirokoji,
Kamigyo-ku, 602-8566, Kyoto, Japan.

The normal counterparts of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
(PTCL-NOS) have not been accurately identified. We immunohistochemically analyzed
10 PTCL-NOS cases to examine the expression of the master regulators of T-cell
differentiation and of surface antigens, including chemokine receptors. All cases
were positive for the master regulator of helper T cells (Th-POK) and the marker 
of effector T cells (CD45RO). Three cases each were positive for T-Bet and GATA3,
which are master regulators of helper T cells (T(H) ) type 1 (T(H)1) and 2
(T(H)2), respectively. Two cases were positive for the surface antigens of
central memory (Tcm) (CCR7 and CD62L), and 1 case was positive for follicular
helper T-cell (TFH) phenotype (BCL6, CXCL13, and PD-1). The remaining case was
negative for all markers of effector T(H) subtypes. These results suggest the
postulated normal counterparts of PTCL-NOS identified in 9 of the 10 cases
consist of T(H)1, T(H)2, TCM, and TFH.

PMID: 20093238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2010 Jun;5(2):240-51. doi: 10.1007/s11481-009-9187-x.
Epub 2010 Jan 21.

S-nitrosoglutathione a physiologic nitric oxide carrier attenuates experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Nath N(1), Morinaga O, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Darby Children's Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 173
Ashley Avenue CRI # 505, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) is a physiological nitric oxide molecule which
regulates biological activities of target proteins via s-nitrosylation leading to
attenuation of chronic inflammation. In this study we evaluated the therapeutic
efficacy of GSNO in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal
model of multiple sclerosis. Oral administration of GSNO (0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg)
reduced disease progression in chronic models (SJL and C57BL/6) of EAE induced
with PLP((139-151)) or MOG((35-55)) peptides, respectively. GSNO attenuated EAE
disease by reducing the production of IL17 (from Th(i) or Th17 cells) and the
infiltration of CD4 T cells into the central nervous system without affecting the
levels of Th1 (IFN gamma) and Th2 (IL4) immune responses. Inhibition of IL17 was 
observed in T cells under normal as well as Th17 skewed conditions. In vitro
studies showed that the phosphorylation of STAT3 and expression of ROR gamma, key
regulators of IL17 signaling, were reduced while phosphorylation of STAT4 or
STAT6 and expression of T-bet or GATA3 remained unaffected, suggesting that GSNO 
preferentially targets Th17 cells. Collectively, GSNO attenuated EAE via
modulation of Th17 cells and its effects are independent of Th1 or Th2 cells
functions, indicating that it may have therapeutic potential for Th17-mediated
autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC2965418
PMID: 20091246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 14;5(1):e8706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008706.

Human CD4 memory T cells can become CD4+IL-9+ T cells.

Putheti P(1), Awasthi A, Popoola J, Gao W, Strom TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Transplant Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: IL-9 is a growth factor for T- and mast-cells that is secreted by
human Th2 cells. We recently reported that IL-4+TGF-beta directs mouse
CD4(+)CD25(-)CD62L(+) T cells to commit to inflammatory IL-9 producing CD4(+) T
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that human inducible regulatory T
cells (iTregs) also express IL-9. IL-4+TGF-beta induced higher levels of IL-9
expression in plate bound-anti-CD3 mAb (pbCD3)/soluble-anti-CD28 mAb (sCD28)
activated human resting memory CD4(+)CD25(-)CD45RO(+) T cells as compared to
naïve CD4(+)CD25(-)CD45RA(+) T cells. In addition, as compared to pbCD3/sCD28
plus TGF-beta stimulation, IL-4+TGF-beta stimulated memory CD4(+)CD25(-)CD45RO(+)
T cells expressed reduced FOXP3 protein. As analyzed by pre-amplification boosted
single-cell real-time PCR, human CD4(+)IL-9(+) T cells expressed GATA3 and RORC, 
but not IL-10, IL-13, IFNgamma or IL-17A/F. Attempts to optimize IL-9 production 
by pbCD3/sCD28 and IL-4+TGF-beta stimulated resting memory CD4(+) T cells
demonstrated that the addition of IL-1beta, IL-12, and IL-21 further enhance IL-9
production.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together these data show both the differences and
similarities between mouse and human CD4(+)IL9(+) T cells and reaffirm the
powerful influence of inflammatory cytokines to shape the response of activated
CD4(+) T cells to antigen.

PMCID: PMC2806834
PMID: 20090929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):395-403. doi: 10.1242/dev.038828.

Gata3 regulates trophoblast development downstream of Tead4 and in parallel to
Cdx2.

Ralston A(1), Cox BJ, Nishioka N, Sasaki H, Chea E, Rugg-Gunn P, Guo G, Robson P,
Draper JS, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, MARS Building, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, ON
M5G 1L7, Canada.

The mouse blastocyst and stem cells derived from its tissue lineages provide a
unique genetic system for examining the establishment and loss of pluripotency.
The transcription factor Cdx2 plays a central role by repressing pluripotency
genes, such as Oct4, and promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate at the
blastocyst stage. However, genetic evidence has suggested that Cdx2 does not work
alone in the trophoblast lineage. We have used bioinformatic and functional
genomic strategies to identify the transcription factor Gata3 as a trophoblast
factor. We show Gata3 to be capable of inducing trophoblast fate in embryonic
stem cells and driving trophoblast differentiation in trophoblast stem cells. In 
addition, Cdx2 is not required for Gata3-induced expression of a subset of
trophoblast genes in embryonic stem cells. We show that Gata3 is coexpressed with
Cdx2 in the blastocyst, but this does not depend on Cdx2. In the embryo,
expression of Gata3, like that of Cdx2, depends on Tead4, and the expression of
both factors becomes restricted to trophoblast by a mechanism that does not
initially rely on Oct4. These observations suggest that Gata3 and Cdx2 can act in
parallel pathways downstream of Tead4 to induce the expression of common and
independent targets in the trophoblast lineage, whereas Oct4 is required for
continued repression of trophoblast fate in the embryonic lineage.

PMID: 20081188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):116-28. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.12.004. Epub 2010 
Jan 14.

Interferons direct Th2 cell reprogramming to generate a stable GATA-3(+)T-bet(+) 
cell subset with combined Th2 and Th1 cell functions.

Hegazy AN(1), Peine M, Helmstetter C, Panse I, Fröhlich A, Bergthaler A, Flatz L,
Pinschewer DD, Radbruch A, Löhning M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Current T cell differentiation models invoke separate T helper 2 (Th2) and Th1
cell lineages governed by the lineage-specifying transcription factors GATA-3 and
T-bet. However, knowledge on the plasticity of Th2 cell lineage commitment is
limited. Here we show that infection with Th1 cell-promoting lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) reprogrammed otherwise stably committed GATA-3(+)
Th2 cells to adopt a GATA-3(+)T-bet(+) and interleukin-4(+)interferon-gamma(+)
"Th2+1" phenotype that was maintained in vivo for months. Th2 cell reprogramming 
required T cell receptor stimulation, concerted type I and type II interferon and
interleukin-12 signals, and T-bet. LCMV-triggered T-bet induction in adoptively
transferred virus-specific Th2 cells was crucial to prevent viral persistence and
fatal immunopathology. Thus, functional reprogramming of unfavorably
differentiated Th2 cells may facilitate the establishment of protective immune
responses. Stable coexpression of GATA-3 and T-bet provides a molecular concept
for the long-term coexistence of Th2 and Th1 cell lineage characteristics in
single memory T cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20079668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Curr Opin Mol Ther. 2009 Dec;11(6):652-63.

siRNA as a therapy for asthma.

Huang HY(1), Chiang BL.

Author information: 
(1)National Taiwan University, Graduate Institute of Immunology, College of
Medicine, 1 Jen-Ai Road, Section 1, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.

RNAi is the process of sequence-specific, post-transcriptional/transcriptional
gene silencing through siRNA. RNAi is a popular method of controlling gene
expression and has potential in the development of drugs for several diseases,
such as various types of cancer and viral infections. Gene therapy for asthma has
already been developed and has demonstrated promising results in animal models.
Recent progress in delivering siRNA to the respiratory system has also improved
the therapeutic feasibility of RNAi for asthma. In this review, the mechanism, as
well as the general strategies and problems associated with the application of
RNAi in vivo, are discussed, focusing on the possibility of applying RNAi to
alleviate airway inflammation in allergic asthma. Data from studies with siRNA
against molecules involved in allergic responses are summarized, and the
potential and limitations of RNAi as a novel therapeutic approach are discussed.

PMID: 20072942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 13;5(1):e8644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008644.

Vaccination of mice with salmonella expressing VapA: mucosal and systemic Th1
responses provide protection against Rhodococcus equi infection.

Oliveira AF(1), Ruas LP, Cardoso SA, Soares SG, Roque-Barreira MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Conventional vaccines to prevent the pneumonia caused by Rhodococcus equi have
not been successful. We have recently demonstrated that immunization with
Salmonella enterica Typhimurium expressing the VapA antigen protects mice against
R. equi infection. We now report that oral vaccination of mice with this
recombinant strain results in high and persistent fecal levels of
antigen-specific IgA, and specific proliferation of the spleen cells of immunized
mice in response to the in vitro stimulation with R. equi antigen. After in vitro
stimulation, spleen cells of immunized mice produce high levels of Th1 cytokines 
and show a prominent mRNA expression of the Th1 transcription factor T-bet, in
detriment of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-3. Following R. equi challenge, a 
high H2O2, NO, IL-12, and IFN-gamma content is detected in the organs of
immunized mice. On the other hand, TNF-alpha and IL-4 levels are markedly lower
in the organs of vaccinated mice, compared with the non-vaccinated ones. The
IL-10 content and the mRNA transcription level of TGF-beta are also higher in the
organs of immunized mice. A greater incidence of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and B
lymphocytes is verified in vaccinated mice. However, there is no difference
between vaccinated and non-vaccinated mice in terms of the frequency of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T cells. Finally, we show that the vaccination confers a
long-term protection against R. equi infection. Altogether, these data indicate
that the oral vaccination of mice with S. enterica Typhimurium expressing VapA
induces specific and long-lasting humoral and cellular responses against the
pathogen, which are appropriately regulated and allow tissue integrity after
challenge.

PMCID: PMC2800180
PMID: 20072623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):685-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1530. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Prognosis of hormone-dependent breast cancers: implications of the presence of
dysfunctional transcriptional networks activated by insulin via the immune
transcription factor T-bet.

McCune K(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Thorat MA, Nephew KP, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive breast cancers that co-express
transcription factors GATA-3 and FOXA1 have a favorable prognosis. These
transcription factors form an autoregulatory hormonal network that influences
estrogen responsiveness and sensitivity to hormonal therapy. Disruption of this
network may be a mechanism whereby ERalpha-positive breast cancers become
resistant to therapy. The transcription factor T-bet is a negative regulator of
GATA-3 in the immune system. In this study, we report that insulin increases the 
expression of T-bet in breast cancer cells, which correlates with reduced
expression of GATA-3, FOXA1, and the ERalpha:FOXA1:GATA-3 target gene GREB-1. The
effects of insulin on GATA-3 and FOXA1 could be recapitulated through
overexpression of T-bet in MCF-7 cells (MCF-7-T-bet). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed reduced ERalpha binding to GREB-1 enhancer
regions in MCF-7-T-bet cells and in insulin-treated MCF-7 cells. MCF-7-T-bet
cells were resistant to tamoxifen in the presence of insulin and displayed
prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase and AKT activation in response to
epidermal growth factor treatment. ERalpha-positive cells with intrinsic
tamoxifen resistance as well as MCF-7 cells with acquired tamoxifen and
fulvestrant resistance expressed elevated levels of T-bet and/or reduced levels
of FOXA1 and GATA-3. Analysis of publicly available databases revealed
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-positive breast cancers expressing lower levels of FOXA1
(P = 0.0137) and GATA-3 (P = 0.0063) compared with
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-negative breast cancers. Thus, T-bet expression in primary
tumors and circulating insulin levels may serve as surrogate biomarkers to
identify ERalpha-positive breast cancers with a dysfunctional hormonal network,
enhanced growth factor signaling, and resistance to hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2807987
PMID: 20068169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar-Apr;88(3):244-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2009.114. Epub 2010
Jan 12.

Transcriptional regulation of Th2 cell differentiation.

Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

CD4 T helper 2 (Th2) cells have critical functions in immune responses against
extracellular parasites and are involved in asthma and other allergic diseases.
The differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells into Th2 cells is initiated from T-cell 
receptor and cytokine-mediated signaling followed by upregulation of GATA3 and
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5), two
indispensable events for this differentiation process. In this review, regulation
of GATA3 expression and STAT5 activation and functions of these two transcription
factors in inducing the expression of Th2 cytokines, cytokine receptors as well
as epigenetic modification at Th2 cytokine locus are summarized. Furthermore, I
present positive and negative regulatory networks important for Th2 cell
commitment, selective growth of committed Th2 cells and suppression of
alternative lineage fates. Finally, the difference between in vitro and in vivo
Th2 differentiation is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3477614
PMID: 20065998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jan;9(1):33-45. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0486. Epub
2010 Jan 6.

Global methylation pattern of genes in androgen-sensitive and
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.

Mishra DK(1), Chen Z, Wu Y, Sarkissyan M, Koeffler HP, Vadgama JV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Research and Training, Department of Medicine, Charles Drew
University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California 90059, USA.

Promoter DNA methylation of CpG islands is an important epigenetic mechanism in
cancer development. We have characterized the promoter methylation profile of 82 
genes in three prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, and DU145) and two normal 
prostate cell lines (RWPE1 and RWPE2). The methylation pattern was analyzed using
a Panomics gene array system that consists of immobilized probes of known gene
promoters on a nitrocellulose membrane. Methylation binding protein-purified
methylated DNA was hybridized on the membrane and detected by the
chemiluminescence method. We analyzed methylation profile in normal (RWPE1)
versus cancerous cells and androgen receptor (AR)-sensitive (LNCaP) versus
AR-negative cells (DU145 and PC3). Our study shows that >50% of the genes were
hypermethylated in prostate cancer cells compared with 13% in normal cell lines. 
Among these were the tumor suppressor (RB, TMS1, DAPK, RBL1, PAX6, and FHIT),
cell cycle (p27KIP1 and CDKN2A), transporters (MDR1, MLC1, and IGRP), and
transcription factor (STAT1, CIITA, MYOD, and NPAT) genes. Relative methylation
pattern shows that most of these genes were methylated from 5-fold to >10-fold
compared with the normal prostate cells. In addition, promoter methylation was
detected for the first time in target genes such as RIOK3, STAT5, CASP8, SRBC,
GAGE1, and NPAT. A significant difference in methylation pattern was observed
between AR-sensitive versus AR-negative cancer cells for the following genes:
CASP8, GPC3, CD14, MGMT, IGRP, MDR1, CDKN2A, GATA3, and IFN. In summary, our
study identified candidate genes that are methylated in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2806502
PMID: 20053773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1309-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804162. Epub 2009
Dec 28.

Phylogenetic and functional analysis identifies Ets-1 as a novel regulator of the
Th2 cytokine gene locus.

Strempel JM(1), Grenningloh R, Ho IC, Vercelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Laboratory, Arizona Respiratory Center, Tucson, AZ 85719, 
USA.

The Th2 cytokine gene locus has emerged as a remarkable example of coordinated
gene expression, the regulation of which seems to be rooted in an extensive array
of cis-regulatory regions. Using a hypothesis-generating computational approach
that integrated multispecies (n = 11) sequence comparisons with algorithm-based
transcription factor binding-site predictions, we sought to identify
evolutionarily conserved noncoding regions (ECRs) and motifs shared among them,
which may underlie coregulation. Twenty-two transcription factor families were
predicted to have binding sites in at least two Th2 ECRs. The ranking of these
shared motifs according to their distribution and relative frequency pointed to a
regulatory hierarchy among the transcription factor families. GATA sites were the
most prevalent and widely distributed, consistent with the known role of GATA3 as
a Th2 master switch. Unexpectedly, sites for ETS-domain proteins were also
predicted within several Th2 ECRs and the majority of these sites were found to
support Ets-1 binding in vitro and in vivo. Of note, the expression of all three 
Th2 cytokines (IL-5, -13, and -4) was significantly and selectively decreased in 
Th2 cells generated from Ets-1-deficient mice. Collectively, these data suggest
that Ets-1 contributes to Th2 cytokine gene regulation by interacting with
multiple cis-regulatory regions throughout the Th2 locus.

PMCID: PMC2809820
PMID: 20038639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Zhong Yao Cai. 2009 Sep;32(9):1407-10.

[Primary study on mechanism of baicalin on the Th1/Th2 response in murine model
of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang F(1), Tong XY, Deng HM, Nie H, Zhang RH, Cai Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Herbal Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
hftxyy@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the mechanism of baicalin on the cytokines of Th1/Th2 in
murine model of asthma.
METHODS: The murine model of asthma was induced by OVA. Different doses of
baicalin were orally administered to the mice respectively. The spleen cells were
cultured 3 days for the measurement of IFN-gamma, IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 by ELISA. 
After 2 days of culture, the spleen cells were treated with Trizol for extraction
of total RNA. The gene expressions of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT-6 were analyzed by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The treatment with baicalin obviously decreased the production of IL-4
and IL-5 and the gene expression of GATA-3, STAT-6, but increased the production 
of IL-10.
CONCLUSION: Baicalin may modulate the Th1/Th2 balance mainly by altering the gene
expressions of GATA-3 and STAT-6 in vivo and increasing the production of IL-10.

PMID: 20034219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 May;46(5):416-30. doi:
10.1007/s11626-009-9266-6. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

BMP4 induction of trophoblast from mouse embryonic stem cells in defined culture 
conditions on laminin.

Hayashi Y(1), Furue MK, Tanaka S, Hirose M, Wakisaka N, Danno H, Ohnuma K, Oeda
S, Aihara Y, Shiota K, Ogura A, Ishiura S, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Because mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) do not contribute to the formation of 
extraembryonic placenta when they are injected into blastocysts, it is believed
that mESCs do not differentiate into trophoblast whereas human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) can express trophoblast markers when exposed to bone morphogenetic 
protein 4 (BMP4) in vitro. To test whether mESCs have the potential to
differentiate into trophoblast, we assessed the effect of BMP4 on mESCs in a
defined monolayer culture condition. The expression of trophoblast-specific
transcription factors such as Cdx2, Dlx3, Esx1, Gata3, Hand1, Mash2, and Plx1 was
specifically upregulated in the BMP4-treated differentiated cells, and these
cells expressed trophoblast markers. These results suggest that BMP4 treatment in
defined culture conditions enabled mESCs to differentiate into trophoblast. This 
differentiation was inhibited by serum or leukemia inhibitory factor, which are
generally used for mESC culture. In addition, we studied the mechanism underlying
BMP4-directed mESC differentiation into trophoblast. Our results showed that BMP4
activates the Smad pathway in mESCs inducing Cdx2 expression, which plays a
crucial role in trophoblast differentiation, through the binding of Smad protein 
to the Cdx2 genomic enhancer sequence. Our findings imply that there is a common 
molecular mechanism underlying hESC and mESC differentiation into trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC2862943
PMID: 20033790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Blood. 2010 Apr 29;115(17):3498-507. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-235754. Epub 2009
Dec 23.

Critical requirement for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein in Th2 effector
function.

Morales-Tirado V(1), Sojka DK, Katzman SD, Lazarski CA, Finkelman FD, Urban JF,
Fowell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Apr 29;115(17):3419-20.

Patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) have numerous immune cell
deficiencies, but it remains unclear how abnormalities in individual cell types
contribute to the pathologies of WAS. In T cells, the WAS protein (WASp)
regulates actin polymerization and transcription, and plays a role in the
dynamics of the immunologic synapse. To examine how these events influence CD4
function, we isolated the WASp deficiency to CD4(+) T cells by adoptive transfer 
into wild-type mice to study T-cell priming and effector function. WAS(-/-)
CD4(+) T cells mediated protective T-helper 1 (Th1) responses to Leishmania major
in vivo, but were unable to support Th2 immunity to Nippostrongylus brasiliensis 
or L major. Mechanistically, WASp was not required for Th2 programming but was
required for Th2 effector function. WAS(-/-) CD4(+) T cells up-regulated IL-4 and
GATA3 mRNA and secreted IL-4 protein during Th2 differentiation. In contrast,
cytokine transcription was uncoupled from protein production in WAS(-/-)
Th2-primed effectors. WAS(-/-) Th2s failed to produce IL-4 protein on
restimulation despite elevated IL-4/GATA3 mRNA. Moreover, dominant-negative WASp 
expression in WT effector T cells blocked IL-4 production, but had no effect on
IFNgamma. Thus WASp plays a selective, posttranscriptional role in Th2 effector
function.

PMCID: PMC2867263
PMID: 20032499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Pediatr Int. 2010 Aug;52(4):584-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2009.03019.x.

Increased mucosal expression of GATA-3 and STAT-4 in pediatric ulcerative
colitis.

Ohtani K(1), Ohtsuka Y, Ikuse T, Baba Y, Yamakawa Y, Aoyagi Y, Fujii T, Kudo T,
Nagata S, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Serum pro-inflammatory cytokine levels are frequently elevated in the
acute phase of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Because the role of
pro-inflammatory cytokine in the acute phase of pediatric IBD has not been well
investigated, the serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the expression
of Th1 and Th2 signaling molecules in mucosa from the acute phase of pediatric
IBD were examined.
METHODS: Twenty children with ulcerative colitis (UC; mean age, 9.95 ± 4.10
years) and 12 with Crohn's disease (CD; mean age, 10.0 ± 4.90 years) were
enrolled for the serum cytokine (interleukin [IL]-4, IL-5, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor-a, tumor growth factor-ß1, and interferon-<U+03B3>) assay. Expression of T-helper
cell 1 (Th1) (T-box expressed in T cells: T-bet and signal transducer and
activator of transcription-4: STAT-4) and Th2 (GATA-3 and STAT-6) signaling
molecules was examined on real-time polymerase chain reaction using mucosal
samples from eight children in the acute phase of UC, eight with CD and eight
controls.
RESULTS: Significant elevation of serum IL-4 and IL-6 levels was detected at the 
acute phase of pediatric UC and CD compared with levels at remission (P < 0.05 in
each). The mucosal expression of GATA-3 and STAT-4 was significantly enhanced in 
the acute phase of pediatric UC compared with normal mucosa. No significant
difference was observed in the expression of all examined molecules in the acute 
phase of pediatric CD.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-4 and its signaling molecule GATA-3, as well as the Th1 signaling
molecule STAT-4, are involved in the pathogenesis of acute phase of pediatric UC.

© 2010 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 20030749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hear Res. 2010 Mar;261(1-2):9-21. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2009.12.017. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Expression of prestin and Gata-3,-2,-1 mRNA in the rat organ of Corti during the 
postnatal period and in culture.

Gross J(1), Stute K, Moller R, Fuchs J, Amarjargal N, Pohl EE, Angerstein M,
Smorodchenko A, Mazurek B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Institute of Cell- and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Germany. johann.gross@charite.de

Based on observations that mutations of GATA-3 are responsible for the
HDR-syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, renal defects) and that
GATA-transcription factors have an important role to play in inner ear
development, we hypothesized that these transcription factors may be involved in 
regulatory changes of prestin transcription. To prove this, we examined in
parallel the expression of mRNA of prestin and Gata-3,-2 and Gata-1 in the organ 
of Corti during early postnatal development of rats and in organotypic cultures. 
Remarkable relations are observed between prestin and Gata-3,-2 expression in
organ of Corti preparations in vivo and in vitro: (i) Gata-3,-2 expression
display similar apical-basal gradients as prestin mRNA levels. (ii) The prestin
expression increases between postnatal day two and postnatal day eight by a
factor of about four in the apical and middle segments and by a factor of two in 
the basal part. Highly significant Pearson correlation coefficients were observed
between Gata-3,-2 mRNA and prestin levels when the data were evaluated by
regression analyses. (iii) Parallel changes of prestin mRNA and Gata-3,-2 mRNA
levels were observed in response to thyroid hormone and to gemfibrozil
application. These observations suggest a regulatory role played by the Gata-3,-2
transcription factors in prestin expression.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Transplant Proc. 2009 Dec;41(10):4316-20. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2009.08.057.

Increased T-bet to GATA-3 ratio during acute allograft rejection in the rat lung.

Jungraithmayr W(1), Ji L, Yang L, Weder W, Korom S, Hersberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Acute allograft rejection (AR) remains a major problem in solid organ
transplantation. The pivotal mechanism hinges on alloantigen recognition by
recipient T helper (T(h)) cells that differentiate into T(h)1 and T(h)2. This
study investigated the association of mRNA levels of the transcription factors
T-box expressed in T cells and GATA-binding protein 3 with the development of
T(h)1/T(h)2-directed immune responses. We investigated the expression of T-bet
and GATA-3 mRNA levels and the protein levels of their marker cytokines
interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-4 in orthotopically transplanted rat lungs during AR.
We observed a nonsignificant increase in T-bet expression following allografting 
at days 3 and 5 but there was a significant reduction in GATA-3 expression on day
5 compared with controls. The ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 expression showed a trend 
to increase at day 3 following allografting reaching significance at 5 days.
These changes were associated with a significant increase in the expression of
IL-2 over IL-4 on days 3 and 5. This study suggests that T(h)1 responses play a
major role during AR in the rat lung, and that this differentiation can be
monitored by measuring mRNA levels of T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 20005391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Endocrinology. 2010 Jan;151(1):56-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0565. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Leptin: a critical regulator of CD4+ T-cell polarization in vitro and in vivo.

Batra A(1), Okur B, Glauben R, Erben U, Ihbe J, Stroh T, Fedke I, Chang HD, Zeitz
M, Siegmund B.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Gastroenterology, 12200 Berlin, Germany.

Besides being mandatory in the metabolic system, adipokines like leptin directly 
affect immunity. Leptin was found to be necessary in T helper 1 (Th1)-dependent
inflammatory processes, whereas effects on Th2 cells are rarely understood. Here,
we focused on leptin in T-helper cell polarization and in Th2-mediated intestinal
inflammation in vivo. The induction of cytokine-producing Th1 or Th2 cells from
naive CD4(+) T cells under polarizing conditions in vitro was generally decreased
in cells from leptin-deficient ob/ob mice compared with wild-type mice. To
explore the in vivo relevance of leptin in Th2-mediated inflammation, the model
of oxazolone-induced colitis was employed in wild-type, ob/ob, and
leptin-reconstituted ob/ob mice. Ob/ob mice were protected, whereas wild-type and
leptin-reconstituted ob/ob mice developed colitis. The disease severity went in
parallel with local production of the Th2 cytokine IL-13. A possible explanation 
for the protection of ob/ob mice in Th1- as well as in Th2-dependent inflammation
is provided by a decreased expression of the key transcription factors for Th1
and Th2 polarization, T-bet and GATA-3, in naive ob/ob T cells. In conclusion,
these results support the regulatory function of the adipokine leptin within
T-cell polarization and thus in the acquired immune system and support the
concept that there is a close interaction with the endocrine system.

PMID: 19966187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS Genet. 2009 Nov;5(11):e1000748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000748. Epub 2009
Nov 26.

Palmitoylation regulates epidermal homeostasis and hair follicle differentiation.

Mill P(1), Lee AW, Fukata Y, Tsutsumi R, Fukata M, Keighren M, Porter RM, McKie
L, Smyth I, Jackson IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Palmitoylation is a key post-translational modification mediated by a family of
DHHC-containing palmitoyl acyl-transferases (PATs). Unlike other lipid
modifications, palmitoylation is reversible and thus often regulates dynamic
protein interactions. We find that the mouse hair loss mutant, depilated, (dep)
is due to a single amino acid deletion in the PAT, Zdhhc21, resulting in protein 
mislocalization and loss of palmitoylation activity. We examined expression of
Zdhhc21 protein in skin and find it restricted to specific hair lineages. Loss of
Zdhhc21 function results in delayed hair shaft differentiation, at the site of
expression of the gene, but also leads to hyperplasia of the interfollicular
epidermis (IFE) and sebaceous glands, distant from the expression site. The
specific delay in follicle differentiation is associated with attenuated anagen
propagation and is reflected by decreased levels of Lef1, nuclear beta-catenin,
and Foxn1 in hair shaft progenitors. In the thickened basal compartment of mutant
IFE, phospho-ERK and cell proliferation are increased, suggesting increased
signaling through EGFR or integrin-related receptors, with a parallel reduction
in expression of the key differentiation factor Gata3. We show that the
Src-family kinase, Fyn, involved in keratinocyte differentiation, is a direct
palmitoylation target of Zdhhc21 and is mislocalized in mutant follicles. This
study is the first to demonstrate a key role for palmitoylation in regulating
developmental signals in mammalian tissue homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2776530
PMID: 19956733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;30(10):658-61.

[The role of interleukin-18 and interleukin-18 receptor in predominant Th1 immune
response of patients with immune thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Yang XJ, Shan NN, Hou M, Ji XB, Wang CY, Zhu XJ, Yang L, Zhang XL,
Peng J, Ma DX, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of interleukin (IL)-18 and IL-18 receptor
(IL-18R) in the predominant Th1 type cytokine response in patients with immune
thrombocytopenia (ITP).
METHODS: Fifteen patients with active phase ITP, eighteen in remission and
thirteen healthy controls were enrolled in this study. T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA
levels in peripheral blood mononucleated cells (PBMNC) were measured by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); the plasma IL-18 level by
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the expression of IL-18R on CD3(+)
lymphocytes and total lymphocytes by flow cytometry(FCM).
RESULTS: The T-bet mRNA levels in patients with active phase ITP was 3.572 fold
as much as that in the controls (P < 0.05), while the GATA-3 mRNA levels were
0.378 fold of that in controls (P < 0.05). The levels of plasma IL-18 and IL-18R 
on CD3(+) lymphocytes were significantly increased in active phase ITP than in
remission phase and controls. There was no difference in ratio of T-bet/GATA-3
between remitted ITP and controls and so was for T-bet mRNA, GATA-3 mRNA, plasma 
IL-18 and IL-18R on CD3(+) lymphocytes.
CONCLUSION: ITP as a disease of Th1-dominant response there is an unbalance
between T-bet and GATA-3 in its active phase; IL-18 and IL-18R being upregulated.

PMID: 19954659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Endocr J. 2010;57(2):171-4. Epub 2009 Dec 1.

Diabetes mellitus in a Japanese girl with HDR syndrome and GATA3 mutation.

Muroya K(1), Mochizuki T, Fukami M, Iso M, Fujita K, Itakura M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan.

We report on a Japanese girl with HDR (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
deafness, and renal dysplasia) syndrome who developed diabetes mellitus (DM) at
three years of age (blood glucose 713 mg/dL, HbA(1c) 8.0%) in the absence of
anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibodies. Mutation analysis revealed a de 
novo heterozygous two base pair deletion at exon 6 of the GATA3 gene
(c.1200_1201delCA; p.H400fsX506). GATA3 expression was identified by PCR
amplification for human pancreas cDNA, and mouse Gata3 was weekly but
unequivocally expressed in pancreatic beta cells. The results, in conjunction
with the previous findings indicating the critical role of GATA3 in lymphocyte
function, GATA3 haploinsufficiency may affect the function of beta cells and/or
lymphocytes, leading to the development of DM in relatively exceptional patients 
with high susceptibility to DM.

PMID: 19952462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mod Pathol. 2010 Feb;23(2):270-5. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.172. Epub 2009 Nov 
27.

Expression of Forkhead-box protein A1, a marker of luminal A type breast cancer, 
parallels low Oncotype DX 21-gene recurrence scores.

Ademuyiwa FO(1), Thorat MA, Jain RK, Nakshatri H, Badve S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University, School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.

The Oncotype DX assay is one of the molecular tests that provide predictive and
prognostic information to breast cancer patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and node-negative disease. This study evaluates the association of 
Forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) expressions
with Oncotype DX recurrences scores in 77 cases of patients with ER-positive
node-negative breast carcinomas diagnosed at Indiana University. The data were
correlated with patient age, tumor size, histologic type, Scarff-Bloom-Richardson
score, histologic grade, and progesterone receptor status. The median FOXA1 and
GATA3 scores were 240 and 200, respectively. The Oncotype DX recurrence scores
were low in 57%, intermediate in 30%, and high in 13% of cases. FOXA1 expression 
correlated negatively with Oncotype DX recurrence scores (P=0.004), and
histologic type (P=0.0004). Oncotype DX recurrences score also correlated
negatively with progesterone receptor (P=0.035) with 100% of progesterone
receptor-negative cases having high or intermediate Oncotype DX scores. FOXA1 and
GATA3 expressions correlated positively (P=0.014). The correlation between FOXA1 
expression and Oncotype DX recurrence scores remained significant after adjusting
for multiple comparisons and controlling for confounders such as histological
type, grade, and progesterone receptor. A statistically significant correlation
between the Oncotype DX recurrence scores and FOXA1 expression in our diverse
cohort of ER-positive breast cancer patients was observed. We propose that this
may represent a more cost-effective strategy to further risk stratify patients
with good prognosis in whom chemotherapy may be omitted. To confirm these
findings, further studies in a larger cohort of patients are warranted.

PMID: 19946260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cell Res. 2010 Jan;20(1):62-71. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.128. Epub 2009 Nov 24.

IL-23 signaling enhances Th2 polarization and regulates allergic airway
inflammation.

Peng J(1), Yang XO, Chang SH, Yang J, Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

IL-23/IL-17 axis is an important regulator in various inflammatory diseases.
However, the role of IL-23 in allergic airway inflammation is not well
understood. In this study, we show that in an allergen-induced asthma model, mice
with transgenic overexpression of IL-23R exhibited increased airway infiltration 
of eosinophils and Th2 cytokine production, whereas those deficient in IL-23
displayed reduced airway inflammation. In vitro, IL-23-IL-23R signaling promoted 
GATA-3 expression and enhanced Th2 cytokine expression. Conversely, in the
absence of this signal, Th2 cell differentiation was partially inhibited.
Therefore, IL-23 signaling may regulate allergic asthma through modulation of Th2
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2801763
PMID: 19935773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Immunol. 2009 Sep;46(15):3099-107. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.06.008. Epub
2009 Jul 2.

Transcription factor GATA-3 in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar): molecular
characterization, promoter activity and expression analysis.

Kumari J(1), Bogwald J, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biotechnology, Norwegian College of Fishery Science,
University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. jaya.kumari@uit.no

GATA-3 is a T cell-specific transcription factor and is essential for the
development of the T cell lineage and differentiation of T helper type 2 cells.
We have identified and characterized the full-length Atlantic salmon GATA-3 cDNA 
(3074bp), having two zinc finger domains which are fully conserved within
teleosts and higher vertebrates. RT-PCR analysis revealed that the Atlantic
salmon GATA-3 (AsGATA-3) is strongly expressed in gills, thymus, and brain.
Moreover, the involvement of GATA-3 in Atlantic salmon immune response was
demonstrated by investigating the early time dependent expression profile of
GATA-3 in spleen and head kidney following intraperitoneal injection of live
Aeromonas salmonicida, LPS, and beta-glucan. Furthermore, we have determined
1.9kb of upstream promoter sequence and found a number of sequence motifs which
match those of known transcription factor binding sites and the AsGATA-3 promoter
is a TATA-less promoter. Activities of presumptive regulatory regions of this
gene were assessed by transfecting different 5' deletion constructs and the
result showed the basal promoter and positive transcriptional regulator activity 
of AsGATA-3 gene is determined by sequences located between +58 and -199bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site (TSS). This study provides further
insights into the transcriptional regulation of AsGATA-3.

PMID: 19576635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(17):4640-52. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00119-09. Epub 2009 Jun 
29.

Id1 attenuates Notch signaling and impairs T-cell commitment by elevating Deltex1
expression.

Wang HC(1), Perry SS, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Complete inhibition of E protein transcription factors by Id1 blocks the
developmental transition of CD4/CD8 double-negative 1 (DN1; CD44(+) CD25(-))
thymocytes to the DN2 (CD44(+) CD25(+)) stage. To understand the underlying
mechanisms, we observed that mRNA levels of Deltex1, as well as Deltex4, were
dramatically elevated in Id1-expressing thymocytes, which could result in
developmental arrest by attenuating Notch function. In support of this
hypothesis, we found that Deltex1 ablation enabled Id1-expressing progenitors to 
differentiate to the DN3 (CD44(-) CD25(+)) stage, which was accompanied by
enhanced Notch1 expression in T-cell progenitors. Consistently, constitutive
activation of Notch1 drove the differentiation of Id1-expressing progenitors to
the DN3 stage. Furthermore, we showed that Gfi1b levels decreased, whereas GATA3 
levels increased in Id1 transgenic thymocytes. When overexpressed, GATA3 was able
to upregulate Deltex1 transcription. Thus, T-cell commitment may be controlled by
the interplay among E proteins, Gfi1b, and GATA3 transcription regulators, which 
influence Notch function through the expression of Deltex1.

PMCID: PMC2725715
PMID: 19564409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nat Immunol. 2009 Aug;10(8):872-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.1747. Epub 2009 Jun 28.

Mina, an Il4 repressor, controls T helper type 2 bias.

Okamoto M(1), Van Stry M, Chung L, Koyanagi M, Sun X, Suzuki Y, Ohara O, Kitamura
H, Hijikata A, Kubo M, Bix M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Aug;10(8):806-8.

T helper type 2 (T(H)2) bias, which is the propensity of naive CD4(+) T cells to 
differentiate into interleukin 4 (IL-4)-secreting T(H)2 cells, is a genetic trait
that affects susceptibility to infectious, autoimmune and allergic diseases.
T(H)2 bias correlates with the amount of IL-4 initially secreted by newly
activated helper T cells that feeds back positively through the pathway of the
IL-4 receptor and the transcription factors STAT6 and GATA-3 to drive T(H)2
development. Here we identify Mina, a member of the jumonji C (JmjC) protein
family, as a genetic determinant of T(H)2 bias. Mina specifically bound to and
repressed the Il4 promoter. Mina overexpression in transgenic mice impaired Il4
expression, whereas its knockdown in primary CD4(+) T cells led to Il4
derepression. Our findings collectively provide mechanistic insight into an
Il4-regulatory pathway that controls helper T cell differentiation and genetic
variation in T(H)2 bias.

PMCID: PMC2825757
PMID: 19561615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gene. 2009 Sep 15;445(1-2):17-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.06.010. Epub 2009 Jun 
25.

Identification of GATA3 binding sites in Jurkat cells.

Okazaki M(1), Maeda G, Chiba T, Doi T, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Dentistry at Tokyo, The Nippon
Dental University, 1-9-20 Fujimi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8159, Japan.

Determining binding sites of transcription factors is important for understanding
the transcriptional control of target genes. Although a transcription factor
GATA3 plays a pivotal role in Th2 lymphocyte development, its physiological role 
is not clearly defined because the target genes remain largely unknown. In this
study, we modified chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and isolated 121 GATA3
binding sites and 83 different annotated target genes. Re-ChIP analysis using
anti-GATA3 and anti-RNA polymerase II mAbs and chromosome conformation capture
assay demonstrate that GATA3-bound fragments interact with basal transcriptional 
units of target genes. GATA3 regulation of target genes under the control of
binding fragments was confirmed by reporter assay and quantification of target
gene mRNA expression in the presence of GATA inhibitor or short interfering RNA
against GATA3. These data demonstrate that GATA3 binds to regulatory elements and
controls target gene expression through physical interaction with core promoter
regions.

PMID: 19559773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Chem Biodivers. 2009 Jun;6(6):916-23. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200800159.

Stemucronatoside L, a pregnane glycoside from the roots of Stephanotis mucronata,
inhibits Th1/Th2 immune responses in vitro.

Chen FY(1), Ye YP, Sun HX, Li XY, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianmushan 
Road 182, Hangzhou 310013, P. R. China.

Stemucronatoside L (SML), isolated from Stephanotis mucronata, could suppress the
activation of T cells in vitro. However, the mechanisms responsible for its
immunosuppressive activity remain poorly understood. The purpose of this study
was to investigate whether SML could suppress Th1/Th2 immune responses and to
characterize the cellular mechanisms involved. Effects of SML on T-lymphocyte
subsets and the production of Th1 cytokines IL-2 and IFN-gamma, and Th2 cytokines
IL-4 and IL-10 from ConA-stimulated mice splenocytes were detected by
flow-cytometric analysis and ELISA method, respectively. Furthermore, effects of 
SML on mRNA expression level of Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors T-bet
and GATA-3 were evaluated by RT-PCR analysis. SML not only significantly
decreased the percentage of CD4(+) T cells and the CD4(+)/CD8(+) ratio, but
reduced the production of Th1/Th2 cytokines in a concentration-dependent manner. 
The mRNA expression levels of Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors (T-bet 
and GATA-3) were also suppressed by SML. These results suggested that SML could
simultaneously inhibit Th1/Th2 immune responses by suppressing gene expression of
Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors.

PMID: 19551733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(3):R40. doi: 10.1186/bcr2327. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Expression of FOXA1 and GATA-3 in breast cancer: the prognostic significance in
hormone receptor-negative tumours.

Albergaria A(1), Paredes J, Sousa B, Milanezi F, Carneiro V, Bastos J, Costa S,
Vieira D, Lopes N, Lam EW, Lunet N, Schmitt F.

Author information: 
(1)Development Domain, Institute of Life and Health Sciences (ICVS), School of
Health Sciences of Minho University, Campus de Gualtar, Braga, Portugal.
aalbergaria@ipatimup.pt

INTRODUCTION: The expression of additional genes, other than oestrogen receptor
(ER), may be important to the hormone-responsive phenotype of breast cancer.
Microarray analyses have revealed that forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and GATA binding
protein 3 (GATA-3) are expressed in close association with ERalpha, both encoding
for transcription factors with a potential involvement in the ERalpha-mediated
action in breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to explore if the
expression of FOXA1 and GATA-3 may provide an opportunity to stratify subsets of 
patients that could have better outcome, among the ERalpha-negative/poor
prognosis breast cancer group.
METHODS: We evaluate FOXA1 and GATA-3 expression in 249 breast carcinomas by
immunohistochemistry, associating it with breast cancer molecular markers,
clinicopathological features and patient's survival. The clinicopathological
features and immunohistochemical markers of the tumours were compared using the
chi-square test and ANOVA. Disease-free survival was analysed through
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox regression.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression was demonstrated in 42% of invasive carcinomas, while
GATA-3 was detected in 48% of the cases. FOXA1 expression was inversely
associated with tumour size, Nottingham Prognostic Index, histological grade,
lymph vascular invasion, lymph node stage and human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER-2) overexpression, while GATA-3 expression showed inverse
association with histological grade and HER-2. Both FOXA1 and GATA-3 were
directly associated with ERalpha and progesterone receptor. Among FOXA1-positive 
tumours, 83.1% are comprised in the luminal A subtype, similar to GATA-3 where
87.7% of positive tumours were classified within this molecular subtype. In the
subset of ERalpha-negative patients, those who were FOXA1-negative had a
3.61-fold increased risk of breast cancer recurrence when compared with the
FOXA1-positive.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 was a significant predictor of good outcome in breast cancer, 
whereas GATA-3 was an important luminal marker. The expression of FOXA1 may be
used for risk stratification among ERalpha-negative patients.

PMCID: PMC2716509
PMID: 19549328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Biochem Funct. 2009 Jul;27(5):316-22. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1577.

Glycoprotein isolated from Dioscorea batatas Decne modulates expressions of IL-4 
and IL-10 in primary-cultured mouse lymphocytes.

Oh PS(1), Lim KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biochemistry Laboratory, Biotechnology Research Institute & Center
for the Control of Animal Hazards Using Biotechnology (BK21), Chonnam National
University, Yongbong-Dong, Gwang-ju, South Korea.

In the present study, we investigated the anti-allergic activity of a
glycoprotein isolated from Dioscorea batatas Decne (DBD glycoprotein, 30 kDa) on 
ovalbumin (OVA, 100 microg ml(-1))-induced T helper (Th) type-2 response in
primary cultured mouse lymphocytes. Our results revealed that the DBD
glycoprotein (200 microg ml(-1)) significantly attenuated the expressions of
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10, whereas enhanced the expression of interferon
(IFN)-gamma in OVA (100 microg ml(-1))-treated primary cultured lymphocytes. We
also found that the DBD glycoprotein has inhibitory effects on phosphorylations
of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-6, p44/42
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and p38 MAPK in primary cultured
lymphocytes. Interestingly, the DBD glycoprotein suppressed the transcriptional
activation of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3), whereas it enhanced the activity
of t-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) in OVA-stimulated lymphocytes. The results 
from these experiments indicated that the DBD glycoprotein inhibits expressions
of IL-4 and IL-10 through modulation of GATA-3, STAT-6, p44/42 MAPK and p38 MAPK 
in mouse lymphocytes. Therefore, we speculated that the DBD glycoprotein might be
one component for preparation of nutraceutical health supplements for prevention 
of Th2 cell response-related immune disorder.

(c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19548268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):172-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802325.

Role of CD44 in the differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells: CD44-deficiency
enhances the development of Th2 effectors in response to sheep RBC and chicken
ovalbumin.

Guan H(1), Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, 29209, USA.

CD4 T cells can be primarily polarized to differentiate into Th1 or Th2 cells.
CD44 is a marker of T cell activation and a property of long-lived memory cells
and implicated in cell migration, activation, and differentiation. To date,
whether CD44 has a role in regulating Th1-Th2 differentiation has not been
determined. In this study, we compared Th1 and Th2 responses in wild-type and
CD44-deficient mice in response to sheep RBC and chicken OVA, as well as examined
Th1-Th2 differentiation in vivo and in vitro from CD44-sufficient and
CD44-deficient naive CD4 T cells. We observed that deficiency of CD44 tended to
inhibit Th1 while promoting Th2 differentiation. Furthermore, chimeric studies
suggested that CD44 expression by CD4 T cells was essential for such Th2 bias.
The regulation by CD44 occurred at the transcription level leading to
up-regulated GATA3 and down-regulated T-bet expression in activated CD4 T cells. 
We also noted that CD44-deficiency could modify the state of dendritic cell
subsets to induce a Th2-biased development. Results presented in this study
demonstrate for the first time that CD44 participates in the regulation of
Th1-Th2 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2723169
PMID: 19542428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2009 Aug;16(8):1139-45. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00424-08. Epub
2009 Jun 10.

T-cell mRNA expression in response to Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccination and
Mycobacterium bovis infection of white-tailed deer.

Thacker TC(1), Palmer MV, Waters WR.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Bacterial
Diseases of Livestock Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA
50010, USA. tyler.thacker@ars.usda.gov

Understanding immune responses of white-tailed deer (WTD) to infection with
Mycobacterium bovis provides insight into mechanisms of pathogen control and may 
provide clues to development of effective vaccine strategies. WTD were vaccinated
with either M. bovis BCG strain Pasteur or BCG strain Danish. Both vaccinees and 
unvaccinated controls were subsequently inoculated with virulent M. bovis via the
intratonsillar route. Real-time PCR was used to assess T-cell mRNA expression in 
peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) from animals following vaccination and
infection. Recall T-cell responses were measured by assessing the relative
expression of gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), T-cell-specific T-box transcription
factor (Tbet), interleukin 12p40 (IL-12p40), IL-12p35, IL-23p19, FoxP3, IL-17,
and GATA3 in PBL stimulated in vitro with purified protein derivative (PPD) of M.
bovis or a recombinant fusion protein, ESAT6-CFP10. Animals vaccinated with BCG
Danish expressed more IFN-gamma and Tbet than either BCG Pasteur-vaccinated
animals or unvaccinated controls. BCG Pasteur-vaccinated animals expressed more
GATA3 than either group. After infection, unvaccinated controls expressed more
Tbet and IL-12p40 than vaccinated animals. BCG Pasteur-vaccinated animals
expressed more GATA3 than either the unvaccinated controls or the BCG
Danish-vaccinated animals after infection. Animals were divided into pathology
groups to correlate gene expression with severity of pathology. Animals in the
visible lesion group expressed more Tbet and IFN-gamma than animals that were
culture negative, while Tbet and IFN-gamma expression in the culture-positive,
no-visible-lesion group was intermediate. GATA3 expression inversely correlated
with pathology. Overall, expression of immune response genes correlated more
closely with pathology than vaccination treatment.

PMCID: PMC2725541
PMID: 19515866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Aug;7(8):1384-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03501.x.
Epub 2009 May 30.

A +220 GATA motif mediates basal but not endotoxin-repressible expression of the 
von Willebrand factor promoter in Hprt-targeted transgenic mice.

Liu J(1), Kanki Y, Okada Y, Jin E, Yano K, Shih SC, Minami T, Aird WC.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Vascular Biology Research and Division of Molecular and
Vascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The von Willebrand factor (VWF) gene is a marker for spatial and
temporal heterogeneity of the endothelium. A GATA motif at +220 has been
implicated in basal VWF expression in vitro. Other studies have shown that GATA3 
and VWF are transcriptionally downregulated in response to inflammatory
mediators.
OBJECTIVES: Our goal was to determine the importance of the +220 GATA motif in
mediating expression of VWF promoter in vivo, and to elucidate whether the GATA
element plays a role in spatial and/or temporal regulation of VWF expression.
METHODS: ChIP and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were carried out in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Reporter gene constructs containing 3.6
kb of the human VWF promoter with and without a mutation of the +220 GATA element
were transfected into cultured endothelial cells or targeted to the Hprt locus of
mice. The Hprt-targeted mice were subjected to endotoxemia.
RESULTS: In protein-DNA binding assays, the +220 GATA motif bound GATA-2, -3 and 
-6. Mutation of the GATA site resulted in reduced basal promoter activity in
HUVEC. When targeted to the Hprt locus of mice, the GATA mutation resulted in a
significant, proportionate reduction of promoter activity in LacZ expressing
vascular beds. Systemic administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) resulted in a 
widespread reduction in VWF mRNA expression and promoter activity. LPS-mediated
repression of the VWF promoter was unaffected by the GATA mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: A region of the VWF promoter between -2182 and the end of the first 
intron contains information for LPS-mediated gene repression. The +220 GATA motif
is important for basal, but not LPS-repressible expression of the VWF gene.

PMID: 19496923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Jan;45(1):32-7.

[The influence of glaucoma filtration surgery on anterior chamber associated
immune deviation in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu JJ(1), Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study glaucoma infiltration surgery induced the anterior chamber
associated immune deviation (ACAID) by with or without anterior chamber (AC)
implantation of foreign epithelium removed corneal graft in mice.
METHODS: In this study, fifty Wistar mice were randomly divided into five groups 
(ten in each group) and additional five SD and one Wistar mouse were used as the 
providers of epithelium removed corneal grafts to induce ACAID as follows: Group 
A: corneal grafts from Wistar mouse were implanted into the AC 1 week after the
infiltration surgery. Group B: the spleen cells were injected into the nape of
neck 1 week after the glaucoma infiltration surgery. In group C, D, and E, the
corneal grafts from SD mice were implanted into the AC at 1 week, 4 week, and 8
week after the glaucoma infiltration surgery, respectively. To induce the delayed
type hypersensitivity (DTH), spleen cells were injected into the right ear pinna 
1 week after the neck injection in group B, 2 weeks after the AC implantation of 
corneal grafts in other groups. At the same time points as the induction of DTH, 
heart blood was collected to detect the concentration of IL-4 and IL-10. The
spleens were removed to evaluate the expression of the GATA-3 mRNA by RT-PCR. The
eyeballs were enucleated and used to evaluate the histopathological changes.
RESULTS: (1) The DTH were found in group B, C, D, and E with corneal grafts of
SD, but not in group A with that of Wistar. (2) The serum concentrations of IL-4 
and IL-10 were statistically different in group C, D, and E (F = 49.124, 6.336; P
< 0.01). The concentrations of IL-4 and IL-10 were significantly (P = 0.002)
lower in group D than those in group C and E (3.759 +/- 0.250 vs 5.916 +/- 0.500 
or 4.566 +/- 0.518, and 17.170 +/- 3.943 vs 44.447 +/- 17.167 or 35.643 +/-
21.233 microg/L, n = 10, respectively), which showed a biphase response
fluctuation of ILs. (3) The GATA-3 mRNA was obviously up-regulated in group D and
E. (4) The exudation and a few inflammatory cells in the AC were observed in
group C, but not in group D and E.
CONCLUSIONS: The eye with the glaucoma infiltration surgery results in a
temporary incapable of inducing ACAID, which is gradually recovered following the
diminish of intraocular inflammation and the increase of levels of IL4, IL-10 and
GATA-3 mRNA.

PMID: 19484928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncogene. 2009 Jul 23;28(29):2634-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.126. Epub 2009 Jun 1.

GATA3 inhibits breast cancer growth and pulmonary breast cancer metastasis.

Dydensborg AB(1), Rose AA, Wilson BJ, Grote D, Paquet M, Giguère V, Siegel PM,
Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Quebec,
Canada.

The loss of expression of the transcription factor GATA3 in breast tumors has
been linked to aggressive tumor development and poor patient survival. In the
present work, we address potential roles for GATA3 in breast tumor lung
metastasis and progression. Using an aggressive breast cancer cell line, which
metastasizes specifically to the lung, we show that GATA3 expression results in
reduced tumor outgrowth in the mammary fat pad and lower lung metastatic burden
in nude mice. Specifically, GATA3 expression inhibits breast cancer cell
expansion inside the lung parenchyma. This phenotype correlates with the ability 
of GATA3 to negatively regulate the expression of several genes that promote
breast cancer lung metastasis (ID1/-3, KRTHB1, LY6E and RARRES3). Conversely, the
expression of genes encoding known inhibitors of lung metastasis (DLC1 (deleted
in liver cancer 1) and PAEP (progestagen-associated endometrial protein)) is
upregulated by GATA3. These data correlate with microarray data from human breast
cancer patients, showing a strong correlation between high GATA3 expression and
absence of metastases specifically to the lungs. We conclude that GATA3 inhibits 
primary breast tumor outgrowth and reduces lung metastatic burden by regulating
key genes involved in metastatic breast tumor progression.

PMID: 19483726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Aug;73(8):1119-23. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2009.04.024. Epub 2009 May 29.

Expression of GATA3, T-bet, IL-4, and IFN-gamma mRNA in the effusion of OME
patients.

Shim HJ(1), Park DC, Lee YC, Eun YG, Yeo SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, School of Medicine, EulJi University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The role of allergy in the pathophysiology of otitis media with
effusion (OME) remains unclear. We evaluated the role of allergy and the Th1/Th2 
balance in OME patients.
METHOD: Middle ear fluid was collected from 46 OME patients who had a ventilating
tube inserted, and expression of GATA3, T-bet, IL-4, and IFN-gamma mRNA was
assessed by RT-PCR. Expression of transcription factors and cytokines was
compared in patients with and without allergy.
RESULTS: The levels of GATA3 and T-bet mRNA in effusion fluid correlated
positively with the levels of IL-4 and IFN-gamma mRNA, respectively. However, the
allergy and non-allergy groups showed no significant differences in expression of
any of these transcription factors and cytokines. The T-bet:GATA3 ratio was
higher in the non-allergy than in the allergy group, but the difference was not
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Although we observed a significant positive correlation between GATA3
and IL-4 mRNA levels, we cannot conclude that OME with allergy is related to a
Th-2 driven immune response.

PMID: 19481821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Neurosci. 2009 May 27;29(21):7098-109. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1206-09.2009.

In mice lacking V2a interneurons, gait depends on speed of locomotion.

Crone SA(1), Zhong G, Harris-Warrick R, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Many animals are capable of changing gait with speed of locomotion. The neural
basis of gait control and its dependence on speed are not fully understood. Mice 
normally use a single "trotting" gait while running at all speeds, either over
ground or on a treadmill. Transgenic mouse mutants in which the trotting is
replaced by hopping also lack a speed-dependent change in gait. Here we describe 
a transgenic mouse model in which the V2a interneurons have been ablated by
targeted expression of diphtheria toxin A chain (DTA) under the control of the
Chx10 gene promoter (Chx10::DTA mice). Chx10::DTA mice show normal trotting gait 
at slow speeds but transition to a galloping gait as speed increases. Although
left-right limb coordination is altered in Chx10::DTA mice at fast speed,
alternation of forelegs and hindlegs and the relative duration of swing and
stance phases for individual limbs is unchanged compared with wild-type mice. The
speed-dependent loss of left-right alternation is recapitulated during
drug-induced fictive locomotion in spinal cords isolated from neonatal Chx10::DTA
mice, and high-speed fictive locomotion evoked by caudal spinal cord stimulation 
also shows synchronous left-right bursting. These results show that spinal V2a
interneurons are required for maintaining left-right alternation at high speeds. 
Whether animals that generate galloping or hopping gaits, characterized by
synchronous movement of left and right forelegs and hindlegs, have lost or
modified the function of V2a interneurons is an intriguing question.

PMCID: PMC2731420
PMID: 19474336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Clin Nephrol. 2009 Jun;71(6):608-16.

GATA-3 is upregulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with
minimal change nephrotic syndrome.

Komatsuda A(1), Wakui H, Iwamoto K, Togashi M, Masai R, Maki N, Sawada K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Akita, Japan. komatsud@med.akita-u-ac-jp

BACKGROUND: An imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cytokines has been reported in MCNS.
Interleukin-13 (IL-13: Th2 cytokine) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
MCNS, but Th1/Th2 regulators such as T-bet (Th1-specific transcription factor)
and GATA-3 (Th2-specific transcription factor) have not been examined.
METHODS: We isolated PBMC from 25 patients with MCNS during nephrosis and
remission phases, from 17 nephrotic patients with membranous nephropathy (MN),
and from 25 healthy subjects. We measured mRNA expression levels of T-bet,
GATA-3, Stat5A (regulator of Th2 priming), IFN-gamma (Th1 cytokine), IL-2 (Th1
cytokine and activator of Stat5), IL-4 (Th2 cytokine), and IL-13 in PBMC, using
real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GATA-3, Stat5A, and IL-13 mRNA expression levels were higher in the
nephrotic MCNS group compared to the others. IL-2 mRNA expression levels were
higher in nephrotic patients with MCNS and MN than in MCNS patients in remission 
and healthy controls. There were no differences in mRNA expression levels of
T-bet, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 between MCNS and MN patients and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to reveal increased mRNA expression levels
of GATA-3 and Stat5A in PBMC from MCNS patients in nephrosis. This study also
supports recent findings suggesting the role of IL-13 in the development of MCNS.
A predominant Th2 type of T cell activation may be involved in the pathogenesis
of MCNS.

PMID: 19473628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1150-62. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 May 20.

Characterization of Foxp2-expressing cells in the developing spinal cord.

Morikawa Y(1), Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1,
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Two members of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, are 
expressed in the developing and adult CNS, including the striatum, cerebral
cortex, and thalamus. In a previous study, we have demonstrated that Foxp1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of V1 interneurons in addition to motor neurons of
the spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. However, the detailed expression
pattern of Foxp2 and its relationship with Foxp1 in the developing spinal cord
remains to be elucidated. To shed light on the potential roles of Foxp1 and Foxp2
in the developing spinal cord, we characterized Foxp2-expressing cells during
mouse embryogenesis. At embryonic day (E) 11.0, Foxp2-expressing cells were first
observed in the ventral spinal cord, which were Pax6(-), p27(+), and
neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin(+) postmitotic neurons. Between E13.5 and 
E15.5, high expression of Foxp2 was observed in both medial and lateral parts of 
the ventral spinal cord. Double-immunofluorescence staining for Foxp2 with some
homeodomain transcription factors revealed that Foxp2-expressing neurons were
Pax2(+), En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons in the 
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, indicating that
Foxp2-expressing neurons were also V1 interneurons with the same phenotypes as
Foxp1-expressing interneurons. In addition, neither Foxp1 nor Foxp2 was expressed
in ventral calbindin(+) Renshaw cells. However, Foxp2 did not colocalize with
Foxp1 in interneurons of the ventral spinal cord. These findings suggest that
Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in the distinct subsets of V1 interneurons that
belong to non-Renshaw cells in the ventral spinal cord during embryogenesis.
Thus, Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in the determination of the cell type
identities during late embryogenesis: the classes of neurotransmitters and the
functional subtypes of non-Renshaw cells, such as Ia and Ib inhibitory
interneurons.

PMID: 19463901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Jan;23(2):70-2.

[Experimental research on the relationship between GATA-3 and ICAM-1 in patients 
with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao J(1), Xu M, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, the Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
College, Zhanjiang, 524001, China. firefoxjun@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between GATA-3 and ICAM-1 in patients with
allergic rhinitis.
METHOD: The expression of GATA-3 was detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 37 patients with allergic rhinitis and 12 controls.
ICAM-1 was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULT: The relative density ratio of GATA-3 to GAPDH in AR patients was 0.632
+/- 0.121, and in control group was 0.131 +/- 0.024. The concentrations of ICAM-1
were (237.5 +/- 37.3) pg/mg and (121.7 +/- 22.4) pg/mg in the two groups
respectively. The expression of GATA-3 was positively correlated to the
expression of ICAM-1 in patients with allergic rhinitis.
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of GATA-3 in patients with allergic rhinitis was
related to the increase of ICAM-1. GATA-3 may play an important role in the
pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis.

PMID: 19452711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 24;385(2):204-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.039. Epub 2009 May 19.

Suppression of Th2-driven, allergen-induced airway inflammation by sauchinone.

Min HJ(1), Won HY, Kim YC, Sung SH, Byun MR, Hwang JH, Hong JH, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Center for Cell Signaling & Drug Discovery Research, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Sauchinone, a lignan compound isolated from the root of Saururus chinensis, has
been recently demonstrated to exhibit anti-inflammatory activity via the
suppression of NF-kB p65 activity in vitro. In an effort to evaluate the in vivo 
anti-inflammatory function of sauchinone, we have evaluated the effects of
sauchinone on allergen-induced airway inflammation using a murine model of
allergic asthma. We observed that marked eosinophilic and lymphocyte infiltration
in the BAL fluid were suppressed to a significant degree by sauchinone, and that 
mucus-secreting goblet cell hyperplasia and collagen deposition in the airways
were also ameliorated by administration of sauchinone treatment. Moreover, gene
expression of the inflammatory cytokines, IL-13, and IL-5 and eotaxin in the
lung, and IL-5 in the draining lymph node were significantly decreased in
sauchinone-treated mice. We demonstrated that sauchinone repressed Th2 cell
development in vitro and IL-4 production by Th2 cells, and also inhibited
GATA-3-mediated IL-5 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. Collectively, 
sauchinone ameliorated allergen-induced airway inflammation, in part, by
repressing GATA-3 activity for Th2 cell development, indicating the possible
therapeutic potential of sauchinone in airway inflammatory diseases including
allergic asthma and rhinitis.

PMID: 19450563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Mar;42(3):331-40. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0397OC. 
Epub 2009 May 15.

Flt3-L increases CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ICOS+ cells in the lungs of cockroach-sensitized 
and -challenged mice.

McGee HS(1), Edwan JH, Agrawal DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine,
Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

We previously reported in an ovalbumin-induced model of allergic asthma that
Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3-L) reversed airway hyperresponsiveness
(AHR) and airway inflammation, and increased the number of regulatory
CD11c(high)CD8 alpha(high)CD11b(low) dendritic cells in the lung. In this study, 
we investigated the effect of Flt3-L in a clinically relevant
aeroallergen-induced asthma on the phenotypic expression of lung T cells. Balb/c 
mice were sensitized and challenged with cockroach antigen (CRA), and AHR to
methacholine was established. These mice received three intraperitoneal
injections of anti-CD25 antibody (PC61; 250 microg) and Flt3-L (3 microg) daily
for 10 days. Cytokines and Ig levels in the serum were measured and differential 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cell counts were examined. Flt3-L reversed
AHR to methacholine to the control level. Flt3-L significantly decreased levels
of BALF IL-5, IFN-gamma, eosinophilia and substantially increased IL-10 and the
number of CD4(+)CD25(+) Forkhead winged helix transcription factor box P3
(Foxp3(+)) IL-10(+) T cells in the lung. Administration of PC61 antibody blocked 
the effect of Flt3-L and substantially increased AHR, eosinophilia, and BALF IL-5
and IFN-gamma levels, and decreased BALF IL-10 levels and the number of
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+)IL-10(+) T cells. Flt3-L significantly decreased CD62-L, but
increased inducible costimulatory molecule and Foxp3 mRNA expression in the
CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells isolated from lungs of Flt3-L-treated, CRA-sensitized mice 
compared to CRA-sensitized mice without Flt3-L treatment and PBS control group.
Flt3-L significantly inhibited the effect of CRA sensitization and challenge to
increase GATA3 expression in lung CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells. Collectively, these data
suggest that the therapeutic effect of Flt3-L is mediated by increased density of
naturally occurring CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+)IL-10(+)ICOS(+) T-regulatory cells in
the lung. Flt3-L could be a therapeutic strategy for the management and
prevention of allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC2830405
PMID: 19448155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2009 Aug;380(2):115-24. doi:
10.1007/s00210-009-0423-y. Epub 2009 May 14.

Suppressive effect of CTB glycoprotein (75 kDa) on IL-4 expression in
primary-cultured lymphocytes treated with di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.

Oh PS(1), Lim KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biochemistry Laboratory, Biotechnology Research Institute & Center
for the Control of Animal Hazards Using Biotechnology (BK21), Chonnam National
University, Gwang-ju, South Korea.

The purpose of this study is to determine the inhibitory effect of a glycoprotein
isolated from Cudrania tricuspidata Bureau (CTB glycoprotein, 75 kDa) on
di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP)-induced differentiation of T helper (Th) type 2
cells in T lymphocytes separated from mice. This experiment evaluated the
activities of protein kinase C (PKC), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK),
transcription factors [signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-6 
and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3)], and Th2 cell-related cytokine [interleukin-4
(IL-4)] using immunoblotting and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Our results revealed that the CTB glycoprotein in the presence of DEHP inhibits
the translocation of PKC from cytosol to membrane and the phosphorylation of
p44/42 MAPK in primary cultured T lymphocytes. We also found that the CTB
glycoprotein (100 microg/ml) has suppressive effects on transcriptional
activation of STAT6, GATA3, and on the expression level of IL-4 in DEHP-treated T
lymphocytes. The phosphorylation of STAT6 and GATA3 were collectively blocked by 
treatment with PKC inhibitor (staurosporine) as well as p44/42 MAPK inhibitor (PD
98059), respectively. The results from these experiments indicated that the CTB
glycoprotein inhibits IL-4 expression, not IL-10 expression, on the stage of Th2 
cell differentiation induced by DEHP in T lymphocytes. Hence, we speculate that
the CTB glycoprotein has a strong inhibitory ability for expressions of
allergy-related cytokines indirectly caused by DEHP in Th2 cell differentiation
of the primary cultured mouse T lymphocytes.

PMID: 19440697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;150(2):133-43. doi: 10.1159/000218116. Epub 2009
May 11.

Effects of live and inactivated VSL#3 probiotic preparations in the modulation of
in vitro and in vivo allergen-induced Th2 responses.

Mastrangeli G(1), Corinti S, Butteroni C, Afferni C, Bonura A, Boirivant M,
Colombo P, Di Felice G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-Mediated Diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The immunological mechanisms responsible for the immunomodulatory and
anti-allergic effects of probiotic bacteria are still poorly defined. The
combined effects of mixtures of different species of probiotic bacteria have been
explored only in part. The present study describes the immunomodulatory activity 
of the VSL#3 probiotic preparation in in vitro and in vivo systems.
METHODS: The activation and cytokine production by in vitro probiotic-stimulated 
bone-marrow dendritic cells (BM-DCs) and spleen cells isolated from naïve or Par 
j 1-sensitized mice were investigated. Mice were intranasally administered a
sonicate preparation of VSL#3 before immunization with rPar j 1. Serum antibody
levels and cytokine expression in the lung were determined.
RESULTS: Both live and sonicated VSL#3 preparations induced maturation and
cytokine production by BM-DCs. Cytokine production by spleen cells from naïve or 
Par j 1-sensitized mice was modulated by the probiotic preparations towards a
Treg/Th0 profile, characterized by increased IL-10 and IFN-gamma production. In
vivo prophylactic treatment with VSL#3 induced a significant reduction of serum
specific IgG1. At lung level, VSL#3 pre-treatment remarkably reduced IL-13 and
IL-4 mRNA expression and increased IL-10 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The VSL#3 preparations have not only the capacity to bias primary
immune responses towards a Treg/Th0-type profile, but also to modify in the same 
way the functional characteristics of established in vitro Th2 responses. In vivo
studies on a mouse model of Par j 1 sensitization indicate that the prophylactic 
intranasal treatment with probiotic bacteria is able to modulate the development 
of Th2-biased responses.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19439979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS Med. 2009 May 12;6(5):e1000076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000076. Epub 2009
May 19.

Suppression of GATA-3 nuclear import and phosphorylation: a novel mechanism of
corticosteroid action in allergic disease.

Maneechotesuwan K(1), Yao X, Ito K, Jazrawi E, Usmani OS, Adcock IM, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: GATA-3 plays a critical role in regulating the expression of the
cytokines interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13 from T helper-2 (Th2) cells and
therefore is a key mediator of allergic diseases. Corticosteroids are highly
effective in suppressing allergic inflammation, but their effects on GATA-3 are
unknown. We investigated the effect of the corticosteroid fluticasone propionate 
on GATA-3 regulation in human T-lymphocytes in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In a T lymphocyte cell line (HuT-78) and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells stimulated by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 in vitro we demonstrated
that fluticasone inhibits nuclear translocation of GATA-3 and expression of Th2
cytokines via a mechanism independent of nuclear factor-kappaB and is due, in
part, to competition between GATA-3 and the ligand-activated glucocorticoid
receptor for nuclear transport through the nuclear importer importin-alpha. In
addition, fluticasone induces the expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), the endogenous inhibitor of p38 MAPK, which is
necessary for GATA-3 nuclear translocation. These inhibitory effects of
fluticasone are rapid, potent, and prolonged. We also demonstrated that inhaled
fluticasone inhibits GATA-3 nuclear translocation in peripheral blood lymphocytes
of patients with asthma in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Corticosteroids have a potent inhibitory effect on GATA-3 via two
interacting mechanisms that potently suppress Th2 cytokine expression. This novel
mechanism of action of corticosteroids may account for the striking clinical
efficacy of corticosteroids in the treatment of allergic diseases.

PMCID: PMC2674207
PMID: 19436703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4116-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3441. Epub 
2009 May 12.

Characterization of a naturally occurring breast cancer subset enriched in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and stem cell characteristics.

Hennessy BT(1), Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Stemke-Hale K, Gilcrease MZ, Krishnamurthy S,
Lee JS, Fridlyand J, Sahin A, Agarwal R, Joy C, Liu W, Stivers D, Baggerly K,
Carey M, Lluch A, Monteagudo C, He X, Weigman V, Fan C, Palazzo J, Hortobagyi GN,
Nolden LK, Wang NJ, Valero V, Gray JW, Perou CM, Mills GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. bhennessy@mdanderson.org

Metaplastic breast cancers (MBC) are aggressive, chemoresistant tumors
characterized by lineage plasticity. To advance understanding of their
pathogenesis and relatedness to other breast cancer subtypes, 28 MBCs were
compared with common breast cancers using comparative genomic hybridization,
transcriptional profiling, and reverse-phase protein arrays and by sequencing for
common breast cancer mutations. MBCs showed unique DNA copy number aberrations
compared with common breast cancers. PIK3CA mutations were detected in 9 of 19
MBCs (47.4%) versus 80 of 232 hormone receptor-positive cancers (34.5%; P =
0.32), 17 of 75 HER-2-positive samples (22.7%; P = 0.04), 20 of 240 basal-like
cancers (8.3%; P < 0.0001), and 0 of 14 claudin-low tumors (P = 0.004). Of 7
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway phosphorylation sites, 6 were more
highly phosphorylated in MBCs than in other breast tumor subtypes. The majority
of MBCs displayed mRNA profiles different from those of the most common,
including basal-like cancers. By transcriptional profiling, MBCs and the recently
identified claudin-low breast cancer subset constitute related receptor-negative 
subgroups characterized by low expression of GATA3-regulated genes and of genes
responsible for cell-cell adhesion with enrichment for markers linked to stem
cell function and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In contrast to
other breast cancers, claudin-low tumors and most MBCs showed a significant
similarity to a "tumorigenic" signature defined using CD44(+)/CD24(-) breast
tumor-initiating stem cell-like cells. MBCs and claudin-low tumors are thus
enriched in EMT and stem cell-like features, and may arise from an earlier, more 
chemoresistant breast epithelial precursor than basal-like or luminal cancers.
PIK3CA mutations, EMT, and stem cell-like characteristics likely contribute to
the poor outcomes of MBC and suggest novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2737191
PMID: 19435916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nature. 2009 Jun 11;459(7248):847-51. doi: 10.1038/nature08036.

Haematopoietic malignancies caused by dysregulation of a chromatin-binding PHD
finger.

Wang GG(1), Song J, Wang Z, Dormann HL, Casadio F, Li H, Luo JL, Patel DJ, Allis 
CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology & Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University, New
York, New York 10065, USA.

Histone H3 lysine 4 methylation (H3K4me) has been proposed as a critical
component in regulating gene expression, epigenetic states, and cellular
identities1. The biological meaning of H3K4me is interpreted by conserved modules
including plant homeodomain (PHD) fingers that recognize varied H3K4me states.
The dysregulation of PHD fingers has been implicated in several human diseases,
including cancers and immune or neurological disorders. Here we report that
fusing an H3K4-trimethylation (H3K4me3)-binding PHD finger, such as the
carboxy-terminal PHD finger of PHF23 or JARID1A (also known as KDM5A or RBBP2),
to a common fusion partner nucleoporin-98 (NUP98) as identified in human
leukaemias, generated potent oncoproteins that arrested haematopoietic
differentiation and induced acute myeloid leukaemia in murine models. In these
processes, a PHD finger that specifically recognizes H3K4me3/2 marks was
essential for leukaemogenesis. Mutations in PHD fingers that abrogated H3K4me3
binding also abolished leukaemic transformation. NUP98-PHD fusion prevented the
differentiation-associated removal of H3K4me3 at many loci encoding
lineage-specific transcription factors (Hox(s), Gata3, Meis1, Eya1 and Pbx1), and
enforced their active gene transcription in murine haematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells. Mechanistically, NUP98-PHD fusions act as 'chromatin boundary factors',
dominating over polycomb-mediated gene silencing to 'lock' developmentally
critical loci into an active chromatin state (H3K4me3 with induced histone
acetylation), a state that defined leukaemia stem cells. Collectively, our
studies represent, to our knowledge, the first report that deregulation of the
PHD finger, an 'effector' of specific histone modification, perturbs the
epigenetic dynamics on developmentally critical loci, catastrophizes cellular
fate decision-making, and even causes oncogenesis during mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC2697266
PMID: 19430464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neurosci Res. 2009 Jun;64(2):162-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2009.02.009. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Common increase of GATA-3 level in PC-12 cells by three teratogens causing autism
spectrum disorders.

Rout UK(1), Clausen P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, and the Departments of
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 
39216, USA. urout@surgery.umsmed.edu

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a disease of neuro-developmental origin of
uncertain etiology. The current understanding is that both genetic and
environmental factors contribute to the development of ASD. Exposure to
valproate, thalidomide and alcohol during gestation are amongst the environmental
triggers that are associated with the development of ASD. These teratogens may
disturb the ontogeny of the brain by altering the expression pattern of genes
that regulate the normal development of the brain. In this study, a neuron-like
PC-12 cell model was used to examine the effects of these compounds on the
binding potential of 50 different transcription factors to understand the
molecular mechanism/s that may be involved in the teratogenesis caused by these
agents. Cells in culture were treated with low or high concentrations of
teratogens within a range that are reported in the blood of individuals. A
pronounced increase in GATA transcription factor binding was observed for all
three teratogens. Furthermore, Western blot analysis showed that GATA-3 level in 
the nuclear fractions was enhanced by each of the three teratogens. Results
suggest that altered gene expression pattern due to heightened GATA-3 activities 
in the fetral brains following exposure to these teratogens may contribute to the
development of ASD.

PMID: 19428696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 26;106(21):8641-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812255106. Epub 2009 May 7.

Intrathymic proliferation wave essential for Valpha14+ natural killer T cell
development depends on c-Myc.

Dose M(1), Sleckman BP, Han J, Bredemeyer AL, Bendelac A, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, Department of Medicine, Rheumatology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The molecular requirements for invariant Valpha14-bearing natural killer T cells 
(iNKT) in the thymus are poorly understood. A minute population of approximately 
500 newly selected CD69(+)CD24(+) stage 0 (ST0) iNKT cells gives rise to
approximately 100 times more CD44(neg/lo)CD24(-) stage 1 (ST1) cells, which then 
generate similar frequencies of CD44(hi)CD24(-) stage 2 (ST2) and mature iNKT
cells. Although the increased number of ST1 compared with ST0 cells indicates the
initiation of a proliferation wave in the very early stages of iNKT cell
development, details about the controlling mechanism are currently lacking. Here,
we show that the transcription factor c-Myc is required for iNKT cell
development. Conditional ablation of c-Myc in double-positive thymocytes
specifically impacted iNKT but not conventional T cell development. Within the
iNKT population, a progressive reduction of iNKT cells was observed starting at
ST1 (approximately 50-fold) and ST2 (approximately 350-fold), with a complete
lack of mature cells in thymus, spleen, and liver. ST0/ST1 c-Myc-deficient iNKT
cells showed reduced proliferation. In contrast, annexin V staining did not
reveal increased apoptosis, and transgenic overexpression of BCL-2 did not rescue
iNKT cell development in c-Myc-deficient mice. Moreover, expression of known iNKT
differentiation factors such as Plzf and Gata3 was not dramatically altered.
These, findings provide compelling evidence that c-Myc mediates an intrathymic
proliferation wave immediately after agonist selection of iNKT cells and
illustrate the importance of this expansion for the generation of mature iNKT
cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2689024
PMID: 19423665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Am J Transplant. 2009 May;9(5):1230-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2009.02596.x.

Predominant Th1 and cytotoxic phenotype in biopsies from renal transplant
recipients with transplant glomerulopathy.

Homs S(1), Mansour H, Desvaux D, Diet C, Hazan M, Buchler M, Lebranchu Y, Buob D,
Badoual C, Matignon M, Audard V, Lang P, Grimbert P.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Transplantation Unit, Henri Mondor Hospital and Centre de
Recherche, INSERM 841, AP-HP, Institut Francilien de Recherche en Néphrologie et 
Transplantation, Paris XII University, Créteil, France.

Transplant glomerulopathy (TGP) appears to be a pathogenic feature of chronic
antibody-mediated rejection, but the pathogenesis of this histologic entity is
still poorly understood. Previous studies suggest the involvement of lymphocytes 
but the phenotypes of these cells have never been analyzed. Here, we report the
first study of mRNAs for specific markers of CD4+ T cells including Th1 (T-bet
and INFgamma), Th2 (IL4 and GATA3), Treg (Foxp3) and Th17 (IL-17 and RORgammat)
subsets, cytotoxic CD8 T cells (Granzyme B) and B-cell markers (CD20) in renal
biopsies from renal transplant recipients suffering interstitial fibrosis and
tubular atrophy (IF/TA) with or without TGP but with a similar inflammatory score
and controls including transplant recipients with normal renal function. Only
INFgamma, T-bet (both functionally defined markers of Th1 CD4 T cells) and
granzyme B (a CD8 cytotoxic marker) were significantly more strongly expressed in
patients with TGP than in patients without TGP and normal controls. These results
indicate a role of an active T-mediated inflammatory and cytotoxic process in the
pathogenesis of TGP.

PMID: 19422348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Clin Periodontol. 2009 May;36(5):396-403. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-051X.2009.01390.x.

Over-expression of forkhead box P3 and its association with receptor activator of
nuclear factor-kappa B ligand, interleukin (IL) -17, IL-10 and transforming
growth factor-beta during the progression of chronic periodontitis.

Dutzan N(1), Gamonal J, Silva A, Sanz M, Vernal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago de Chile, Chile.

AIM: T regulatory (Treg) cells have been detected in periodontitis lesions, and
forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) expression has been negatively correlated to receptor
activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL). The aim of this study was to 
correlate T-helper type 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17 and Treg transcription factor
expressions, in gingival tissues from patients undergoing active periodontal
tissue destruction, with bone loss-associated cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 10 chronic periodontitis patients undergoing disease
progression, the mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3, RORC2, interleukin
(IL)-1beta, IL-10, IL-17, RANKL, interferon (IFN)-gamma and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta1 were quantified using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The levels of these markers were
compared between active and inactive periodontal lesions.
RESULTS: In active periodontal lesions, Foxp3, T-bet, RANKL, IL-17, IL-1beta and 
IFN-gamma were significantly over-expressed compared with inactive lesions. The
expression of IFN-gamma was the highest within the active periodontal lesions,
similar to that of TGF-beta1 within the inactive ones. There was a positive
correlation between RANKL and IL-17. Additionally, RANKL and IL-17 were
positively correlated with RORC2, but no correlation was detected with Foxp3.
CONCLUSIONS: These results lead us to speculate that Foxp3(+) cells that do not
have a regulatory function might have a role in the pathogenesis of active
periodontal lesions by down-regulating TGF-beta1 and IL-10 synthesis that lead to
the over-expression of Th17-associated cytokines RANKL and IL-17.

PMID: 19419438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.004.

CDK inhibitor p18(INK4c) is a downstream target of GATA3 and restrains mammary
luminal progenitor cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Pei XH(1), Bai F, Smith MD, Usary J, Fan C, Pai SY, Ho IC, Perou CM, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Mammary epithelia are composed of luminal and myoepithelial/basal cells whose
neoplastic transformations lead to distinct types of breast cancers with diverse 
clinical features. We report that mice deficient for the CDK4/6 inhibitor
p18(Ink4c) spontaneously develop ER-positive luminal tumors at a high penetrance.
Ink4c deletion stimulates luminal progenitor cell proliferation at pubertal age
and maintains an expanded luminal progenitor cell population throughout life. We 
demonstrate that GATA3 binds to and represses INK4C transcription. In human
breast cancers, low INK4C and high GATA3 expressions are simultaneously observed 
in luminal A type tumors and predict a favorable patient outcome. Hence,
p18(INK4C) is a downstream target of GATA3, constrains luminal progenitor cell
expansion, and suppresses luminal tumorigenesis in the mammary gland.

PMCID: PMC2699569
PMID: 19411068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(2):R23. doi: 10.1186/bcr2249. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Association of GATA3, P53, Ki67 status and vascular peritumoral invasion are
strongly prognostic in luminal breast cancer.

Jacquemier J(1), Charafe-Jauffret E, Monville F, Esterni B, Extra JM,
Houvenaeghel G, Xerri L, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR891 Inserm, IFR137, 232 Bd sainte
Marguerite Marseille, France. jacquemierj@marseille.fnclcc.fr

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancers are traditionally divided into hormone-receptor
positive and negative cases. This classification helps to guide patient
management. However, a subgroup of hormone-receptor positive patients relapse
irrespective of hormonal therapy. Gene expression profiling has classified breast
tumours into five major subtypes with significant different outcome. The two
luminal subtypes, A and B, show high expression of ESR1, GATA3 and FOXA1 genes.
Prognostic biomarkers for oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive cases include
progesterone receptor (PR) and androgen receptor (AR), and proteins related to
proliferation or apoptotic resistance. The aim of this study was to identify the 
best predictors of success of hormonal therapy.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry we studied 10 markers in a consecutive series of
832 cases of breast carcinoma treated at the Paoli-Calmettes Institute from 1990 
to 2002 and deposited onto tissue microarrays (TMA). These markers were
luminal-related markers ER, PR, AR, FOXA1 and GATA3 transcription factors,
proliferation-related Ki67 and CCND1, ERBB2, anti-apoptotic BCL2 and P53. We also
measured vascular peritumoural invasion (VPI), size, grade and lymph node
involvement. For 143 cases, gene expression profiles were available. Adjuvant
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy were given to high- and low-risk patients,
respectively. The 162 events observed and taken into account were metastases.
RESULTS: Molecular expression of the 10 parameters and subtype with ER status
were strongly correlated. Of the 67 luminal A cases of this series, 63 were
ER-positive. Multivariate analyses showed the highly significant prognostic value
of VPI (hazard ratio (HR) = 2.47), Ki67 (HR = 2.9), P53 (HR = 2.9) and GATA3 (HR 
= 0.5) for the 240 patients who received hormonal therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: A panel of three antibodies (Ki67, P53 and GATA3) associated with
VPI can significantly improve the traditional prognosticators in predicting
outcome for ER-positive breast cancer patients receiving hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2688952
PMID: 19405945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Phytomedicine. 2009 Sep;16(9):864-73. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2009.03.002. Epub
2009 Apr 28.

Berberine increases expression of GATA-2 and GATA-3 during inhibition of
adipocyte differentiation.

Hu Y(1), Davies GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.

It is known that a number of transcription factors are key regulators in the
complex process of adipocyte differentiation including peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and the CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha). Studies have demonstrated that in pre-adipocyte 3T3-L1 cells
constitutive expression of the DNA binding proteins GATA-2 and GATA-3 results in 
protein/protein interactions with C/EBPalpha resulting in down regulation of
PPARgamma and subsequent suppressed adipocyte differentiation with cells trapped 
at the pre-adipocyte stage. Thus it appears that GATA-2 and GATA-3 are of
critical importance in regulating adipocyte differentiation through molecular
interactions with PPARgamma and C/EBPalpha. Recent reports suggest that
berberine, an isoquinoline derivative alkaloid isolated from many medicinal herbs
prevents differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells via a down regulation of PPARgamma and
C/EBPalpha expression. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
berberine on GATA-2 and 3 gene and protein expression levels during
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells. MTT (Methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium
bromide) was used to detect the cytotoxic effects of berberine on the viability
of 3T3-L1 cells during proliferation and differentiation. Differentiation of
3T3-L1 cells was monitored by Oil Red O staining and RT-PCR of PPARgamma and
C/EBPalpha and the expression of GATA-2 and 3 was determined by RT-PCR and
Western Blot. Results show that following treatment with 8microM berberine the
mRNA and protein expression levels of GATA-2 and 3 were elevated and accompanied 
by inhibited adipocyte differentiation. These results may lead to the use of
berberine to target the induction of specific genes such as GATA-2 and GATA-3
which affect adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 19403287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;29(2):106-10.

[Preliminary study on predictors for selection of immunosuppressive therapy or
androgens in treating aplastic anemia patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang XD(1), Zhang SS, Ma R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiyuan Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential usefulness of a multivariable model,
established mainly upon peripheral T-cell subsets, Th1/Th2, T-bet and GATA-3 gene
expressions as well as TCM and Western medical diagnostic criteria, in predicting
the selection of immunosuppressive therapy (IST) or androgens in treating
patients with aplastic anemia (AA).
METHODS: Peripheral blood T cell subsets in 85 patients with AA were serially
analyzed by flow cytometry before and after treatment, and their T-bet and GATA-3
gene expressions were assessed meantime by Real-time PCR. Then analysis of
Logistic regression equation and ROC curves were performed based on the cases
responding to IST or androgens.
RESULTS: (1) According to the logistic equation and ROC curve of SPSS, setting
the false positive rate as 0.10, the P value was 0.832. When P> or =0.832,
patients were judged in the immunosuppressive dominant state, IST should be
applied; when P<0.832, it means patients in the bone marrow failure dominant
state, androgens should be added. (2) A novel theory is raised by the
above-mentioned analysis, which indicated that the genesis and development
process of AA could be divided in 2 stages, the abnormal immune dominant stage
and the bone marrow failure dominant stage. For treatment of patients in the two 
stages, IST and androgens is the preference respectively.
CONCLUSION: The multivariable model could be used for indicating which stage the 
AA patient is in, the abnormal immune stage or the bone marrow failure stage, and
thus to guide the proper selection of IST or androgens in clinical practice.

PMID: 19382467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Immunol. 2009 May 1;182(9):5515-27. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803256.

Impaired CD4 and CD8 effector function and decreased memory T cell populations in
ICOS-deficient patients.

Takahashi N(1), Matsumoto K, Saito H, Nanki T, Miyasaka N, Kobata T, Azuma M, Lee
SK, Mizutani S, Morio T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Interaction of ICOS with its ligand is essential for germinal center formation, T
cell immune responses, and development of autoimmune diseases. Human ICOS
deficiency has been identified worldwide in nine patients with identical ICOS
mutations. In vitro studies of the patients to date have shown only mild T cell
defect. In this study, we report an in-depth analysis of T cell function in two
siblings with novel ICOS deficiency. The brother displayed mild skin infections
and impaired Ig class switching, whereas the sister had more severe symptoms,
including immunodeficiency, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease,
interstitial pneumonitis, and psoriasis. Despite normal CD3/CD28-induced
proliferation and IL-2 production in vitro, peripheral blood T cells in both
patients showed a decreased percentage of CD4 central and effector memory T cells
and impaired production of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cytokines upon CD3/CD28
costimulation or PMA/ionophore stimulation. The defective polarization into
effector cells was associated with impaired induction of T-bet, GATA3, MAF, and
retinoic acid-related orphan nuclear hormone receptor (RORC). Reduced
CTLA-4(+)CD45RO(+)FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells and diminished induction of
inhibitory cell surface molecules, including CTLA-4, were also observed in the
patients. T cell defect was not restricted to CD4 T cells because reduced memory 
T cells and impaired IFN-gamma production were also noted in CD8 T cells. Further
analysis of the patients demonstrated increased induction of receptor activator
of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL), lack of IFN-gamma response, and loss of Itch
expression upon activation in the female patient, who had autoimmunity. Our study
suggests that extensive T cell dysfunction, decreased memory T cell compartment, 
and imbalance between effector and regulatory cells in ICOS-deficient patients
may underlie their immunodeficiency and/or autoimmunity.

PMID: 19380800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Immunol. 2009 May 1;182(9):5317-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803868.

A functional IL-13 receptor is expressed on polarized murine CD4+ Th17 cells and 
IL-13 signaling attenuates Th17 cytokine production.

Newcomb DC(1), Zhou W, Moore ML, Goleniewska K, Hershey GK, Kolls JK, Peebles RS 
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

IL-17A is produced from Th17 cells, and is involved in many autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases. IL-13R has not previously been reported to be functionally
expressed on T cells; however, we found that purified BALB/c CD4(+) cells
polarized to Th17 with TGF-beta, IL-6, and IL-23 have increased mRNA and protein 
expression of IL-13R alpha1 and mRNA expression of IL-4R alpha compared with Th0,
Th1, or Th2 polarized cells. The addition of IL-13 at Th17 polarization
negatively regulated IL-17A and IL-21 expression, and reduced the number of
CD4(+) T cells producing IL-17A. Further, adding IL-13 at the time of Th17 cell
restimulation attenuated IL-17A expression. CD4(+) Th17 polarized cells from IL-4
knockout (KO) mice also had IL-13-induced inhibition of IL-17A production, but
this was not observed in IL-4R KO and STAT6 KO mice. Addition of IL-13 at
polarization increased IL-13R expression in wild-type Th17 cells. Further, IL-13 
administration during Th17 polarization down-regulated retinoic
acid-related-gammaT, the transcription required for Th17 development; increased
STAT6 phosphorylation, and up-regulated GATA3, the transcription factor activated
during the development of Th2 cells. This IL-13-mediated effect was specific to
Th17 cells as IL-13 neither decreased IFN-gamma expression by Th1 cells nor
affected Th2 cell production of IL-4. Collectively, we have shown that Th17 cells
express a functional IL-13R and that IL-13 negatively regulates IL-17A and IL-21 
production by decreasing retinoic acid-related-gammaT expression and while
increasing phosphorylation of STAT6 and GATA3 expression. Therefore, therapeutic 
intervention inhibiting IL-13 production could have adverse consequences by
up-regulating Th17 inflammation in certain disease states.

PMCID: PMC3711250
PMID: 19380778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Exp Med. 2009 May 11;206(5):991-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090303. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

T follicular helper cells differentiate from Th2 cells in response to helminth
antigens.

Glatman Zaretsky A(1), Taylor JJ, King IL, Marshall FA, Mohrs M, Pearce EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

The relationship of T follicular helper (TFH) cells to other T helper (Th)
subsets is controversial. We find that after helminth infection, or immunization 
with helminth antigens, reactive lymphoid organs of 4get IL-4/GFP reporter mice
contain populations of IL-4/GFP-expressing CD4(+) T cells that display the TFH
markers CXCR5, PD-1, and ICOS. These TFH cells express the canonical TFH markers 
BCL6 and IL-21, but also GATA3, the master regulator of Th2 cell differentiation.
Consistent with a relationship between Th2 and TFH cells, IL-4 protein
production, reported by expression of huCD2 in IL-4 dual reporter (4get/KN2)
mice, was a robust marker of TFH cells in LNs responding to helminth antigens.
Moreover, the majority of huCD2/IL-4-producing Th cells were found within B cell 
follicles, consistent with their definition as TFH cells. TFH cell development
after immunization failed to occur in mice lacking B cells or CD154. The
relationship of TFH cells to the Th2 lineage was confirmed when TFH cells were
found to develop from CXCR5(-) PD-1(-) IL-4/GFP(+) CD4(+) T cells after their
transfer into naive mice and antigen challenge in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2715032
PMID: 19380637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Curr Opin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):153-60. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2009.03.010. Epub
2009 Apr 15.

How are T(H)1 and T(H)2 effector cells made?

Amsen D(1), Spilianakis CG, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Differentiation of T(H)1 and T(H)2 effector cells proceeds through several
phases: First, naïve CD4(+) precursor cells are instructed to differentiate as
appropriate to optimally fight the infectious threat encountered. This process is
governed by the IL12 and IL4 cytokines, as well as by signaling through the Notch
receptor. In response to these signals, transcription is initiated of lineage
specific cytokine genes including the Ifngamma and Il4 genes as well as of genes 
encoding transcriptional regulators, such as T-bet and Gata3. The respective
differentiation programs are reinforced by both positive and negative feedback
mechanisms. Furthermore, epigenetic modifications of the lineage specific genes
result in the emergence of regulatory elements, which control high level lineage 
restricted expression by both intrachromosomal and interchromosomal associations.
Together, these mechanisms ensure stable inheritance of the differentiated fate
in the numerous progeny of the original naïve CD4(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC2695256
PMID: 19375293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Sep 15;131(1-2):127-36. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.03.007. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Co-culture of carp (Cyprinus carpio) kidney haematopoietic cells with feeder
cells resulting in long-term proliferation of T-cell lineages.

Katakura F(1), Takizawa F, Yoshida M, Yamaguchi T, Araki K, Tomana M, Nakao M,
Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

To characterise fish haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, it is necessary to
develop a culture system that supports proliferation and differentiation of these
cells. In the present study, we established cell lines from various tissues of
carp (Cyprinus carpio) and ginbuna (Carassius auratus langsdorfii). By using
these cell lines, we developed a culture system in which carp haematopoietic
cells proliferated and were successively passaged. Cell lines from carp thymus
(KoT), carp fin (KoF1) and ginbuna thymus (GTS6 and GTS9) were newly established.
In addition to these cell lines, ginbuna fin (CFS) cell lines were also used as
feeder layers. Kidney haematopoietic cells co-cultured with these feeder layers
proliferated rapidly and were passaged over 20 times for more than 60 days. To
characterise the proliferating cells, expression of marker genes for blood cell
development were analysed. In the primary culture, marker genes for
myeloid/erythroid progenitors (gata1), haematopoietic stem cells (gata2),
neutrophils (mpx/mpo), B-cells (IgH) and T-cells (lck, TCRbeta and gata3) were
detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Expression 
of most of the genes disappeared after the third passage, only T-cell marker
genes were highly expressed after passages. These results indicate that multiple 
blood cells developed in the primary culture and then T-cell lineages dominantly 
proliferated after several passages.

PMID: 19375173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genes Cells. 2009 May;14(5):569-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01289.x. Epub
2009 Apr 13.

GATA2-dependent and region-specific regulation of Gata2 transcription in the
mouse midbrain.

Nozawa D(1), Suzuki N, Kobayashi-Osaki M, Pan X, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA2 is expressed in numerous mammalian tissues, including 
neural, hematopoietic, cardiovascular and urogenital systems, and yet it plays
important roles in the regulation of tissue-restricted gene expression. The Gata2
gene itself is also under stringent tissue-specific control and multiple
cis-regulatory domains have been identified in the Gata2 locus. In this study we 
sought out and then examined in detail the domains that regulate Gata2 in the
midbrain. We identified two discrete domains in the Gata2 promoter that direct
midbrain expression; these distal 5H and proximal 2H regulatory domains are
located 3.0 and 1.9 kbp, respectively, upstream of the transcriptional initiation
site. Importantly, both domains contain GATA factor binding sites. Our analyses
further revealed that GATA2 is essential for Gata2 gene expression in the
midbrain, whereas GATA3 is not. Both the 2H and 5H domains have the independent
ability to activate Gata2 gene expression in the midbrain superior colliculus,
whereas the distal-5H domain is additionally capable of activating Gata2
transcription in the inferior colliculus. These results demonstrate that two
distinct regulatory domains contribute to the Gata2 gene expression in the mouse 
midbrain and that Gata2 midbrain transcription is under positive autoregulation.

PMID: 19371385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Immunity. 2009 Apr 17;30(4):533-43. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.02.008. Epub 2009 
Apr 9.

Lyn kinase controls basophil GATA-3 transcription factor expression and induction
of Th2 cell differentiation.

Charles N(1), Watford WT, Ramos HL, Hellman L, Oettgen HC, Gomez G, Ryan JJ,
O'Shea JJ, Rivera J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Signaling, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

T helper 1 (Th1)-Th2 cell balance is key to host defense and its dysregulation
has pathophysiological consequences. Basophils are important in Th2 cell
differentiation. However, the factors controlling the onset and extent of
basophil-mediated Th2 cell differentiation are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
Lyn kinase dampened basophil expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 and
the initiation and extent of Th2 cell differentiation. Lyn-deficient mice had a
marked basophilia, a constitutive Th2 cell skewing that was exacerbated upon in
vivo challenge of basophils, produced antibodies to a normally inert antigen, and
failed to appropriately respond to a Th1 cell-inducing pathogen. The Th2 cell
skewing was dependent on basophils, immunoglobulin E, and interleukin-4, but was 
independent of mast cells. Our findings demonstrate that basophil-expressed Lyn
kinase exerts regulatory control on Th2 cell differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC2772996
PMID: 19362019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cancer Inform. 2009;7:29-40. Epub 2008 Dec 23.

Quantitative assessment of tissue biomarkers and construction of a model to
predict outcome in breast cancer using multiple imputation.

Emerson JW(1), Dolled-Filhart M, Harris L, Rimm DL, Tuck DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Missing data pose one of the greatest challenges in the rigorous evaluation of
biomarkers. The limited availability of specimens with complete clinical
annotation and quality biomaterial often leads to underpowered studies. Tissue
microarray studies, for example, may be further handicapped by the loss of data
points because of unevaluable staining, core loss, or the lack of tumor in the
histospot. This paper presents a novel approach to these common problems in the
context of a tissue protein biomarker analysis in a cohort of patients with
breast cancer. Our analysis develops techniques based on multiple imputation to
address the missing value problem. We first select markers using a training
cohort, identifying a small subset of protein expression levels that are most
useful in predicting patient survival. The best model is obtained by including
both protein markers (including COX6C, GATA3, NAT1, and ESR1) and lymph node
status. The use of either lymph node status or the four protein expression levels
provides similar improvements in goodness-of-fit, with both significantly better 
than a baseline clinical model. Using the same multiple imputation strategy, we
then validate the results out-of-sample on a larger independent cohort. Our
approach of integrating multiple imputation with each stage of the analysis
serves as an example that may be replicated or adapted in future studies with
missing values.

PMCID: PMC2664700
PMID: 19352457  [PubMed]


281. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Apr;123(4):813-23.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.01.055.

T-box 21 transcription factor is responsible for distorted T(H)2 differentiation 
in human peripheral CD4+ T cells.

Kaminuma O(1), Kitamura F, Miyatake S, Yamaoka K, Miyoshi H, Inokuma S, Tatsumi
H, Nemoto S, Kitamura N, Mori A, Hiroi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Regardless of T(H)1/T(H)2 theory, CD4(+) T cells of patients with
allergic asthma, a typical T(H)2 disease, and those of healthy subjects expressed
equivalent levels of IFN-gamma, even though T(H)2 cytokines were significantly
upregulated in asthmatic patients.
OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms underlying distorted T(H)2 cell polarization in human T
cells were elucidated.
METHODS: Cytokine-producing activity and the expression of T(H)1/T(H)2-specific
transcription factors in naïve, T(H)1/T(H)2, or both CD4(+) T cells derived from 
human peripheral and cord blood were comparatively analyzed. The mechanisms of
the differential expression of T-box 21 transcription factor (T-bet) in the cells
were assessed by determining the chromatin accessibility at the TBX21 gene. The
functional roles of T-bet and other transcription factors in human T(H)1/T(H)2
differentiation were further investigated.
RESULTS: T(H)2 cells derived from naive CD4(+) T cells in peripheral blood but
not in cord blood produced IFN-gamma. T-bet was expressed in peripheral, but not 
cord blood, resting naive T cells. Consistently, the accessibility at the
proximal TBX21 gene promoter in peripheral naive T cells was higher than that in 
cord blood naive T cells. IFN-gamma-producing activity was induced in
T(H)2-differentiated cord blood T cells by means of ectopic expression of T-bet. 
In addition, a reduction of T-bet in peripheral T cells suppressed IFN-gamma
production. T-bet not only upregulated IFN-gamma but also downregulated IL-4 and 
IL-13 gene transcription, independently of the modification of T(H)1/T(H)2
balance.
CONCLUSION: The expression of T-bet at a naive stage is crucial for the
development of IFN-gamma-producing T cells in human peripheral blood, even in
T(H)2-related diseases.

PMID: 19348920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Brain Behav Immun. 2009 Aug;23(6):830-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2009.03.010. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

Restraint stress modulates virus specific adaptive immunity during acute
Theiler's virus infection.

Steelman AJ(1), Dean DD, Young CR, Smith R 3rd, Prentice TW, Meagher MW, Welsh
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843-4458, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a devastating CNS disease of unknown origin. Multiple 
factors including genetic background, infection, and psychological stress affect 
the onset or progression of MS. Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV)
infection is an animal model of MS in which aberrant immunity leads to viral
persistence and subsequently results in demyelination that resembles MS. Here, we
examined how stress during acute TMEV infection altered virus-specific cell
mediated responses. Using immunodominant viral peptides specific for either
CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells, we found that stress reduced IFN-gamma producing
virus-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the spleen and CD8(+) T cells CNS.
Cytokine production by cells isolated from the CNS or spleens following
stimulation with virus or viral peptides, indicated that stress decreased both
type 1 and type 2 responses. Glucocorticoids were implicated in the decreased T
cell function as the effects of stress were partially reversed by concurrent
RU486 administration but mimicked by dexamethasone. As T cells mediate viral
clearance in this model, our data support the hypothesis that stress-induced
immunosuppression may provide a mechanism for enhanced viral persistence within
the CNS.

PMCID: PMC2710426
PMID: 19348911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5829-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-179507. Epub 2009
Apr 3.

IFN-lambda1 (IL-29) inhibits GATA3 expression and suppresses Th2 responses in
human naive and memory T cells.

Dai J(1), Megjugorac NJ, Gallagher GE, Yu RY, Gallagher G.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Immunology Laboratory, HUMIGEN, The Institute for Genetic Immunology, 
Hamilton, NJ 08690, USA.

IFN-lambda1 (IL-29) plays a novel, emerging role in the inhibition of human Th2
responses. Here, we demonstrate that both naive and memory human CD4(+) T cells
express mRNA for the IFN-lambda1-specific receptor, IL-28Ralpha, and are
responsive to IFN-lambda1. Expression of Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13) was
suppressed in naive and memory CD4(+) T cells by IFN-lambda1, without affecting
their proliferation. Further, acquisition of IL-4Ralpha expression after
stimulation was inhibited by IFN-lambda1, as was GATA3 expression. Finally,
IFN-lambda1 diminished the change in cell-surface phenotype that accompanies
differentiation of "central memory" T cells into "effector memory" T cells. Taken
together, our data describe unique immunomodulatory effects of IFN-lambda1 and
identify novel mechanisms for the reduction of existing Th2 responses and the
regulation of new ones, in circulating naive and memory CD4(+) T cells.

PMID: 19346497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Sep 15;131(1-2):9-16. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.03.001. Epub 2009 Mar 14.

In vitro effect of vitamin E on lectin-stimulated porcine peripheral blood
mononuclear cells.

Hernández J(1), Soto-Canevett E, Pinelli-Saavedra A, Resendiz M, Moya-Camarena
SY, Klasing KC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C., Apdo. Postal No.
1735, Hermosillo 83000 Sonora, Mexico. jhdez@ciad.mx

In order to analyze the effect of vitamin E on Th1 and Th2 cytokine production,
porcine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from healthy pigs
(n=8) and cultured with either 0, 10, 50, or 100muM of vitamin E
(alpha-tocopherol). PBMC were stimulated with PHA for either, 24h to determine:
(a) the concentration of tocopherol incorporated into the cell membrane, (b)
cytokine production and (c) Th1 and Th2 regulators gene expression; or 72h to
determine the proliferation of PBMC. Vitamin E was incorporated into the PBMC in 
a dose dependent manner, giving as a result a high proliferation of cells
irrespective of the dose of vitamin E used. Regarding cytokine production,
vitamin E consistently decreases the mRNA expression and the percentage of cells 
producing IL-10. Vitamin E did not influence the production of IFN-gamma but the 
lowest level of vitamin E (10muM) was sufficient to maximally increase the
proportion of cells producing IL-2, to diminish IL-4, and discreetly increase the
mRNA expression of TBX21 vs. GATA3. In conclusion, our results revealed that
vitamin E is able to suppress IL-10 production and to influence the production of
IL-2, IL-4, and maybe TBX21. Vitamin E clearly has immunomodulatory effects,
though further work in vivo to determine the physiological nature of these
effects is warranted.

PMID: 19346007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Jul;9(7-8):918-24. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.03.018.
Epub 2009 Apr 5.

Apigenin protects ovalbumin-induced asthma through the regulation of GATA-3 gene.

Choi JR(1), Lee CM, Jung ID, Lee JS, Jeong YI, Chang JH, Park HJ, Choi IW, Kim
JS, Shin YK, Park SN, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Busan 602-739, South Korea.

Apigenin, a dietary plant-flavonoid has shown anti-inflammatory and anticancer
properties, however the molecular basis of this effect remains to be elucidated. 
Thus we elucidated to anti-allergic effect of apigenin in ovalbumin (OVA)-induced
asthma model mice. The OVA-induced mice showed allergic airway reactions. It
included an increase in the number of eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
fluid, an increase in inflammatory cell infiltration into the lung around blood
vessels and airways, airway luminal narrowing, and the development of airway
hyper-responsiveness (AHR). The administration of apigenin before the last airway
OVA challenge resulted in a significant inhibition of all asthmatic reactions.
Accordingly, this study may provide evidence that apigenin plays a critical role 
in the amelioration of the pathogenetic process of asthma in mice. These findings
provide new insight into the immunopharmacological role of apigenin in terms of
its effects in a murine model of asthma.

PMID: 19345747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 May;123(5):1179-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.02.008.
Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Genetic variants in the GATA3 gene are not associated with asthma and atopic
diseases in German children.

Suttner K, Depner M, Klopp N, Illig T, Vogelberg C, Adamski J, von Mutius E,
Kabesch M.

PMID: 19342088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Jul;9(7-8):894-9. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.03.014.
Epub 2009 Mar 29.

Immunoregulatory effects of sinomenine on the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio and Th1/Th2
cytokine balance in the treatment of mesangial proliferative nephritis.

Cheng Y(1), Zhang J, Hou W, Wang D, Li F, Zhang Y, Yuan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Xinqiao Hospital, PLA, The Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, PR China. chengyue20022@hotmail.com

Sinomenine has been used to treat autoimmune diseases for centuries. However, the
mechanism underlying its therapeutic effects remains unknown. Increasing
recognition of the importance of the Th1/Th2 imbalance in nephritis has raised
the questions of whether there is a Th1/Th2 imbalance in patients with mesangial 
proliferative nephritis (MsPGN) and whether sinomenine can modulate the Th1/Th2
imbalance. In this study, 25 MsPGN patients were treated with sinomenine and
followed for 3 months. The expression of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and the serum levels of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), interleukin (IL)-4, and IL-10 were studied at month 0, month 1, and 
month 3. The intra-renal expression of T-bet and GATA-3 was studied via
immunohistochemistry. Results reveal that PBMCs from MsPGN patients expressed
high levels of T-bet mRNA and low levels of GATA-3 mRNA, and the T-bet/GATA-3
ratio in MsPGN patients was significantly higher than that in healthy donors.
Meanwhile, MsPGN patients were found to have simultaneously elevated IFN-gamma
values and decreased IL-10 values. Immunohistochemistry revealed increased T-bet 
and decreased GATA-3 expression in renal tissues from MsPGN patients. Moreover,
sinomenine was found to cause a decrease in T-bet mRNA expression, resulting in a
drop in the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Sinomenine was also found to elicit a decrease in
the serum levels of IFN-gamma. These results suggest that a shift toward the Th1 
pathway of Th cell activation occurs in MsPGN patients, and that sinomenine has
the potential to counter this shift in the Th1/Th2 balance and thereby produce
therapeutic effects.

PMID: 19336263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Neuron. 2009 Mar 26;61(6):839-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.011.

LMO4 controls the balance between excitatory and inhibitory spinal V2
interneurons.

Joshi K(1), Lee S, Lee B, Lee JW, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Multiple excitatory and inhibitory interneurons form the motor circuit with motor
neurons in the ventral spinal cord. Notch signaling initiates the diversification
of immature V2-interneurons into excitatory V2a-interneurons and inhibitory
V2b-interneurons. Here, we provide a transcriptional regulatory mechanism
underlying their balanced production. LIM-only protein LMO4 controls this binary 
cell fate choice by regulating the activity of V2a- and V2b-specific LIM
complexes inversely. In the spinal cord, LMO4 induces GABAergic V2b-interneurons 
in collaboration with SCL and inhibits Lhx3 from generating glutamatergic
V2a-interneuons. In LMO4;SCL compound mutant embryos, V2a-interneurons increase
markedly at the expense of V2b-interneurons. We further demonstrate that LMO4
nucleates the assembly of a novel LIM-complex containing SCL, Gata2, and NLI.
This complex activates specific enhancers in V2b-genes consisting of binding
sites for SCL and Gata2, thereby promoting V2b-interneuron fate. Thus, LMO4 plays
essential roles in directing a balanced generation of inhibitory and excitatory
neurons in the ventral spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2848494
PMID: 19323994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;28(12):1118-20.

[Effect of fumigation therapy with yinxieling on T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expression in the peripheral blood monocyte of patients with psoriasis vulgaris].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei G(1), Yue CW, Zhang CM.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan. weiguopfk@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of fumigating with Yinxieling (YXL) in treating
patients with psoriasis vulgaris and its influence on T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expressions in peripheral blood monocyte (PBMC).
METHODS: Western blot method was employed to detect the T-bet and GATA-3 protein 
expressions in PBMC of 30 psoriasis vulgaris patients before and after they
received fumigation therapy with YXL, also in 25 healthy persons for controls.
The therapeutic efficacy was observed and the relationship between PASI scores
and levels of T-bet and GATA-3 analyzed.
RESULTS: After treatment, 12 out of the 30 patients were cured, 9 were markedly
effective, 8 effective and 1 unchanged, the cure rate being 40.0% and the
effective rate 96.7%. Level of T-bet expression in PBMC of patients was 1.7917
+/- 0.3840, which was higher than that of healthy persons (0.8860 +/- 0.1486, P <
0.01), but the GATA3 expression was lower than that in control (0.8777 +/- 0.3114
vs. 1.2384 +/- 0.1783, P < 0.01). However, the two indexes were restored after
fumigation to 1.3410 +/- 0.3642 and 1.0883 +/- 0.2435 respectively, showing
significant difference to those before fumigation (P < 0.01). Correlation
analysis showed that PASI score was positively correlated with level of T-bet
expression (r = 0.7448, P < 0.01) and negatively correlated with level of GATA-3 
expression (r = -0.8291, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Fumigation therapy is effective in treating psoriasis vulgaris, its
mechanism is possibly by way of modulating the equilibrium of the transcription
factors T-bet and GATA-3 protein expressions in PBMC, and rectifying the immune
abnormality of Th1/Th2 subsets imbalance.

PMID: 19317171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Virology. 2009 May 10;387(2):373-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.02.033. Epub 2009
Mar 21.

Induction of T helper 3 regulatory cells by dendritic cells infected with porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Silva-Campa E(1), Flores-Mendoza L, Reséndiz M, Pinelli-Saavedra A, Mata-Haro V, 
Mwangi W, Hernández J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C. Hermosillo, Sonora,
Mexico.

Delayed development of virus-specific immune response has been observed in pigs
infected with the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV).
Several studies support the hypothesis that the PRRSV is capable of modulating
porcine immune system, but the mechanisms involved are yet to be defined. In this
study, we evaluated the induction of T regulatory cells by PRRSV-infected
dendritic cells (DCs). Our results showed that PRRSV-infected DCs significantly
increased Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells, an effect that was reversible by IFN-alpha
treatment, and this outcome was reproducible using two distinct PRRSV strains.
Analysis of the expressed cytokines suggested that the induction of
Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells is dependent on TGF-beta but not IL-10. In addition, a
significant up-regulation of Foxp3 mRNA, but not TBX21 or GATA3, was detected.
Importantly, our results showed that the induced Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells were
able to suppress the proliferation of PHA-stimulated PBMCs. The T cells induced
by the PRRSV-infected DCs fit the Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T helper 3 (Th3) regulatory
cell phenotype described in the literature. The induction of this cell phenotype 
depended, at least in part, on PRRSV viability because IFN-alpha treatment or
virus inactivation reversed these effects. In conclusion, this data supports the 
hypothesis that the PRRSV succeeds to establish and replicate in porcine cells
early post-infection, in part, by inducing Th3 regulatory cells as a mechanism of
modulating the porcine immune system.

PMID: 19304305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Transplantation. 2009 Mar 27;87(6):857-63. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318199fa57.

Expression of regulatory T-cell-related molecule genes and clinical outcome in
kidney transplant recipients.

Alvarez CM(1), Opelz G, Garcia LF, Süsal C.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Inmunología Celular e Inmunogenética, Facultad de Medicina, Instituto
de Investigaciones Médicas, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Naturally occurring regulatory T cells have been associated with
long-term allograft survival. We investigated whether gene transcripts of
Treg-related molecules are upregulated or downregulated in kidney transplant
recipients with different clinical outcomes and may serve as markers of operative
tolerance.
METHODS: Expression levels of transcription factor (forkhead box P3 [FOXP3],
t-bet, and GATA3), regulatory molecule (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4,
glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor receptor-related protein, tribbles
protein-1, and transforming growth factor-beta), and chemokine receptor (CCR7 and
CXCR4) genes were measured in kidney graft recipients with long-term (> or = 9
years) stable renal function (LTS) or chronic rejection (ChrRx). Patients on
dialysis and healthy individuals served as controls.
RESULTS: The level of FOXP3 transcripts was lower in ChrRx patients than in LTS
patients (P<0.01). The highest transforming growth factor-beta transcripts were
observed in ChrRx and the highest CCR7 and CXCR4 transcripts were observed in LTS
patients. In LTS patients, FOXP3 gene expression was associated with CXCR4 gene
expression (P=0.015). FOXP3 and CCR7 transcript levels were higher in LTS
patients without calcineurin inhibitor therapy than in LTS patients with
calcineurin inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that high expression of FOXP3 and chemokine
receptor genes in LTS patients are possible indicators of a regulatory process
that contributes to long-term allograft acceptance. Markers that were increased
in LTS patients were found to be decreased in ChrRx patients, suggesting that
rejection may partly be the result of a lack of this regulatory process. FOXP3
and CCR7 and CXCR4 transcripts might be used as markers to distinguish patients
who developed long-term allograft acceptance from patients who are prone to
ChrRx.

PMID: 19300189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 1;182(7):4479-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0713927.

Transcriptional modulation of the immune response by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-{alpha} agonists in autoimmune disease.

Gocke AR(1), Hussain RZ, Yang Y, Peng H, Weiner J, Ben LH, Drew PD, Stuve O,
Lovett-Racke AE, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, 75390, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) agonists have been
shown to have a therapeutic benefit in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE), an animal model for multiple sclerosis (MS). In this study, we
investigated the mechanism by which the PPARalpha agonist gemfibrozil induces
immune deviation and protects mice from EAE. We demonstrated that treatment with 
gemfibrozil increases expression of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-3 and
decreases expression of the Th1 transcription factor T-bet in vitro and directly 
ex vivo. These changes correlated with an increase in nuclear PPARalpha
expression. Moreover, the protective effects of PPARalpha agonists in EAE were
shown to be partially dependent on IL-4 and to occur in a receptor-dependent
manner. PPARalpha was demonstrated, for the first time, to regulate the IL-4 and 
IL-5 genes and to bind the IL-4 promoter in the presence of steroid receptor
coactivator-1, indicating that PPARalpha can directly transactivate the IL-4
gene. Finally, therapeutic administration of PPARalpha agonists ameliorated
clinically established EAE, suggesting that PPARalpha agonists may provide a
treatment option for immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2959196
PMID: 19299749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Pharmacogenomics. 2009 Mar;10(3):375-83. doi: 10.2217/14622416.10.3.375.

Association of CRTH2 gene polymorphisms with the required dose of antihistamines 
in patients with chronic urticaria.

Palikhe NS(1), Kim SH, Ye YM, Hur GY, Cho BY, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Youngtonggu Wonchon Dong San 5, Suwon, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic urticaria (CU), defined as the recurring incidence of
wheals with or without angioedema for more than 6 weeks, is a common disorder
associated with mast cell activation, degranulation, and histamine release.
Considering the association between the CRTH2 gene and mast cells, we
investigated the association of this gene polymorphism with the CU phenotype and 
antihistamine drug requirement in patients with CU.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Two groups consisting of 384 patients with CU and 231
patients as normal controls (NCs) were enrolled from the Department of Allergy
and Rheumatology, Ajou University Hospital, Suwon, Korea. Two polymorphisms of
the CRTH2 gene, -466T>C and -129C>A were genotyped using primer extension
methods.
RESULTS: No significant differences were detected in the genotype and allele
frequencies of the two CRTH2 polymorphisms between the CU and NC groups, and no
significant associations were observed with clinical parameters, such as atopy
status, serum total IgE, prevalence of autoantibodies and duration of CU.
However, CU patients with homozygous TT genotypes had significantly higher dose
requirements of antihistamines to control the CU symptoms (164.56 +/- 115.62 vs
137.38 +/- 90.15 loratadine equivalents, mg/week) than those with the CT and CC
genotypes (p = 0.025). The luciferase activity was significantly enhanced in the 
construct containing CRTH2 466C compared with the -466T-containing construct (p <
0.001). Co-transfection experiments with GATA-3 (300 ng) and the -466T and -466C 
CRTH2 alleles revealed that the CRTH2 -466T allele produced a greater increase in
induction of luciferase activity than the -466C allele (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The CRTH2 -466T>C gene polymorphism may not affect on the phenotype
of CU, but contributes to the required dose of antihistamines in patients with
CU.

PMID: 19290788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Semin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.02.001. Epub 2009
Mar 9.

Critical role of the Polycomb and Trithorax complexes in the maintenance of CD4 T
cell memory.

Nakayama T(1), Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp

The maintenance of memory CD4 T cells is crucial for the establishment of
immunological memory. The Polycomb (PcG) and Trithorax group (TrxG) genes control
key developmental regulators such as the homeobox genes, and these two antagonize
each other in the same developmental processes. Recently, PcG gene Bmi1 has been 
found to control memory Th1/Th2 cell survival and TrxG gene MLL is to control the
maintenance of memory Th2 cell function selectively. Therefore, in memory CD4 T
cells, PcG and TrxG genes appear to control distinct processes in a distinct
manner, which indicates a novel regulatory feature of the PcG/TrxG genes.

PMID: 19269851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000325. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000325. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

The adenylate cyclase toxins of Bacillus anthracis and Bordetella pertussis
promote Th2 cell development by shaping T cell antigen receptor signaling.

Rossi Paccani S(1), Benagiano M, Capitani N, Zornetta I, Ladant D, Montecucco C, 
D'Elios MM, Baldari CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

The adjuvanticity of bacterial adenylate cyclase toxins has been ascribed to
their capacity, largely mediated by cAMP, to modulate APC activation, resulting
in the expression of Th2-driving cytokines. On the other hand, cAMP has been
demonstrated to induce a Th2 bias when present during T cell priming, suggesting 
that bacterial cAMP elevating toxins may directly affect the Th1/Th2 balance.
Here we have investigated the effects on human CD4(+) T cell differentiation of
two adenylate cyclase toxins, Bacillus anthracis edema toxin (ET) and Bordetella 
pertussis CyaA, which differ in structure, mode of cell entry, and subcellular
localization. We show that low concentrations of ET and CyaA, but not of their
genetically detoxified adenylate cyclase defective counterparts, potently promote
Th2 cell differentiation by inducing expression of the master Th2 transcription
factors, c-maf and GATA-3. We also present evidence that the Th2-polarizing
concentrations of ET and CyaA selectively inhibit TCR-dependent activation of
Akt1, which is required for Th1 cell differentiation, while enhancing the
activation of two TCR-signaling mediators, Vav1 and p38, implicated in Th2 cell
differentiation. This is at variance from the immunosuppressive toxin
concentrations, which interfere with the earliest step in TCR signaling,
activation of the tyrosine kinase Lck, resulting in impaired CD3zeta
phosphorylation and inhibition of TCR coupling to ZAP-70 and Erk activation.
These results demonstrate that, notwithstanding their differences in their
intracellular localization, which result in focalized cAMP production, both
toxins directly affect the Th1/Th2 balance by interfering with the same steps in 
TCR signaling, and suggest that their adjuvanticity is likely to result from
their combined effects on APC and CD4(+) T cells. Furthermore, our results
strongly support the key role of cAMP in the adjuvanticity of these toxins.

PMCID: PMC2643477
PMID: 19266022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mucosal Immunol. 2009 May;2(3):254-64. doi: 10.1038/mi.2009.2. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Cyclooxygenase-2 in mucosal DC mediates induction of regulatory T cells in the
intestine through suppression of IL-4.

Broere F(1), du Pré MF, van Berkel LA, Garssen J, Schmidt-Weber CB, Lambrecht BN,
Hendriks RW, Nieuwenhuis EE, Kraal G, Samsom JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Oral intake of protein leads to tolerance through the induction of regulatory T
cells (Tr cells) in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs). Here we show that the
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in vivo suppressed oral tolerance and was 
associated with enhanced differentiation of interleukin (IL)-4-producing T cells 
and reduced Foxp3(+) Tr-cell differentiation in MLN. As a result, the functional 
suppressive capacity of these differentiated mucosal T cells was lost. IL-4 was
causally related to loss of tolerance as treatment of mice with anti-IL-4
antibodies during COX-2 inhibition restored tolerance. Dendritic cells (DCs) in
the MLN differentially expressed COX-2 and reductionist experiments revealed that
selective inhibition of the enzyme in these cells inhibited Foxp3(+) Tr-cell
differentiation in vitro. Importantly, the inhibition of COX-2 in MLN-DC caused
increased GATA-3 expression and enhanced IL-4 release by T cells, which was
directly related to impaired Tr-cell differentiation. These data provide crucial 
insights into the mechanisms driving de novo Tr-cell induction and tolerance in
the intestine.

PMID: 19262503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2009 Mar 5;11:e8. doi: 10.1017/S1462399409001008.

FOXA1 in breast cancer.

Nakshatri H(1), Badve S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. hnakshat@iupui.edu

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and classification is important for
clinical management. At least five subtypes can be identified based on unique
gene expression patterns; this subtype classification is distinct from the
histopathological classification. The transcription factor network(s) required
for the specific gene expression signature in each of these subtypes is currently
being elucidated. The transcription factor network composed of the oestrogen
(estrogen) receptor alpha (ERalpha), FOXA1 and GATA3 may control the gene
expression pattern in luminal subtype A breast cancers. Breast cancers that are
dependent on this network correspond to well-differentiated and
hormone-therapy-responsive tumours with good prognosis. In this review, we
discuss the interplay between these transcription factors with a particular
emphasis on FOXA1 structure and function, and its ability to control ERalpha
function. Additionally, we discuss modulators of FOXA1 function,
ERalpha-FOXA1-GATA3 downstream targets, and potential therapeutic agents that may
increase differentiation through FOXA1.

PMID: 19261198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Feb 15;149A(4):776-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32706.

Germinal mosaicism of GATA3 in a family with HDR syndrome.

Sun Y(1), Xia W, Xing X, Li M, Wang O, Jiang Y, Pei Y, Ye P, Liu H, Hu Y, Meng X,
Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.

PMID: 19253381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Respir Res. 2009 Feb 27;10:13. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-13.

Activated mammalian target of rapamycin is associated with T regulatory cell
insufficiency in nasal polyps.

Xu G(1), Xia J, Hua X, Zhou H, Yu C, Liu Z, Cai K, Shi J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Cancer Center, Otorhinolaryngology Hospital of the First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
entxgfess@163.com

BACKGROUND: Decreased infiltration of Foxp3+ T regulatory cell (Treg) is
considered to be critical for the Th1/Th2 dysregulation of nasal polyps, while
the cellular mechanism underlying Foxp3+ Treg insufficiency is currently not well
defined.
METHODS: We attempted to investigate the tissue expression of phosphorylated
mammalian target of rapamycin (pmTOR) and infiltration of Foxp3+ Tregs in 28
nasal polyps and 16 controls by histological staining. We also evaluated the
effects of blocking the mTOR signaling pathway with rapamycin on T cell phenotype
selection and Foxp3+CD4+ Tregs expansion in a tissue culture system.
RESULTS: Significantly increased infiltration of pmTOR+ inflammatory cells and
decreased infiltration of Foxp3+CD4+ Tregs into nasal polyps was observed, with
an inverse association. In the tissue culture system, we detected significantly
elevated Foxp3 expression and IL-10 production, as well as an increased
percentage of Foxp3+ Tregs in nasal polyps after blocking the mTOR signaling
pathway with rapamycin.
CONCLUSION: Here we demonstrate for the first time that the mTOR signaling
pathway is associated with Foxp3+ Tregs insufficiency in nasal polyps. Inhibition
of the mTOR signaling pathway may be helpful for enhancement of Foxp3+ Treg
expansion, as well as modulation of T cell phenotype imbalances in nasal polyps.

PMCID: PMC2651851
PMID: 19250527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Feb 15;149A(4):770-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32689.

HDR syndrome: a novel "de novo" mutation in GATA3 gene.

Ferraris S(1), Del Monaco AG, Garelli E, Carando A, De Vito B, Pappi P, Lala R,
Ponzone A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
silvio.ferraris@unito.it

Human GATA3 haploinsufficiency leads to HDR (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and
renal dysplasia) syndrome. The development of a specific subset of organs in
which this transcription factor is expressed appears exquisitely sensitive to
gene dosage. We report on a 14-year-old patient with symptomatic
hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural bilateral deafness, unilateral renal dysplasia,
bilateral palpebral ptosis, and horizontal nystagmus. Fundoscopy displayed
symmetrical pseudopapilledema, and brain CT scan revealed basal ganglia
calcifications. FISH analysis did not disclose any microdeletion in the 22q11.2
or 10p14 regions. GATA3 mutation analysis identified a heterozygous deletion of
GG nucleotides at codon 36 and 37 (c.108_109delGG) in exon 2 causing a frameshift
with a premature stop codon after a new 15-aminoacid sequence. Restriction
endonuclease analysis performed in parents was negative. Our patient carries a
novel "de novo" GATA3 mutation, providing further evidence that HDR syndrome is
caused by haploinsufficiency of GATA3, which may be responsible for a complex
neurologic picture besides the known triad.

PMID: 19248180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Mar;60(3):750-9. doi: 10.1002/art.24329.

GATA-3 protects against severe joint inflammation and bone erosion and reduces
differentiation of Th17 cells during experimental arthritis.

van Hamburg JP(1), Mus AM, de Bruijn MJ, de Vogel L, Boon L, Cornelissen F,
Asmawidjaja P, Hendriks RW, Lubberts E.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with the infiltration of T helper
cells into the joints. It is unclear whether interferon-gamma
(IFNgamma)-producing Th1 cells or the novel T helper subset, interleukin-17
(IL-17)-producing Th17 cells, are the pathogenic mediators of joint inflammation 
in chronic nonautoimmune arthritis. Therefore, this study was aimed at examining 
whether the Th2-specific transcription factor GATA-3 can regulate arthritis, in
an experimental murine model, by modulating Th1 and/or Th17 cell polarization.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced with methylated bovine serum albumin (mBSA) in
both wild-type and CD2 T cell-specific GATA-3 (CD2-GATA-3)-transgenic mice. At
days 1 and 7 after the induction of arthritis, knee joints were scored
macroscopically for arthritis severity and for histologic changes. Single-cell
suspensions were generated from the spleens, lymph nodes, and inflamed knee
joints. Cytokine expression by CD4+ T cells was determined using flow cytometry, 
and IL-17 expression in the inflamed knee joints was determined by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Analyses of gene expression were performed for
Th17-associated factors.
RESULTS: Wild-type mice developed severe joint inflammation, including massive
inflammatory cell infiltration and bone erosion that increased significantly over
time, reaching maximal arthritis scores at day 7. In contrast, only mild joint
inflammation was observed in CD2-GATA-3-transgenic mice. This mild effect was
further accompanied by systemic and local reductions in the numbers of
IL-17+IFNgamma- and IL-17+IFNgamma+, but not IL-17-IFNgamma+, CD4+ T cells, and
by induction of Th2 cytokine expression. Moreover, GATA-3 overexpression resulted
in reduced gene expression of the Th17-associated transcription factor retinoic
acid-related orphan receptor gammat.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that enforced GATA-3 expression protects
against severe joint inflammation and bone erosion in mice, accompanied by
reduced differentiation of Th17 cells, but not Th1 cells, during mBSA-induced
arthritis.

PMID: 19248112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2008 Nov;60(5):440-8.

Expression of the small heat shock protein alphaB-crystallin in term human
placenta.

Mineva I(1), Stamenova M, Gartner W, Wagner L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Immunology of Reproduction, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. imineva@abv.bg

PROBLEM: Expression of heat shock proteins has been described in different
tissues relevant to human reproduction, including placenta. AlphaB-crystallin is 
a member of the small heat shock protein family (sHsp) exerting biologically
important chaperon functions.
METHOD OF STUDY: Immunofluorescence; immunoblot analysis; quantitative
real-time-PCR; CpG island methylation analysis.
RESULTS: In this study, we once again describe the expression of
alphaB-crystallin in the stroma of the placental villi and in the cytoplasm of
decidual cells by immunofluorescence. In contrast, Hsp27--another sHsp family
member--was detected exclusively in the syncytiotrophoblast layer. This varying
expression pattern provides additional support to earlier reports of functional
differences between both proteins. Semi-quantitative immunoblot analysis of
placenta tissue specimens (n = 6) revealed Hsp27 expression exceeding that of
alphaB-crystallin, albeit with interindividual variations. Inter-individual
alphaB-crystallin expression variations were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR.
CpG island methylation was ruled out as the underlying cause for the
inter-individual alphaB-crystallin expression variations. However, the expression
extent of GATA3, which is a transcription factor with corresponding elements
within the alphaB-crystallin gene (CRYAB) promoter, paralleled that of
alphaB-crystallin. We demonstrated remarkable GATA3 expression in placental
tissue, exceeding that of other endocrine organs.
CONCLUSION: We can conclude that the differential expression patterns of
alphaB-crystallin and Hsp27 indicate functional differences between these highly 
related proteins in placental tissues.

PMID: 19238749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 May 15;179(10):875-82. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200806-893OC. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Gamma-secretase inhibitor reduces allergic pulmonary inflammation by modulating
Th1 and Th2 responses.

Kang JH(1), Kim BS, Uhm TG, Lee SH, Lee GR, Park CS, Chung IY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology,
Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea.

RATIONALE: Gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) has been used to effectively block
Notch signaling, which is implicated in the differentiation and functional
regulation of T helper (Th) effector cells. In asthma, a subset of CD4(+) T cells
is believed to initiate and perpetuate the disease.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the therapeutic potential of
GSI against allergic asthma.
METHODS: GSI was administered to an ovalbumin-sensitized mouse via an intranasal 
route at the time of ovalbumin challenge.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The administration of GSI inhibits asthma
phenotypes, including eosinophilic airway inflammation, goblet cell metaplasia,
methacholine-induced airway hyperresponsiveness, and serum IgE production. GSI
treatment of bronchoalveolar lavage cells stimulated via TCR or non-TCR pathways 
led to a decrease in Th2 cytokine production with a concomitant increase in Th1
cytokine secretion. Expression of Hes-1, a target of Notch signaling, was
down-regulated in conjunction with a reduction of Notch intracellular domain and 
GATA-3 levels after GSI treatment of bronchoalveolar lavage cells. GSI treatment 
resulted in an inhibition of NF-kappaB activation, and combined treatment with
GSI and an NF-kappaB inhibitor augmented IFN-gamma production in a synergistic
manner.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that GSI directly regulates Th1 and Th2 responses
in allergic pulmonary inflammation through a Notch signaling-dependent pathway
and that GSI is of high therapeutic value for treating asthma by inhibiting
airway inflammatory responses.

PMID: 19234107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Gene. 2009 May 1;436(1-2):121-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.02.002. Epub 2009 Feb
13.

Abundant expression of Kallikrein 1 gene in human keratinocytes was mediated by
GATA3.

Son do N(1), Li L, Katsuyama H, Komatsu N, Saito M, Tanii H, Saijoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Kanazawa,
Japan.

Among Tissue kallikrein genes (KLKs), KLK1 is abundantly expressed in human skin.
Although its putative promoter is known to have various cis-elements, they have
not been functionally tested. In the present study, the regulation mechanism of
KLK1 promoter supporting such abundant expression was examined. Luciferase assay 
targeting the KLK1 promoter (nucleotide -1153/+40 from the major transcriptional 
start site) was performed on NHEK human keratinocyte. -954/-855, -428/-236, and
-100/+40 had the induction activity. The motif search program failed to find
unique binding motifs in -428/-236, whereas both -954/-855 and -100/+40 had a
unique GATAs binding motif. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and DNA
footprinting confirmed the binding of NHEK nuclear protein to these motifs that
were supershifted by anti-GATA3 antibody. Among GATA isoforms, GATA3 alone could 
be amplified in RNA obtained from NHEK. Moreover, introduction of GATA3 into
fibroblastic NIH3T3 cells enhanced the activity of KLK1 promoter containing
-954/+40, while that of GATA3 dominant negative mutant to NHEK cells impaired the
same promoter's activity. Thus, GATA3 was found to bind the site located at
-954/-855 and to be a key regulator of abundant KLK1 expression in human
keratinocyte.

PMID: 19232384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Zhong Yao Cai. 2008 Oct;31(10):1519-22.

[Primary study on the mechanism of Ma Xing Shi Gan decoction on the Th1/Th2
response in a murine model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang F(1), Tong XY, Zhang RH, Cai Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
hftxyy@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the mechanism of Ma Xing Shi Gan decoction on the cytokines
of Th1/Th2 in a murine model of asthma.
METHODS: The murine model of asthma was induced by OVA. Various doses of Ma Xing 
Shi Gan decoction were orally administered to the mice respectively. The spleen
cells were cultured 3 days for measurement of IFN-gamma, IL4 and IL-5 by ELISA.
After 2 days' culture, the spleen cells were treated with Trizol for extraction
of total RNA. The gene expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT-6 were analyzed by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After the treatment with Ma Xing Shi Gan decoction, the production of
IL-4 and IL-5 and the gene expression of GATA-3, STAT-6 obviously decreased.
CONCLUSION: Ma Xing Shi Gan decoction may modulate Thl/Th2 balance by suppressing
the gene expression of GATA-3 and STAT-6 in vivo.

PMID: 19230405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004519. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Lack of galectin-3 drives response to Paracoccidioides brasiliensis toward a
Th2-biased immunity.

Ruas LP(1), Bernardes ES, Fermino ML, de Oliveira LL, Hsu DK, Liu FT, Chammas R, 
Roque-Barreira MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, Brasil.

There is recent evidence that galectin-3 participates in immunity to infections, 
mostly by tuning cytokine production. We studied the balance of Th1/Th2 responses
to P. brasiliensis experimental infection in the absence of galectin-3. The
intermediate resistance to the fungal infection presented by C57BL/6 mice,
associated with the development of a mixed type of immunity, was replaced with
susceptibility to infection and a Th2-polarized immune response, in
galectin-3-deficient (gal3(-/-)) mice. Such a response was associated with
defective inflammatory and delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) reactions, high
IL-4 and GATA-3 expression and low nitric oxide production in the organs of
infected animals. Gal3(-/-) macrophages exhibited higher TLR2 transcript levels
and IL-10 production compared to wild-type macrophages after stimulation with P. 
brasiliensis antigens. We hypothesize that, during an in vivo P. brasiliensis
infection, galectin-3 exerts its tuning role on immunity by interfering with the 
generation of regulatory macrophages, thus hindering the consequent Th2-polarized
type of response.

PMCID: PMC2641003
PMID: 19229338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):e1-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162958. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

A HaemAtlas: characterizing gene expression in differentiated human blood cells.

Watkins NA(1), Gusnanto A, de Bono B, De S, Miranda-Saavedra D, Hardie DL,
Angenent WG, Attwood AP, Ellis PD, Erber W, Foad NS, Garner SF, Isacke CM, Jolley
J, Koch K, Macaulay IC, Morley SL, Rendon A, Rice KM, Taylor N, Thijssen-Timmer
DC, Tijssen MR, van der Schoot CE, Wernisch L, Winzer T, Dudbridge F, Buckley CD,
Langford CF, Teichmann S, Göttgens B, Ouwehand WH; Bloodomics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, National Health Service
Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, United Kingdom. naw23@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):4479-80.

Hematopoiesis is a carefully controlled process that is regulated by complex
networks of transcription factors that are, in part, controlled by signals
resulting from ligand binding to cell-surface receptors. To further understand
hematopoiesis, we have compared gene expression profiles of human erythroblasts, 
megakaryocytes, B cells, cytotoxic and helper T cells, natural killer cells,
granulocytes, and monocytes using whole genome microarrays. A bioinformatics
analysis of these data was performed focusing on transcription factors,
immunoglobulin superfamily members, and lineage-specific transcripts. We observed
that the numbers of lineage-specific genes varies by 2 orders of magnitude,
ranging from 5 for cytotoxic T cells to 878 for granulocytes. In addition, we
have identified novel coexpression patterns for key transcription factors
involved in hematopoiesis (eg, GATA3-GFI1 and GATA2-KLF1). This study represents 
the most comprehensive analysis of gene expression in hematopoietic cells to date
and has identified genes that play key roles in lineage commitment and cell
function. The data, which are freely accessible, will be invaluable for future
studies on hematopoiesis and the role of specific genes and will also aid the
understanding of the recent genome-wide association studies.

PMCID: PMC2680378
PMID: 19228925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMC Syst Biol. 2009 Feb 12;3:19. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-3-19.

A module-based analytical strategy to identify novel disease-associated genes
shows an inhibitory role for interleukin 7 Receptor in allergic inflammation.

Mobini R(1), Andersson BA, Erjefält J, Hahn-Zoric M, Langston MA, Perkins AD,
Cardell LO, Benson M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit for Clinical Systems Biology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. reza.mobini@pediat.gu.se

BACKGROUND: The identification of novel genes by high-throughput studies of
complex diseases is complicated by the large number of potential genes. However, 
since disease-associated genes tend to interact, one solution is to arrange them 
in modules based on co-expression data and known gene interactions. The
hypothesis of this study was that such a module could be a) found and validated
in allergic disease and b) used to find and validate one ore more novel
disease-associated genes.
RESULTS: To test these hypotheses integrated analysis of a large number of gene
expression microarray experiments from different forms of allergy was performed. 
This led to the identification of an experimentally validated reference gene that
was used to construct a module of co-expressed and interacting genes. This module
was validated in an independent material, by replicating the expression changes
in allergen-challenged CD4+ cells. Moreover, the changes were reversed following 
treatment with corticosteroids. The module contained several novel
disease-associated genes, of which the one with the highest number of
interactions with known disease genes, IL7R, was selected for further validation.
The expression levels of IL7R in allergen challenged CD4+ cells decreased
following challenge but increased after treatment. This suggested an inhibitory
role, which was confirmed by functional studies.
CONCLUSION: We propose that a module-based analytical strategy is generally
applicable to find novel genes in complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC2653464
PMID: 19216740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int J Oncol. 2009 Mar;34(3):697-705.

The Phox2 pathway is differentially expressed in neuroblastoma tumors, but no
mutations were found in the candidate tumor suppressor gene PHOX2A.

Wilzén A(1), Nilsson S, Sjöberg RM, Kogner P, Martinsson T, Abel F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Gothenburg University, S-416 85 Gothenburg,
Sweden.

Neuroblastoma (NB), a tumor of the sympathetic nervous system, is the most common
solid tumor in childhood. By microarray expression analysis (Affymetrix HU133A)
important players in the noradrenalin biosynthesis pathway (DBH, DDC, GATA2,
GATA3, PHOX2A, PHOX2B, SLC6A2 SLC18A1 and TH) were found to be among the top
ranked genes in showing lower expression in unfavorable NB tumor types as
compared to favorable ones. By quantitative PCR with TaqMan, this result was
significantly verified for all transcripts (p<0.05, one-tailed) in a new set of
11 primary NB tumors (5 favorable vs. 6 unfavorable). PHOX2A, a downstream target
of Phox2b, was found to be the sixth ranked gene from the microarray gene list.
Since the PHOX2A gene is localized in a tumor suppressor candidate region at 11q,
we screened this gene for mutations by DNA sequencing in 47 tumors of different
stages. However, no critical changes were found that could support its role in
tumor development or progression. Overall, the findings in this study either
suggest that expression of this pathway could be a predictive differentiation
marker of NB tumors, or our results could also imply that the noradrenalin
biosynthesis pathway is involved in tumor pathogenesis.

PMID: 19212675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Feb;5(2):e1000292. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000292. Epub 2009
Feb 6.

Differences in APOBEC3G expression in CD4+ T helper lymphocyte subtypes modulate 
HIV-1 infectivity.

Vetter ML(1), Johnson ME, Antons AK, Unutmaz D, D'Aquila RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
TN, USA.

The cytidine deaminases APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F exert anti-HIV-1 activity that is
countered by the HIV-1 vif protein. Based on potential transcription factor
binding sites in their putative promoters, we hypothesized that expression of
APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F would vary with T helper lymphocyte differentiation. Naive 
CD4+ T lymphocytes were differentiated to T helper type 1 (Th1) and 2 (Th2)
effector cells by expression of transcription factors Tbet and GATA3,
respectively, as well as by cytokine polarization. APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F RNA
levels, and APOBEC3G protein levels, were higher in Th1 than in Th2 cells. T cell
receptor stimulation further increased APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F expression in Tbet- 
and control-transduced, but not in GATA3-transduced, cells. Neutralizing
anti-interferon-gamma antibodies reduced both basal and T cell
receptor-stimulated APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F expression in Tbet- and
control-transduced cells. HIV-1 produced from Th1 cells had more virion APOBEC3G,
and decreased infectivity, compared to virions produced from Th2 cells. These
differences between Th1- and Th2-produced virions were greater for viruses
lacking functional vif, but also seen with vif-positive viruses. Over-expression 
of APOBEC3G in Th2 cells decreased the infectivity of virions produced from Th2
cells, and reduction of APOBEC3G in Th1 cells increased infectivity of virions
produced from Th1 cells, consistent with a causal role for APOBEC3G in the
infectivity difference. These results indicate that APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F levels 
vary physiologically during CD4+ T lymphocyte differentiation, that
interferon-gamma contributes to this modulation, and that this physiological
regulation can cause changes in infectivity of progeny virions, even in the
presence of HIV-1 vif.

PMCID: PMC2631133
PMID: 19197360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jan;119(2):491-6. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0269-x.
Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Frequent somatic mutations of GATA3 in non-BRCA1/BRCA2 familial breast tumors,
but not in BRCA1-, BRCA2- or sporadic breast tumors.

Arnold JM(1), Choong DY, Thompson ER; kConFab, Waddell N, Lindeman GJ, Visvader
JE, Campbell IG, Chenevix-Trench G.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Royal Brisbane Hospital, Herston,
QLD, Australia 4029.

Heterozygous somatic mutations of the transcription factor, GATA-3, have recently
been reported in approximately 5% breast of tumors unselected for family history.
We sequenced the GATA-3 gene in 55 breast tumors from women with familial breast 
cancer, and found seven heterozygous somatic mutations, all in non-BRCA1/2 cases 
in which the frequency was 22%. In contrast, we found mutations of GATA-3 in only
4% of 81 sporadic tumors analysed. It is possible that GATA3 mutations occur
earlier in the evolution of BRCAx tumors, compared to BRCA1, BRCA2 or sporadic
tumors, and are therefore easier to detect by direct sequencing in the presence
of some stromal contamination.

PMID: 19189213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;29(11):733-6.

[Study on the dendritic cell subsets in peripheral blood and its relationship
with the expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 in lymphocytes in severe aplastic
anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Shao ZH, Fu R, Ruan EB, Qu W, Liang Y, Liu H, Wu YH, Song J, Wang HQ, 
Xing LM, Guan J, Li LJ, Liu H, Dong SW, You L, Zou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the dendritic cell (DC)
subsets and transcriptive factors, T-bet, GATA-3, and immune imbalance in
acquired severe aplastic anemia (SAA).
METHODS: The DC1 (HLA-DR+Lin-CD11c+) and DC2 (HLA-DR+Lin-CD123+) in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were measured with flow cytometry (FCM), the
expressions of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA in PBMNC with semiquantitative RT-PCR
and the plasma level of IFN gamma and IL-4 with ELISA in 29 SAA patients and 16
healthy controls.
RESULTS: The percentages of DC1 in PBMNC were (0.44 +/- 0.24)% and (0.73 +/-
0.30)% in untreated and recovered SAA patients respectively, both were higher
than that in controls (0.29 +/- 0.10)% (P < 0.05). The percentage of DC2 in the
untreated cases was lower than that of recovered ones or controls [(0.18 +/-
0.14)% vs (0.28 +/- 0.20)% and (0.29 +/- 0.13)%] (P < 0.05). DC1/DC2 ratios were 
3.45 +/- 2.71 and 2.90 +/- 0.95 in untreated and recovered groups respectively,
both were higher than that in controls (1.15 +/- 0.56) (P < 0.05). No statistic
difference in DC1/DC2 ratio was found between untreated and recovered patients (P
< 0.05). The relative mRNA expression levels of transcriptive factor T-bet were
0.37 +/- 0.07, 0.20 +/- 0.07 and 0.17 +/- 0.05 in the above 3 groups,
respectively, untreated group being higher than that of recovered group or
healthy controls (P < 0.05). There was no statistic difference of GATA-3
expression among the 3 groups (P > 0.05). T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was 0.72 +/- 0.13 in
untreated group, being higher than that of recovered group (0.33 +/- 0.08) or
controls (0.35 +/- 0.11). The plasma level of IFN gamma in the untreated group
was (50.9 +/- 1.1) ng/L, which was higher than that of recovered group [(49.7 +/-
0.9) ng/L] or controls [(49.7 +/- 0.7) ng/L]. There was significant positive
correlations between T-bet and DC1/DC2 ratio (r = 0.445, P < 0.01), as well as
between T-bet and IFN gamma (r = 0.402, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Either DC1/DC2 or T-bet/GATA-3 ratio might become an index to
estimate immune imbalance. High-expressed T-bet was related to the progress of
SAA. In patients with SAA, DC1/DC2 ratio returns to normal range later than that 
of routine blood test does, indicating that immunosuppressive therapy should not 
be withdrawn too earlier.

PMID: 19176008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009 Feb;9(2):106-15. doi: 10.1038/nri2489.

RUNX proteins in transcription factor networks that regulate T-cell lineage
choice.

Collins A(1), Littman DR, Taniuchi I.

Author information: 
(1)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular
Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of
Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2009 Feb;9(2):81-2.

Recent research has uncovered complex transcription factor networks that control 
the processes of T-cell development and differentiation. RUNX (runt-related
transcription factor) proteins are among the many factors that have crucial roles
in these networks. In this Review, we examine the mechanisms by which RUNX
complexes act together with other transcription factors, such as Th-POK
(T-helper-inducing POZ/Kruppel-like factor) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) in
determining the CD4/CD8 lineage choice of developing thymocytes. In addition, we 
discuss evidence indicating that RUNX complexes are also involved in the
differentiation of effector T-cell subsets and that the molecular mechanisms by
which RUNX proteins regulate T-cell fate decisions are conserved between the
thymus and periphery.

PMCID: PMC4231139
PMID: 19165227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 15;327(2):478-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.034. Epub 2009 
Jan 3.

Cell communication with the neural plate is required for induction of neural
markers by BMP inhibition: evidence for homeogenetic induction and implications
for Xenopus animal cap and chick explant assays.

Linker C(1), De Almeida I, Papanayotou C, Stower M, Sabado V, Ghorani E, Streit
A, Mayor R, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street (Anatomy Building), London WC1E 6BT, UK. claudia.linker@cancer.org.uk

In Xenopus, the animal cap is very sensitive to BMP antagonists, which result in 
neuralization. In chick, however, only cells at the border of the neural plate
can be neuralized by BMP inhibition. Here we compare the two systems. BMP
antagonists can induce neural plate border markers in both ventral Xenopus
epidermis and non-neural chick epiblast. However, BMP antagonism can only
neuralize ectodermal cells when the BMP-inhibited cells form a continuous trail
connecting them to the neural plate or its border, suggesting that homeogenetic
neuralizing factors can only travel between BMP-inhibited cells. Xenopus animal
cap explants contain cells fated to contribute to the neural plate border and
even to the anterior neural plate, explaining why they are so easily neuralized
by BMP-inhibition. Furthermore, chick explants isolated from embryonic epiblast
behave like Xenopus animal caps and express border markers. We propose that the
animal cap assay in Xenopus and explant assays in the chick are unsuitable for
studying instructive signals in neural induction.

PMCID: PMC2713608
PMID: 19162002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2009 Feb 1;182(3):1370-8.

The adaptor molecule signaling lymphocytic activation molecule-associated protein
(SAP) regulates IFN-gamma and IL-4 production in V alpha 14 transgenic NKT cells 
via effects on GATA-3 and T-bet expression.

Cen O(1), Ueda A, Guzman L, Jain J, Bassiri H, Nichols KE, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

NKT cells comprise a rare regulatory T cell population of limited TCR diversity, 
with most cells using a Valpha14 Jalpha18 TCR. These cells exhibit a critical
dependence on the signaling adapter molecule, signaling lymphocytic activation
molecule-associated protein (SAP), for their ontogeny, an aspect not seen in
conventional alphabeta T cells. Prior studies demonstrate that SAP enhances
TCR-induced activation of NF-kappaB in CD4(+) T cells. Because NF-kappaB is
required for NKT cell development, SAP might promote the ontogeny of this lineage
by signaling to NF-kappaB. In this study, we demonstrate that forced expression
of the NF-kappaB target gene, Bcl-x(L), or inhibitory NF-kappaB kinase beta, a
catalytic subunit of the IkappaB kinase complex essential for NF-kappaB
activation, fails to restore NKT cell development in sap(-/-) mice, suggesting
that SAP mediates NKT cell development independently of NF-kappaB. To examine the
role of SAP in NKT cell function, we generated NKT cells in sap(-/-) mice by
expressing a transgene encoding the Valpha14 Jalpha18 component of the invariant 
TCR. These cells bound alpha-galactosylceramide-loaded CD1d tetramers, but
exhibited a very immature CD24(+)NK1.1(-) phenotype. Although sap(-/-)
tetramer-reactive cells proliferated in response to TCR activation, they did not 
produce appreciable levels of IL-4 or IFN-gamma. The reduction in cytokine
production correlated with the near absence of GATA-3 and T-bet, key
transcription factors regulating cytokine expression and maturation of NKT cells.
Ectopic expression of GATA-3 partially restored IL-4 production by the NKT cells.
Collectively, these data suggest that by promoting GATA-3 and T-bet expression,
SAP exerts control over NKT cell development and mature NKT cell cytokine
production.

PMCID: PMC2630172
PMID: 19155483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009 Feb;9(2):125-35. doi: 10.1038/nri2476.

GATA3 and the T-cell lineage: essential functions before and after
T-helper-2-cell differentiation.

Ho IC(1), Tai TS, Pai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
iho@partners.org

Many advances in our understanding of the molecules that regulate the
development, differentiation and function of T cells have been made over the past
few years. One important regulator of T-cell differentiation is the transcription
factor GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3). Although the main function of GATA3 is to 
act as a master transcription factor for the differentiation of T helper 2
(T(H)2) cells, new research has helped to uncover crucial functions of GATA3 in T
cells that go beyond T(H)2-cell differentiation and that are important at earlier
stages of haematopoietic and lymphoid-cell development. This Review focuses on
the functions of GATA3 from early thymocyte development to effector T-cell
differentiation. In addition, we discuss the interactions between GATA3 and other
transcription factors and signalling pathways, and highlight the functional
significance of the GATA3 protein structure.

PMCID: PMC2998182
PMID: 19151747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;149(2):98-102. doi: 10.1159/000189191. Epub 2009
Jan 6.

Enhanced interferon-gamma gene expression in T Cells and reduced
ovalbumin-dependent lung eosinophilia in hypoxia-inducible
factor-1-alpha-deficient mice.

Guo J(1), Lu W, Shimoda LA, Semenza GL, Georas SN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester 14642, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence that hypoxia-inducible transcription
factors are involved in the pathophysiology of asthma. Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) in particular controls the expression of many hypoxia 
regulated genes, but whether HIF-1alpha directly contributes to allergen-driven
immune responses is not known.
METHODS: Partially HIF-1alpha-deficient mice (HIF-1alpha(+/-)) or wild-type
littermate controls were used in all experiments. Spleen CD4+ T cells were
stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies and cytokine secretion was
measured in vitro. Mice were sensitized by intraperitoneal injection of ovalbumin
(Ova) plus alum, and then challenged by intranasal Ova followed by
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and isolation of spleen cells. BAL cells were
counted and the differential determined using cytospin, and splenocytes were
incubated with Ova to measure recall cytokine production.
RESULTS: Interferon-gamma secretion was significantly higher in anti-CD3 plus
anti-CD28 stimulated CD4+ T cells obtained from HIF-1alpha(+/-) mice compared to 
wild-type controls. HIF-1alpha(+/-) mice were protected from lung eosinophilia 72
h after allergen challenge, in association with enhanced secretion of
interferon-gamma in recall responses of splenocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: HIF-1alpha contributes to allergic immune responses and lung
eosinophilia in a mouse model of asthma.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2824623
PMID: 19127065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):999-1010.

Critical role for the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor in the control
of Th2 cytokine expression.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Heath H, Krpic S, Dingjan GM, van Hamburg JP, Bergen I, 
van de Nobelen S, Sleutels F, Grosveld F, Galjart N, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Differentiation of naive CD4+ cells into Th2 cells is accompanied by chromatin
remodeling at the Th2 cytokine locus allowing the expression of the IL-4, IL-5,
and IL-13 genes. In this report, we investigated the role in Th2 differentiation 
of the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed multiple CTCF binding sites in the Th2
cytokine locus. Conditional deletion of the Ctcf gene in double-positive
thymocytes allowed development of peripheral T cells, but their activation and
proliferation upon anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulation in vitro was severely impaired.
Nevertheless, when TCR signaling was circumvented with phorbol ester and
ionomycin, we observed proliferation of CTCF-deficient T cells, enabling the
analysis of Th2 differentiation in vitro. We found that in CTCF-deficient Th2
polarization cultures, transcription of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 was strongly
reduced. By contrast, CTCF deficiency had a moderate effect on IFN-gamma
production in Th1 cultures and IL-17 production in Th17 cultures was unaffected. 
Consistent with a Th2 cytokine defect, CTCF-deficient mice had very low levels of
IgG1 and IgE in their serum, but IgG2c was close to normal. In CTCF-deficient Th2
cultures, cells were polarized toward the Th2 lineage, as substantiated by
induction of the key transcriptional regulators GATA3 and special AT-rich binding
protein 1 (SATB1) and down-regulation of T-bet. Also, STAT4 expression was low,
indicating that in the absence of CTCF, GATA3 still operated as a negative
regulator of STAT4. Taken together, these findings show that CTCF is essential
for GATA3- and SATB1-dependent regulation of Th2 cytokine gene expression.

PMID: 19124743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):741-5.

Cutting edge: Ikaros is a regulator of Th2 cell differentiation.

Quirion MR(1), Gregory GD, Umetsu SE, Winandy S, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Ikaros, a hematopoietic transcription factor, has well defined effects on early
lymphocyte development in the bone marrow and thymus. In this study we
demonstrate that Ikaros is a positive regulator of Th2 cytokine gene expression
in peripheral T cells. CD4+ T cells from naive Ikaros(null) mice cultured under
Th2-skewing conditions express the Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma and have reduced IL-4, 
IL-5, and IL-13 expression. Ikaros directly associates with several Th2 locus
regulatory regions in naive CD4+ T cells. The decreased ability to express Th2
cytokines in Ikaros(null)T cells corresponds with histone 3 hypoacetylation
across the Th2 cytokine locus as well as decreased GATA3 and cMaf and increased
T-bet and STAT1 expression. These data support a model whereby Ikaros directly
activates Th2 gene expression by promoting local chromatin accessibility during
CD4+ T cell differentiation and also acts indirectly to regulate expression of
Th2- and Th1-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2718557
PMID: 19124715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. FASEB J. 2009 May;23(5):1558-71. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-121236. Epub 2009 Jan 5.

Glucocorticoids inhibit GATA-3 phosphorylation and activity in T cells.

Liberman AC(1), Druker J, Refojo D, Holsboer F, Arzt E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Molecular, Departamento de
Fisiología y Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 1428
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Glucocorticoid (GC) immunosuppression and anti-inflammatory action involve the
regulation of several transcription factors (TFs). GCs inhibit the acute
production of T-helper (Th) 1 and Th2 cytokines but ultimately favor a shift
toward Th2 phenotype. GCs inhibit the transcriptional activity of T-bet Th1 TF by
a transrepression mechanism. Here we analyze GC regulation of GATA-3, the master 
driver of Th2 differentiation. We found that GCs inhibit GATA-3 transcriptional
activity. We demonstrate that this mechanism does not involve physical
interaction between the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and GATA-3 or reduction of
GATA-3 binding to DNA, as described previously for T-bet. Instead, GCs inhibit
GATA-3 activity by inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase induced
GATA-3 phosphorylation. GCs also inhibit GATA-3 mRNA and protein expression.
Finally, GATA-3 inhibition affects the interleukin-5 gene, a central Th2
cytokine. The IC(50) of dexamethasone is 10 nM with a maximum effect at 100 nM.
All inhibitory actions were blocked by the GR antagonist RU38486 (1 uM), proving 
the specificity of GR action. In view of the crucial role of GATA-3 in T-cell
differentiation and inflammation, we propose that the mechanism of GATA-3
inhibition compared with that in T-bet may have relevant implications in
understanding and modulating the anti-inflammatory and Th-regulatory properties
of GCs.

PMID: 19124555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 2009 Feb;24(1):25-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-302X.2008.00469.x.

Factors involved in the T helper type 1 and type 2 cell commitment and osteoclast
regulation in inflammatory apical diseases.

Fukada SY(1), Silva TA, Garlet GP, Rosa AL, da Silva JS, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Periapical chronic lesion formation involves activation of the
immune response and alveolar bone resorption around the tooth apex. However, the 
overall roles of T helper type 1 (Th1), Th2, and T-regulatory cell (Treg)
responses and osteoclast regulatory factors in periapical cysts and granulomas
have not been fully determined. This study aimed to investigate whether different
forms of apical periodontitis, namely cysts and granulomas, show different
balances of Th1, Th2 regulators, Treg markers, and factors involved in osteoclast
chemotaxis and activation.
METHODS: Gene expression of these factors was assessed using quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction, in samples obtained from healthy gingiva (n 
= 8), periapical granulomas (n = 20), and cysts (n = 10).
RESULTS: Periapical cysts exhibited a greater expression of GATA-3, while a
greater expression of T-bet, Foxp3, and interleukin-10 (IL-10) was seen in
granulomas. The expression of interferon-gamma, IL-4, and transforming growth
factor-beta was similar in both lesions. Regarding osteoclastic factors, while
the expression of SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 and CCR1 was higher in cysts, the expression 
of RANKL was significantly higher in granulomas. Both lesions exhibited similar
expression of CXCR4, CKbeta8/CCL23, and osteoprotegerin, which were significantly
higher than in control.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed a predominance of osteoclast activity in
granulomas that was correlated with the Th1 response. The concomitant expression 
of Treg cell markers suggests a possible suppression of the Th1 response in
granulomas. On the other hand, in cysts the Th2 activity is augmented. The
mechanisms of periradicular lesion development are still not fully understood but
the imbalance of immune and osteoclastic cell activity in cysts and granulomas
seems to be critically regulated by Treg cells.

PMID: 19121066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS Genet. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000316. Epub 2008
Dec 26.

Gata3 acts downstream of beta-catenin signaling to prevent ectopic metanephric
kidney induction.

Grote D(1), Boualia SK, Souabni A, Merkel C, Chi X, Costantini F, Carroll T,
Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Quebec, Canada.

Metanephric kidney induction critically depends on mesenchymal-epithelial
interactions in the caudal region of the nephric (or Wolffian) duct. Central to
this process, GDNF secreted from the metanephric mesenchyme induces ureter
budding by activating the Ret receptor expressed in the nephric duct epithelium. 
A failure to regulate this pathway is believed to be responsible for a large
proportion of the developmental anomalies affecting the urogenital system. Here, 
we show that the nephric duct-specific inactivation of the transcription factor
gene Gata3 leads to massive ectopic ureter budding. This results in a spectrum of
urogenital malformations including kidney adysplasia, duplex systems, and
hydroureter, as well as vas deferens hyperplasia and uterine agenesis. The
variability of developmental defects is reminiscent of the congenital anomalies
of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) observed in human. We show that Gata3
inactivation causes premature nephric duct cell differentiation and loss of Ret
receptor gene expression. These changes ultimately affect nephric duct epithelium
homeostasis, leading to ectopic budding of interspersed cells still expressing
the Ret receptor. Importantly, the formation of these ectopic buds requires both 
GDNF/Ret and Fgf signaling activities. We further identify Gata3 as a central
mediator of beta-catenin function in the nephric duct and demonstrate that the
beta-catenin/Gata3 pathway prevents premature cell differentiation independently 
of its role in regulating Ret expression. Together, these results establish a
genetic cascade in which Gata3 acts downstream of beta-catenin, but upstream of
Ret, to prevent ectopic ureter budding and premature cell differentiation in the 
nephric duct.

PMCID: PMC2597718
PMID: 19112489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 20;284(8):4978-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807329200. Epub 2008
Dec 23.

Context-dependent function of regulatory elements and a switch in chromatin
occupancy between GATA3 and GATA2 regulate Gata2 transcription during trophoblast
differentiation.

Ray S(1), Dutta D, Rumi MA, Kent LN, Soares MJ, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology and the Division of Cancer & Developmental
Biology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

GATA transcription factors are important regulators of tissue-specific gene
expression during development. GATA2 and GATA3 have been implicated in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific genes. However, the regulatory mechanisms of
GATA2 expression in trophoblast cells are poorly understood. In this study, we
demonstrate that Gata2 is transcriptionally induced during trophoblast giant
cell-specific differentiation. Transcriptional induction is associated with
displacement of GATA3-dependent nucleoprotein complexes by GATA2-dependent
nucleoprotein complexes at two regulatory regions, the -3.9- and +9.5-kb regions,
of the mouse Gata2 locus. Analyses with reporter genes showed that, in
trophoblast cells, -3.9- and +9.5-kb regions function as transcriptional
enhancers in GATA motif independent and dependent fashions, respectively. We also
found that knockdown of GATA3 by RNA interference induces GATA2 in
undifferentiated trophoblast cells. Interestingly, three other known GATA
motif-dependent Gata2 regulatory elements, the -1.8-, -2.8-, and -77-kb regions, 
which are important to regulate Gata2 in hematopoietic cells are not occupied by 
GATA factors in trophoblast cells. These elements do not show any enhancer
activity and also possess inaccessible chromatin structure in trophoblast cells
indicating a context-dependent function. Our results indicate that GATA3 directly
represses Gata2 in undifferentiated trophoblast cells, and a switch in chromatin 
occupancy between GATA3 and GATA2 (GATA3/GATA2 switch) induces transcription
during trophoblast differentiation. We predict that this GATA3/GATA2 switch is an
important mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of other
trophoblast-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2643515
PMID: 19106099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20100-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806501105. Epub 2008 Dec 22.

A gene regulatory network armature for T lymphocyte specification.

Georgescu C(1), Longabaugh WJ, Scripture-Adams DD, David-Fung ES, Yui MA,
Zarnegar MA, Bolouri H, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Choice of a T lymphoid fate by hematopoietic progenitor cells depends on
sustained Notch-Delta signaling combined with tightly regulated activities of
multiple transcription factors. To dissect the regulatory network connections
that mediate this process, we have used high-resolution analysis of regulatory
gene expression trajectories from the beginning to the end of specification,
tests of the short-term Notch dependence of these gene expression changes, and
analyses of the effects of overexpression of two essential transcription factors,
namely PU.1 and GATA-3. Quantitative expression measurements of >50 transcription
factor and marker genes have been used to derive the principal components of
regulatory change through which T cell precursors progress from primitive
multipotency to T lineage commitment. Our analyses reveal separate contributions 
of Notch signaling, GATA-3 activity, and down-regulation of PU.1. Using
BioTapestry (www.BioTapestry.org), the results have been assembled into a draft
gene regulatory network for the specification of T cell precursors and the choice
of T as opposed to myeloid/dendritic or mast-cell fates. This network also
accommodates effects of E proteins and mutual repression circuits of Gfi1 against
Egr-2 and of TCF-1 against PU.1 as proposed elsewhere, but requires additional
functions that remain unidentified. Distinctive features of this network
structure include the intense dose dependence of GATA-3 effects, the
gene-specific modulation of PU.1 activity based on Notch activity, the lack of
direct opposition between PU.1 and GATA-3, and the need for a distinct,
late-acting repressive function or functions to extinguish stem and
progenitor-derived regulatory gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2629331
PMID: 19104054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Mar;33(3):347-53. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181908e24.

Expression of the urothelial differentiation markers GATA3 and placental S100
(S100P) in female genital tract transitional cell proliferations.

Esheba GE(1), Longacre TA, Atkins KA, Higgins JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The degree of urothelial differentiation in putative transitional (urothelial)
proliferations in the female genital tract is still controversial. To further
investigate the similarities (or dissimilarities) between female genital tract
transitional proliferations and bladder urothelium, we evaluated the expression
of S100P and GATA3, 2 proteins that we previously found to be strongly expressed 
in bladder urothelial tumors, in 25 benign ovarian Brenner tumors, 19 Walthard
cell nests (17 tubal and 2 ovarian hilus), 1 mature teratoma with a benign
urothelial proliferation, 2 proliferating (borderline) ovarian Brenner tumors, 1 
malignant Brenner tumor, and 12 ovarian transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). Each 
lesion was also evaluated for p63 expression by immunohistochemistry.
Immunostaining was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections
using the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method. Eighty-eight percent of
Brenner tumors were positive for S100P, whereas 96% and 100% were positive for
GATA3 and p63, respectively. One of 2 proliferating Brenner tumors was positive
for S100P, whereas both cases were positive for GATA3 and p63; the malignant
Brenner tumor was positive for S100P and p63, but negative for GATA3. Only 17% of
TCC were positive for S100p, whereas 33% and 50% of TCC were positive for GATA3
and p63, respectively. Tubal Walthard cell nests were either completely negative 
or showed only scattered positive staining for S100P; in contrast, 89.5% and 100%
of Walthard nests, including the 2 ovarian cases were positive for GATA3 and p63.
The teratoma-associated benign urothelial proliferation was also negative for
S100P, but positive for GATA3 and p63. Although proliferating and malignant
Brenner tumors may exhibit a more intermediate immunoprofile, expression of
S100P, GATA3, and p63 by a majority of ovarian Brenner tumors underscores the
similarity between these neoplasms and urothelial proliferations of bladder
origin. The indeterminate phenotype seen in Walthard nests and ovarian TCC
suggests that these proliferations may represent an incomplete or alternate form 
of differentiation.

PMID: 19092634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Development. 2009 Jan;136(2):253-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.029900. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Gata2 is a tissue-specific post-mitotic selector gene for midbrain GABAergic
neurons.

Kala K(1), Haugas M, Lilleväli K, Guimera J, Wurst W, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Midbrain GABAergic neurons control several aspects of behavior, but regulation of
their development and diversity is poorly understood. Here, we further refine the
midbrain regions active in GABAergic neurogenesis and show their correlation with
the expression of the transcription factor Gata2. Using tissue-specific
inactivation and ectopic expression, we show that Gata2 regulates GABAergic
neuron development in the mouse midbrain, but not in rhombomere 1, where it is
needed in the serotonergic lineage. Without Gata2, all the precursors in the
embryonic midbrain fail to activate GABAergic neuron-specific gene expression and
instead switch to a glutamatergic phenotype. Surprisingly, this fate switch is
also observed throughout the neonatal midbrain, except for the GABAergic neurons 
located in the ventral dopaminergic nuclei, suggesting a distinct developmental
pathway for these neurons. These studies identify Gata2 as an essential
post-mitotic selector gene of the GABAergic neurotransmitter identity and
demonstrate developmental heterogeneity of GABAergic neurons in the midbrain.

PMID: 19088086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hum Pathol. 2009 Apr;40(4):489-95. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.09.010. Epub 2008 
Dec 11.

The significance of GATA3 expression in breast cancer: a 10-year follow-up study.

Ciocca V(1), Daskalakis C, Ciocca RM, Ruiz-Orrico A, Palazzo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia,
PA 19107, USA.

GATA3 is a transcription factor closely associated with estrogen receptor alpha
in breast carcinoma, with a potential prognostic utility. This study investigated
the immunohistochemical expression of GATA3 in estrogen receptor alpha-positive
and estrogen receptor alpha-negative breast carcinomas. One hundred sixty-six
cases of invasive breast carcinomas with 10-year follow-up information were
analyzed. Positive GATA3 and estrogen receptor alpha cases were defined as
greater than 20% of cells staining. Time to cancer recurrence and time to death
were analyzed with survival methods. Of 166 patients, 40 were estrogen receptor
alpha negative and 121 estrogen receptor alpha positive. Thirty-eight (23%)
recurrences and 51 (31%) deaths were observed. In final multivariable analyses,
GATA3-positive tumors had about two thirds the recurrence risk of GATA3-negative 
tumors (hazard ratio = 0.65, P = .395) and comparable mortality risk (hazard
ratio = 0.86, P = .730). In prespecified subgroup analyses, the protective effect
of GATA3 expression was most pronounced among estrogen receptor alpha-positive
patients who received tamoxifen (hazard ratio = 0.57 for recurrence and 0.68 for 
death). We found no statistically significant differences in recurrence or
survival rates between GATA3-positive and GATA3-negative tumors. However, there
was a suggestion of a modest-to-strong protective effect of GATA3 expression
among estrogen receptor alpha-positive patients receiving hormone therapy.

PMID: 19084267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Sep;117(2):371-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0257-1.
Epub 2008 Dec 11.

No evidence that GATA3 rs570613 SNP modifies breast cancer risk.

Johnatty SE(1), Couch FJ, Fredericksen Z, Tarrell R, Spurdle AB, Beesley J, Chen 
X; kConFab Investigators; AOCS Group; Swedish BRCA1 and BRCA2 Study
Collaborators, Gschwantler-Kaulich D, Singer CF, Fuerhauser C, Fink-Retter A,
Domchek SM, Nathanson KL, Pankratz VS, Lindor NM, Godwin AK, Caligo MA, Hopper J,
Southey MC, Giles GG, Justenhoven C, Brauch H, Hamann U, Ko YD, Heikkinen T,
Aaltonen K, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Nevanlinna H, Hall P, Czene K, Liu J, Peock
S, Cook M, Platte R, Gareth Evans D, Lalloo F, Eeles R, Pichert G, Eccles D,
Davidson R, Cole T, Cook J, Douglas F, Chu C, Hodgson S, Paterson J, Hogervorst
FB, Rookus MA, Seynaeve C, Wijnen J, Vreeswijk M, Ligtenberg M, van der Luijt RB,
van Os TA, Gille HJ, Blok MJ; HEBON, Issacs C, Humphreys MK, McGuffog L, Healey
S, Sinilnikova O, Antoniou AC, Easton DF, Chenevix-Trench G; Breast Cancer
Association Consortium and Consortium of Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2.

Collaborators: Peock S, Cook M, Haites N, Gregory H, Morrison P, Cole T, McKeown 
C, Burgess L, Donaldson A, Paterson J, Murray A, Rogers M, McCann E, Kennedy J,
Daly P, Barton D, Porteous M, Steel M, Brewer C, Rankin J, Davidson R, Murday V, 
Bradshaw N, Watt C, Snadden L, Longmuir M, Izatt L, Pichert G, Langman C, Dorkins
H, Barwell J, Bishop T, Chu C, Ellis I, Evans G, Lalloo F, Shenton A, Male A,
Robinson A, Gardiner C, Douglas F, Burn J, Side L, Walker L, Durell S, Eeles R,
Shanley S, Rahman N, Houlston R, Bancroft E, D'Mello L, Ardern-Jones A, Cook J,
Quarrell O, Hodgson S, Goff S, Eccles D, Lucassen A, Karlsson P, Nordling M,
Bergman A, Einbeigi Z, Stenmark-Askmalm M, Liedgren S, Borg A, Loman N, Olsson H,
Kristoffersson U, Jernstrom H, Backenhorn K, Lindblom A, Arver B, von Wachenfeldt
A, Liljegren A, Barbany-Bustinza G, Rantala J, Gronberg H, Stattin EL,
Emanuelsson M, Bostrom H, Rosenquist Brandell R, Dahl N, Hogervorst F, Pijpe A,
Verhoef S, van Leeuwen F, van 't Veer L, Rookus M, van den Ouweland A, Schutte M,
Collée M, Jager A, Hooning M, Seynaeve C, Wijnen J, van Asperen C, Devilee P,
Ligtenberg M, Hoogerbrugge N, van der Luijt R, Ausems M, Aalfs C, van Os T, Gille
H, Meijers-Heijboer H, Blok R, Gomez-Garcia E.

GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a transcription factor that is crucial to
mammary gland morphogenesis and differentiation of progenitor cells, and has been
suggested to have a tumor suppressor function. The rs570613 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in intron 4 of GATA3 was previously found to be associated
with a reduction in breast cancer risk in the Cancer Genetic Markers of
Susceptibility project and in pooled analysis of two case-control studies from
Norway and Poland (P (trend) = 0.004), with some evidence for a stronger
association with estrogen receptor (ER) negative tumours [Garcia-Closas M et al. 
(2007) Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16:2269-2275]. We genotyped GATA3
rs570613 in 6,388 cases and 4,995 controls from the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium (BCAC) and 5,617 BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers from the Consortium of
Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA). We found no association between
this SNP and breast cancer risk in BCAC cases overall (OR(per-allele) = 1.00, 95%
CI 0.94-1.05), in ER negative BCAC cases (OR(per-allele) = 1.02, 95% CI
0.91-1.13), in BRCA1 mutation carriers RR(per-allele) = 0.99, 95% CI 0.90-1.09)
or BRCA2 mutation carriers (RR(per-allele) = 0.93, 95% CI 0.80-1.07). We conclude
that there is no evidence that either GATA3 rs570613, or any variant in strong
linkage disequilibrium with it, is associated with breast cancer risk in women.

PMCID: PMC2728174
PMID: 19082709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Nov 20;121(22):2346-9.

Inhibition of interleukin-13 gene expression in T cells through GATA-3 pathway by
arsenic trioxide.

Yao X(1), He HY, Yang Y, Dai SL, Sun PL, Yin KS, Huang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

PMID: 19080345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Nov 18;88(42):2999-3002.

[Effects of acute and chronic murine cytomegalovirus infections on the ratio of
regulatory T cells and expression of Th1/Th2 transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YN(1), Zhou YF, Shu SN, Zhu DD, Yang ZF, Fang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of acute and chronic murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV) infections on the regulatory T cells (Treg) ratio and protein expression
of the Th1/Th2 transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3.
METHODS: 120 BALB/c mice were randomly divided into 2 equal groups: MCMV-infected
group undergoing infra-peritoneal injection of homogenate of salivary gland
containing MCMV, and mock infection group undergoing infra-peritoneal injection
of normal homogenate of salivary gland 1, 3, 7, 14, 28, 45, 60, 75, 90, and 120
days after infection 6 mice from each group were killed to examine the viral load
of the heart, lung, liver, and kidney by plaque assay to access the status of
MCMV infection. Suspension of splenocytes was prepared. The proportion of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Treg in the splenocytes was measured by flow cytometry. Western
blotting was used to detect the protein expression of T-bet/GATA-3.
RESULTS: The cutoff point between acute and chronic points was the 28th day. The 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Treg proportion in splenocytes significantly decreased during the 
acute infection stage and to the lowest level of (1.46+/-0.27)% at day 28,
significantly lower than that of the mock infection group [(2.78+/-0.29)%,
P<0.05]; then obviously increased in the chronic infection stage, increased to
(4.51+/-0.24)% at day 60, significantly higher than that of the mock infection
group [(2.69+/-0.12)%, P<0.05], and continued to increase still. The protein
level (K value) of T-bet of the MCMV infection group peaked to the level of
(0.618+/-0.053) on day 3, obviously higher than that of the mock infected group
[(0.205+/-0.026)], then decreased to the level similar to that of the mock
infection group on day 28, and was obviously lower than that of the mock
infection group on day 75. Whereas the protein level of GATA-3 of the MCMV group 
increased to (0.836+/-0.061) on day 3, markedly higher than that of the mock
infection group (0.398+/-0.022), peaked on day 7, then gradually decreased, and
remained at the levels similar to those of the mock infection group from day 75
to day 120.
CONCLUSION: In the acute infection stage, MCMV up-regulates the T-bet and GATA-3 
protein expression. But during the chronic infection stage, MCMV induces a marked
proliferation and activation of Treg cells which further inhibit the Th1 and Th2 
reactions, especially Th1 response. Treg proliferation may be an important
mechanism of chronic and persistent CMV infection in the host.

PMID: 19080080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;87(2):109-12. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.100. Epub 2008
Dec 16.

Decision by committee: new light on the CD4/CD8-lineage choice.

Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, CIT, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. evroth@its.caltech.edu

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1122-30.
    Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1131-9.
    Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1113-21.

PMID: 19079359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Br J Haematol. 2009 Mar;144(5):755-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07520.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 5.

Interleukin 18 and interleukin 18 binding protein in patients with idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura.

Shan NN(1), Zhu XJ, Peng J, Qin P, Zhuang XW, Wang HC, Hou M.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

To evaluate the balance of interleukin IL18 and its endogenous antagonist IL18
binding protein (IL18BP) in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
(ITP), plasma IL18, IL18BP, interferon gamma (IFNG) and IL4 levels, as well as
platelet counts were measured in patients with active ITP (n = 23), ITP in
remission (n = 21) and in healthy subjects (n = 24) by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Using real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, the mRNA expression of IL18, IL18BP, IFNG, IL4, T-box (TBX21) and
GATA-binding protein 3(GATA3) were studied in all subjects. The results showed
that IL18 and IFNG protein and mRNA levels were significantly increased in
patients with active ITP than in control subjects, but that IL18BP were not
significantly elevated in ITP patients, which resulted in an elevated ratio of
IL18/IL18BP in patients with active disease. During remission stages, the levels 
of these cytokines were comparable to those of healthy controls. The elevated
levels of IL18/IL18BP in plasma during active stages of disease suggest a
possible role in the pathogenesis and course of ITP.

PMID: 19077159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Stroke. 2009 Mar;40(3 Suppl):S34-7. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.534917. Epub 2008 
Dec 8.

Inflammation and the emerging role of the toll-like receptor system in acute
brain ischemia.

Marsh BJ(1), Stevens SL, Hunter B, Stenzel-Poore MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, L220, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Systemic administration of cytosine-guanine (CpG)
oligodeoxynucleotides provides neuroprotection against subsequent cerebral
ischemic injury. We examined the genomic response of leukocytes and brain cells
after ischemia in the context of CpG preconditioning.
METHODS: RNA was isolated from circulating leukocytes and ischemic cortex 3 and
24 hours after middle cerebral artery occlusion after CpG or saline pretreatment 
and subjected to microarray analysis. Genes uniquely upregulated in
CpG-pretreated mice were examined for overrepresented transcriptional regulatory 
elements.
RESULTS: CpG preconditioning induced a novel response to middle cerebral artery
occlusion within circulating leukocytes that was dominated by natural killer
cell-associated genes and the GATA-3 transcriptional regulatory element.
Preconditioning also caused a novel brain response to stroke that was dominated
by Type I interferon, interferon-associated genes, and transcriptional regulatory
elements.
CONCLUSIONS: CpG preconditioning invokes novel leukocyte and brain responses to
stroke. In this, CpG may be a unique preconditioning agent, coordinating
peripheral and brain responses to protect against ischemic injury.

PMCID: PMC2729591
PMID: 19064776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Mar;9(3):261-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.10.021. Epub
2008 Dec 4.

Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 balance in a murine model of asthma.

Park HJ(1), Lee CM, Jung ID, Lee JS, Jeong YI, Chang JH, Chun SH, Kim MJ, Choi
IW, Ahn SC, Shin YK, Yeom SR, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University College of Medicine, Busan
602-739, South Korea.

Quercetin is found to be the most active of the flavonoids in studies and many
medicinal plants owe much of their activity to their high Quercetin content.
Quercetin has demonstrated significant anti-inflammatory activity because of
direct inhibition of several initial processes of inflammation. However, its
anti-allergic effect in the Th1/Th2 immune response was poorly understood.
Recently, it was shown that T-bet and GATA-3 were master Th1 and Th2 regulatory
transcription factors. In this study, we have attempted to determine whether
Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine production, T-bet and GATA-3 gene expression
in OVA-induced asthma model mice. Quercetin reduced the increased levels of IL-4,
Th2 cytokine production in OVA-sensitized and -challenged mice. The other side,
it increased IFN-gamma, Th1 cytokine production in Quercetin administrated mice. 
We also examined to ascertain whether Quercetin could influence Eosinophil
peroxidase (EPO) activity. The administration of Quercetin before the last airway
OVA challenge resulted in a significant inhibition of all asthmatic reactions.
Accordingly, this study may provide evidence that Quercetin plays a critical role
in the amelioration of the pathogenetic process of asthma in mice. These findings
provide new insight into the immunopharmacological role of Quercetin in terms of 
its effects in a murine model of asthma, and also broaden current perspectives in
our understanding of the immunopharmacological functions of Quercetin.

PMID: 19061976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Surg Res. 2009 Dec;157(2):290-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.07.015. Epub 2008 Aug 
26.

GATA-3 as a marker of hormone response in breast cancer.

Fang SH(1), Chen Y, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

GATA-3 is a transcription factor that orchestrates gene expression profiles
during embryogenesis of a variety of human tissues, including hematopoietic
cells, skin, kidney, mammary gland, and the central nervous system. Among several
other roles, GATA-3 has recently been identified as a key player of luminal cell 
differentiation in the mammary gland. The majority of breast cancers arise from
luminal epithelial cells and hence GATA-3 appears to control a set of genes
involved in the differentiation and proliferation of breast cancer. The
expression of GATA-3 has a strong association with the expression of estrogen
receptor-alpha (ER) in breast cancer, and there is mounting evidence that GATA-3 
can be used as a clinical marker to determine response to hormonal therapy and to
refine the prognosis of breast cancer patients. Here, we review the literature
from the past 10 y on GATA-3 in normal and pathological states of the mammary
gland. Conclusions from the literature are confirmed using meta-analyses
performed by the Oncomine Research Platform.

PMID: 19059610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Bone Miner Metab. 2009;27(3):386-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-008-0015-9. Epub 2008
Dec 5.

A novel mutation in the GATA3 gene of a Japanese patient with PTH-deficient
hypoparathyroidism.

Saito T(1), Fukumoto S, Ito N, Suzuki H, Igarashi T, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Hypoparathyroidism is a disease characterized by hypocalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia derived from deficient actions of parathyroid hormone (PTH). We
report the case of 43-year-old Japanese man with PTH-deficient hypoparathyroidism
introduced to an endocrinologist in our hospital. As he had complained of hearing
disturbance since the age of 20, we decided to investigate the GATA3 gene. Direct
sequencing of PCR products identified a novel heterozygous mutation, 432insG, in 
the GATA3 gene. The mutation introduces a premature stop codon at exon 4 (K302X),
which results in a loss of both zinc finger domains of the GATA3 protein.
However, because the mutation in the GATA3 gene found in this patient is highly
likely to impair GATA3 function, we speculate that it is extremely unlikely that 
this patient has mutations in other genes that cause PTH-deficient
hypoparathyroidism, in addition to the GATA3 mutation described here.

PMID: 19057839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):3037-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807302200. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Transcriptional regulation of GATA3 in T helper cells by the integrated
activities of transcription factors downstream of the interleukin-4 receptor and 
T cell receptor.

Scheinman EJ(1), Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

GATA3 is a critical transcription factor for many developmental processes. During
T helper (Th) cell differentiation, GATA3 induces the Th2 and suppresses the Th1 
pathway. Stimulation of the T cell receptor (TCR) of naive Th cells in the
presence of interleukin 4 (IL-4) induces robust expression of GATA3; however, it 
is unclear where these signals integrate. Gata3 encodes two transcripts that
differ in their alternative, untranslated first exons. We show here the
involvement of the TCR-inducible transcription factor NFAT1 in the
transcriptional regulation of both Gata3 transcripts following TCR stimulation of
naive and differentiated Th2 cells. We also show that IL-4 is important for the
initiation and establishment of Gata3 transcription in developing Th2 cells,
especially from the distal promoter. The early function of IL-4 can be STAT6
dependent or independent. However, the establishment of the activity of the
distal promoter is totally dependent on STAT6, whereas it is likely that the
proximal promoter has additional activation mechanisms that are STAT6
independent. Our findings suggest that different combinations of transcription
factors downstream of the IL-4 receptor (IL-4R) and TCR finely modulate Gata3
gene expression from its two promoters for optimal Th2 differentiation.

PMID: 19056736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8700-10.

T-bet and eomesodermin play critical roles in directing T cell differentiation to
Th1 versus Th17.

Yang Y(1), Xu J, Niu Y, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

Th1 and Th17 cells are crucial in immune regulation and autoimmune disease
development. By adding Stat6 deficiency to T-bet deficiency, and thus negating
effects from elevated levels of IL-4/Stat6/GATA3 Th2 signals in T-bet-deficient
cells, we investigated the signals important for Th1 and Th17 cell
differentiation and their role in colitis development. The data reveal that
Eomesodermin compensates T-bet deficiency for IFN-gamma and Th1 development.
However, without T-bet, IFN-gamma production and Th1 differentiation are
susceptible to inhibition by IL-6 and TGFbeta. As a result, Th17 development is
strongly favored, the threshold for TGFbeta requirement is lowered, and IL-6
drives Th17 differentiation, elucidating a critical role for T-bet in directing T
cell differentiation to Th1 vs Th17. In contrast to IL-6 plus TGFbeta-driven
Th17, IL-6-driven Th17 cells do not express IL-10 and they induce a more intense 
colitis. Naive CD4 T cells deficient in Stat6 and T-bet also induce a
Th17-dominant colitis development in vivo. Our data provide new insights into the
choice between Th1 and Th17 development and their roles in autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2834216
PMID: 19050290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3520-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-171942. Epub 2008
Dec 1.

Viperin is required for optimal Th2 responses and T-cell receptor-mediated
activation of NF-kappaB and AP-1.

Qiu LQ(1), Cresswell P, Chin KC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Inflammation, Singapore Immunology Network, 
Biomedical Sciences Institutes, Singapore.

Viperin (virus inhibitory protein, endoplasmic reticulum [ER]-associated,
interferon-inducible) has been identified as a highly inducible ER protein that
has antiviral activity. Here, we characterized the phenotype of mice deficient in
viperin and examined the biological function of viperin in peripheral T-cell
activation and differentiation. Splenic CD4(+) T cells deficient in viperin
exhibited normal anti-T-cell receptor (TCR)-induced proliferation and IL-2
production, but produced significantly less T helper 2 (Th2) cytokines, including
IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, in association with impaired GATA3 activation, after
stimulation with anti-CD3 antibody, which was not restored upon costimulation
with anti-CD28. Th2 differentiation of viperin-deficient naive T cells was also
impaired in the presence of strong TCR signaling and minimum IL-4, but not under 
optimal Th2-skewed conditions. In parallel, viperin-deficient T cells showed
decreases in NF-kappaB1/p50 and AP-1/JunB DNA binding activities after TCR
engagement. Thus, viperin facilitates TCR-mediated GATA-3 activation and optimal 
Th2 cytokine production by modulating NF-kappaB and AP-1 activities.

PMID: 19047684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Immunol Lett. 2009 Jan 29;122(1):37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2008.11.001. Epub
2008 Nov 29.

IL4 blockade of inducible regulatory T cell differentiation: the role of Th2
cells, Gata3 and PU.1.

Hadjur S(1), Bruno L, Hertweck A, Cobb BS, Taylor B, Fisher AG, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Naive CD4 T cells differentiate into functionally distinct T helper (Th) cells
subsets or into regulatory T (Treg) cells in response to the cytokine milieu in
which they encounter antigen. A recurring theme in post-thymic CD4 T cell
differentiation is the cross-regulation of lineage choice by cytokines and
transcription factors that are expressed in alternative lineages. For example,
TGFbeta induces the de novo expression of the Treg cell signature transcription
factor Foxp3, but iTreg differentiation is blocked by high concentrations of the 
Th2 cytokine IL4. However, whether IL4 can antagonise Foxp3 induction in more
physiological settings remains to be addressed. Here we use a co-culture system
to demonstrate that IL4 provided by Th2 cells in vitro is sufficient to block
Foxp3 induction in naive CD4 T cells. In addition, we find that Foxp3 induction
is efficiently blocked not only by the Th2 transcription factor Gata3, but also
by PU.1, which is transiently induced during Th2 differentiation. These data
suggest that iTreg differentiation may be affected by the polarity of immune
responses.

PMID: 19046990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biogerontology. 2009 Oct;10(5):593-604. doi: 10.1007/s10522-008-9201-3. Epub 2008
Nov 30.

Zinc improves the development of human CD34+ cell progenitors towards NK cells
and increases the expression of GATA-3 transcription factor in young and old
ages.

Muzzioli M(1), Stecconi R, Moresi R, Provinciali M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Center, Gerontol Res Department, INRCA, Ancona, Italy.

Aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of zinc on the kinetic of
development of CD34(+) cell progenitors towards NK cells in young and old ages.
CD34(+) cells were purified from peripheral blood of healthy subjects and
cultured in medium supplemented with interleukin-15, interleukin-7, Flt 3 ligand,
and stem cell factor. The number of cells developed in culture was significantly 
lower in old than in young subjects. CD34(+) cells progressively lost CD34
antigen with a faster kinetics in old than in young donors. The percentage of
primitive double positive CD34(+)CD133(+) cells inside the purified CD34(+) cells
was greatly lower in old than in young subjects. These cells progressively
decreased in cultures from young subjects whereas they remained at very low
levels in old donors. Cells developed in culture acquired a NK phenotype mainly
characterized by CD56(+)CD16(-) cells in young subjects and CD56(-)CD16(+) cells 
in old donors. These NK cells exerted a lower cytotoxic activity in old than in
young subjects. The supplementation with zinc greatly increased the number of
cells in culture and the percentage and the cytotoxic activity of NK cells both
in young and old ages. In zinc supplemented cultures, a 3.6-fold and a 4.1-fold
increased expression of GATA-3 transcription factor was observed in young and old
donors, respectively. Our data demonstrate that zinc influences the proliferation
and differentiation of CD34(+) progenitors both in young and old ages.

PMID: 19043799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Jan;123(1):82-88.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.09.047. Epub 2008 Nov 28.

HLX1 gene variants influence the development of childhood asthma.

Suttner K(1), Ruoss I, Rosenstiel P, Depner M, Pinto LA, Schedel M, Adamski J,
Illig T, Schreiber S, von Mutius E, Kabesch M.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Major transcription factors controlling T(H)1 and T(H)2 development, 
such as T-box transcription factor and GATA3, might be centrally involved in
asthma and atopic diseases. Only recently, the homeobox transcription factor
H.20-like homeobox 1 (HLX1), interacting closely with T-box transcription factor,
has been identified as an important regulator of T(H)1 differentiation and
suppressor of T(H)2 commitment.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether genetic variations in the HLX1 gene exist and 
whether these could affect the development of childhood asthma.
METHODS: The HLX1 gene was resequenced in 80 chromosomes. Associations between
identified polymorphisms, asthma, and atopic diseases were investigated in German
children (total n = 3099) from the cross-sectional International Study of Asthma 
and Allergy in Childhood phase II. Functional properties of polymorphisms were
studied by using luciferase reporter gene assays and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays in T cells. All statistical analyses were performed with
SAS/Genetics software (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, NC).
RESULTS: Nineteen polymorphisms were identified in the HLX1 gene, and 2 tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms representing 7 polymorphisms were associated with
childhood asthma in our study population. Two promoter polymorphisms, C-1407T and
C-742G, contained in 1 tagging block were associated with asthma (odds ratio,
1.44; 95% CI, 1.11-1.86; P = .0061), significantly decrease promoter
transactivation, and disrupt specificity protein-transcription factor binding in 
in vitro experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that polymorphisms in the HLX1 gene increase the
risk for childhood asthma. On the cellular level, altered binding of specificity 
protein-transcription factors to the HLX1 promoter and subsequent changes in HLX1
gene expression might contribute to these effects.

PMID: 19038437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Exp Mol Pathol. 2009 Feb;86(1):74-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2008.10.003. Epub 2008 
Oct 31.

10p12.1 deletion: HDR phenotype without DGS2 features.

Benetti E(1), Murer L, Bordugo A, Andreetta B, Artifoni L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Padua, Via Giustiniani, 3, 35128 Padua, Italy.
elisabene@libero.it

GATA3 gene encodes a transcription factor expressed during thymus, liver, kidney,
adrenal gland, central and peripheral nervous systems, placenta and T lymphocytes
embryonic development. Mutations of GATA3 cause Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
Deafness and Renal dysplasia syndrome (HDR). We report the case of a girl with a 
terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p12.1-pter), including
both HDR locus and the DiGeorge critical region 2 (DGCR2), with HDR phenotype but
not DiGeorge syndrome 2 features. The girl developed chronic renal failure during
the first year of life, associated with sensorineural hearing loss, facial
dysmorphic features and psychomotor development. She had hypodysplastic kidneys
and bilateral grade 3-vesicoureteric reflux. Her karyotype was
46,XX,del(10)(p12.1-pter). Quantitative analysis by Real Time PCR on blood DNA
confirmed the lack of one copy of GATA3 gene. She underwent renal transplantation
at the age of 11. Our patient is the first case with a large deletion of the
short arm of chromosome 10 - that certainly involves DGCR2 - with the HDR
phenotype but without the clinical features of DGS2. This peculiarity suggests
the hypothesis that the mechanisms underlying this syndrome may be more complex. 
It is therefore possible that DGS2 may be determined by locus heterogeneity.

PMID: 19022243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Carcinog. 2008;7:6.

Does GATA3 act in tissue-specific pathways? A meta-analysis-based approach.

Wilson BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Metabolism, McGill Cancer Centre, Room 715, 3655 Sir
William Osler, Montréal, Québec, H3G 1Y6, Canada. Brian J.
Wilson-brian.wilson2@mcgill.ca.

The GATA3 transcription factor is expressed in many tissues such as the immune
system, kidney, brain, endometrium, and mammary epithelial cells. As such it must
co-ordinate a diverse transcriptional program to achieve specific outcomes in
different tissues. One of the most interesting questions raised is whether GATA3 
will be involved in the same pathways in every tissue or will be involved in
distinct regulatory networks within different tissue types? While previous
studies may imply the latter, with some known targets of GATA3 perhaps being
specific to cell-type or tissue-type, the question has not been systematically
addressed until now. With the advent of techniques such as co-expression
meta-analysis a better understanding of the pathway partners of GATA3 can be
obtained and specifically the partners within different tissue types can be
found, yielding leads for future studies. Here, a recent technique of
meta-analysis from the Oncomine database has been employed to probe this very
question. Data obtained implies that GATA3 is involved in distinct pathways in
different tissue types.

PMCID: PMC2669725
PMID: 19008565  [PubMed]


345. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2008 Aug;33(15):1865-8.

[Effect of nebulized TFG on Th1/Th2 imbalance in mouse model with asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LL(1), Weng XJ, Li X, Zhang HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Pharmaceutical Institute of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225001, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of nebulized total ginkgo flavone glycosides
(TFG) on Th1/Th2 imbalance in mice with athma.
METHOD: Forty-eight BALB/C mice were randomly divided into four groups: group A
(control group, n=12); group B (asthmatic model group, n=12); group C (TFG
nebulized treated group, n=12); group D (dexamethasone intraperitoneal treated
group, n=12). The asthmatic model was established by sensitivity and local
activation with Ovalbumin(OVA) and aluminum hydroxide Al(OH)3. TFG (50 g x L(-1),
per aerosol per six mice, 30 minutes) was nebulized 20 days after modeling, while
dexamethasone (1 g x L(-1)) was intraperitoneal once daily for 10 days. Perfusate
of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid(BALF) was collected on day 32. The level of IL-4,
IFN-gamma in BALF, and the level of total IgE in serum was determined. The airway
inflammation pathology change and the expression of GATA-3 protein in lungs was
detected by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULT: Compared with model group, the decreased content of IL-4(49.30 +/- 7.95) 
ng x L(-1) and increased level of IFN-gamma (49.08 x 5.46) ng x L(-1). were found
in BALF, and the level of total IgE (9.47 +/- 1.52) microg x L(-1) in serum also 
decreased in TFG treated group. In model group, smooth muscle hypertrophing,
mucous hyperemia, mucous layer thickening, and inflammatory cell in filtration
were observed. Phlegmasia was appeared in the bronchi, which was filled with lots
of mucus. In contrast, the inflammatory reaction in TFG and Dexamethasone treated
group was less obvious. Expression of GATA-3 was markly increased in model group 
with decreased expression in TFG treated group.
CONCLUSION: Nebulized TFG showed a therapeutic effect for asthmatic mice, the
mechanism may be explained by blockingnnnn GATA-3 expression and regulating the
disorder Th1/Th2 imbalance.

PMID: 19007018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2763-79. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081398. Epub 2008 Nov 
10.

Tim-3 expression defines a novel population of dysfunctional T cells with highly 
elevated frequencies in progressive HIV-1 infection.

Jones RB(1), Ndhlovu LC, Barbour JD, Sheth PM, Jha AR, Long BR, Wong JC,
Satkunarajah M, Schweneker M, Chapman JM, Gyenes G, Vali B, Hyrcza MD, Yue FY,
Kovacs C, Sassi A, Loutfy M, Halpenny R, Persad D, Spotts G, Hecht FM, Chun TW,
McCune JM, Kaul R, Rini JM, Nixon DF, Ostrowski MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
brad.jones@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2699-701.

Progressive loss of T cell functionality is a hallmark of chronic infection with 
human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1). We have identified a novel population of 
dysfunctional T cells marked by surface expression of the glycoprotein Tim-3. The
frequency of this population was increased in HIV-1-infected individuals to a
mean of 49.4 +/- SD 12.9% of CD8(+) T cells expressing Tim-3 in HIV-1-infected
chronic progressors versus 28.5 +/- 6.8% in HIV-1-uninfected individuals. Levels 
of Tim-3 expression on T cells from HIV-1-infected inviduals correlated
positively with HIV-1 viral load and CD38 expression and inversely with CD4(+) T 
cell count. In progressive HIV-1 infection, Tim-3 expression was up-regulated on 
HIV-1-specific CD8(+) T cells. Tim-3-expressing T cells failed to produce
cytokine or proliferate in response to antigen and exhibited impaired Stat5,
Erk1/2, and p38 signaling. Blocking the Tim-3 signaling pathway restored
proliferation and enhanced cytokine production in HIV-1-specific T cells. Thus,
Tim-3 represents a novel target for the therapeutic reversal of HIV-1-associated 
T cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2585847
PMID: 19001139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nat Immunol. 2008 Dec;9(12):1347-55. doi: 10.1038/ni.1677. Epub 2008 Nov 9.

IL-4 inhibits TGF-beta-induced Foxp3+ T cells and, together with TGF-beta,
generates IL-9+ IL-10+ Foxp3(-) effector T cells.

Dardalhon V(1), Awasthi A, Kwon H, Galileos G, Gao W, Sobel RA, Mitsdoerffer M,
Strom TB, Elyaman W, Ho IC, Khoury S, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 May;10(5):551.

Transcription factor Foxp3 is critical for generating regulatory T cells (T(reg) 
cells). Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) induces Foxp3 and suppressive 
T(reg) cells from naive T cells, whereas interleukin 6 (IL-6) inhibits the
generation of inducible T(reg) cells. Here we show that IL-4 blocked the
generation of TGF-beta-induced Foxp3(+) T(reg) cells and instead induced a
population of T helper cells that produced IL-9 and IL-10. The IL-9(+)IL-10(+) T 
cells demonstrated no regulatory properties despite producing abundant IL-10.
Adoptive transfer of IL-9(+)IL-10(+) T cells into recombination-activating gene
1-deficient mice induced colitis and peripheral neuritis, the severity of which
was aggravated if the IL-9(+)IL-10(+) T cells were transferred with CD45RB(hi)
CD4(+) effector T cells. Thus IL-9(+)IL-10(+) T cells lack suppressive function
and constitute a distinct population of helper-effector T cells that promote
tissue inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2999006
PMID: 18997793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Feb;9(2):94-108. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.10.002. Epub
2008 Nov 1.

Expression profile of differentiating serotonin neurons derived from rhesus
embryonic stem cells and comparison to adult serotonin neurons.

Bethea CL(1), Reddy AP, Pedersen D, Tokuyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Oregon National Primate Research Center,
Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. betheac@ohsu.edu

The rhesus monkey embryonic stem cell line 366.4 differentiates into serotonin
neurons. We examined the genetic cascade during differentiation and compared
ESC-derived serotonin neurons to adult monkey serotonin neurons. RNA was
extracted from ESC colonies, embryoid bodies (EBs), neurospheres in selection
(N1) and proliferation stages (N2), differentiated serotonin neurons (N3) and
from laser captured (LC) serotonin neurons of spayed female macaques treated with
placebo, estrogen (E), progesterone (P) or E+P. The RNA was labeled and
hybridized to Rhesus Monkey Affymetrix Gene Chips (n=1 per stage and 2 per animal
treatment). Gene expression was examined with GeneSifter software. 545 genes that
were related to developmental processes showed a threefold or greater change
between stages. TGFb, Wnt, VEGF and Hedgehog signaling pathways showed the
highest percent of probe set changes during differentiation. Genes in the
categories (a) homeobox binding and transcription factors, (b) growth factors and
receptors, (c) brain and neural specific factors and (d) serotonin specific
factors are reported. Pivotal genes were confirmed with quantitative RT-PCR. In
the serotonin developmental cascade, FGFR2 was robustly expressed at each stage. 
GATA3 was robustly expressed in EBs. Sonic hedgehog (Shh), PTCH (Shh-R) and Fev1 
transcription factor expression coincided with the induction of serotonin
specific marker genes during N1-selection. A majority of the examined genes were 
expressed in adult serotonin neurons. However, in the ESC-derived neurons, there 
was significant over-representation of probe sets related to cell cycle, axon
guidance & dorso-ventral axis formation. This analysis suggests that the 366.4
cell line possesses cues for serotonin differentiation at early stages of
differentiation, but that ESC-derived serotonin neurons are still immature.

PMCID: PMC2753257
PMID: 18996226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Dec;334(3):339-58. doi: 10.1007/s00441-008-0709-2. Epub
2008 Nov 5.

Lmx1a is required for segregation of sensory epithelia and normal ear
histogenesis and morphogenesis.

Nichols DH(1), Pauley S, Jahan I, Beisel KW, Millen KJ, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA.

At embryonic day 8.5, the LIM-homeodomain factor Lmx1a is expressed throughout
the otic placode but becomes developmentally restricted to non-sensory epithelia 
of the ear (endolymphatic duct, ductus reuniens, cochlea lateral wall). We
confirm here that the ears of newborn dreher (Lmx1a (dr)) mutants are dysmorphic.
Hair cell markers such as Atoh1 and Myo7 reveal, for the first time, that newborn
Lmx1a mutants have only three sensory epithelia: two enlarged canal cristae and
one fused epithelium comprising an amalgamation of the cochlea, saccule, and
utricle (a "cochlear-gravistatic" endorgan). The enlarged anterior canal crista
develops by fusion of horizontal and anterior crista, whereas the posterior
crista fuses with an enlarged papilla neglecta that may extend into the cochlear 
lateral wall. In the fused endorgan, the cochlear region is distinguished from
the vestibular region by markers such as Gata3, the presence of a tectorial
membrane, and cochlea-specific innervation. The cochlea-like apex displays minor 
disorganization of the hair and supporting cells. This contrasts with the basal
half of the cochlear region, which shows a vestibular epithelium-like
organization of hair cells and supporting cells. The dismorphic features of the
cochlea are also reflected in altered gene expression patterns. Fgf8 expression
expands from inner hair cells in the apex to most hair cells in the base. Two
supporting cell marker proteins, Sox2 and Prox1, also differ in their cellular
distribution between the base and the apex. Sox2 expression expands in mutant
canal cristae prior to their enlargement and fusion and displays a more diffuse
and widespread expression in the base of the cochlear region, whereas Prox1 is
not detected in the base. These changes in Sox2 and Prox1 expression suggest that
Lmx1a expression restricts and sharpens Sox2 expression, thereby defining
non-sensory and sensory epithelium. The adult Lmx1a mutant organ of Corti shows a
loss of cochlear hair cells, suggesting that the long-term maintenance of hair
cells is also disrupted in these mutants.

PMCID: PMC2654344
PMID: 18985389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2008;18(5):357-65.

Intranasal delivery of T-bet modulates the profile of helper T cell immune
responses in experimental asthma.

Wang SY(1), Yang M, Xu XP, Qiu GF, Ma J, Wang SJ, Huang XX, Xu HX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND: Allergic asthma is caused by aberrant helper T (T(H)) type 2 immune
responses in susceptible individuals, characterized by airway
hyperresponsiveness, chronic airway inflammation, and mucus hypersecretion. Its
prevalence continues to increase, but optimal treatment remains a challenge. The 
transcription factor T-bet is a master regulator of T(H)1 lineage commitment and 
strongly promotes interferon gamma expression during T(H)1 cell differentiation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore the role of intranasal delivery
of T-bet on the differentiation of T(H) cell subsets and airway inflammation in
the ovalbumin (OVA)-induced mouse model of allergic airway inflammation.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were sensitized by intraperitoneal injection of OVA and
challenged with nebulized OVA. Four days before the inhalation challenge, the
sensitized mice were subjected to intranasal delivery of a recombinant
adeno-associated virus vector carrying murine T-bet gene (AAV-T-bet). Expression 
of the transcription factors T-bet, GATA3, and Foxp3 was then assayed in the
lungs, and airway histology was analyzed along with other inflammatory
parameters, such as eosinophils and cytokines in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
fluid, and total and OVA-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E in serum.
RESULTS: Intranasal administration of AAV-T-bet efficiently balanced the
T(H)1/T(H)2 transcription factor and cytokine profile and significantly decreased
the number of eosinophils in BAL fluid. It also resulted in a reduction of
peribronchial inflammation scores and serum IgE levels in OVA-sensitized and
challenged mice during the effector phase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that intranasal delivery of T-bet can promote a T(H)1 
immune response, restore a balanced Th immune response, and inhibit airway
inflammation during the challenge phase in a mouse model of allergic airway
inflammation.

PMID: 18973099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mech Dev. 2009 Jan-Feb;126(1-2):80-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.10.001. Epub 2008
Oct 15.

Lack of Gata3 results in conotruncal heart anomalies in mouse.

Raid R(1), Krinka D, Bakhoff L, Abdelwahid E, Jokinen E, Kärner M, Malva M, Meier
R, Pelliniemi LJ, Ploom M, Sizarov A, Pooga M, Karis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
raivo.raid@ut.ee

The transcription factor Gata3 is an important regulator of the development of
thymus, the nervous system, ear, kidney, and adrenal glands. This study analyzes 
the role of Gata3 in the developing heart using a mouse strain containing an
nlsLacZ reporter gene fused in frame to the Gata3 gene by homologous
recombination. Using in situ hybridization, RT-PCR and Gata3-LacZ histochemistry,
Gata3 expression was shown in various cardiac structures up to newborn stage.
During looping stages (E9.5-E11.5) Gata3-LacZ activity recapitulated endogenous
Gata3 and was abundantly expressed in the endocardial ridges and endothelium of
distal outflow tract. Strong reporter gene expression was also noted in the
mesenchyme of ventral branchial arches, and in the epithelium. In the
atrioventricular canal expression was relatively lower. In the four-chambered
heart stages (E13.5-E17.5) the LacZ-staining did not recapitulate the endogenous 
Gata3 transcript and showed rather lineage tracing of formerly Gata3-expressing
cells in the hearts. beta-Galactosidase activity was detected in the cusps of
semilunar valves, aorta, pulmonary trunk, innominate and common carotid arteries,
and faintly in the atrioventricular valves. Gata3-null embryos die normally
between E11 and E12. Pharmacological treatment with sympathomimetic
beta-adrenergic receptor agonist lengthens the survival up to E18 when
malformations of the heart such as ventricular septal defect (VSD), double-outlet
of right ventricle (DORV), anomalies of the aortic arch (AAA) and persistent
truncus arteriosus (PTA) were detected. The specified malformations correlate
with the normal developmental pattern of Gata3-LacZ expression. The short outflow
tract and insufficient rotation of truncus arteriosus during looping stages might
be the main reasons underlying these malformations.

PMID: 18955134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6265-74.

Ikaros regulates Notch target gene expression in developing thymocytes.

Chari S(1), Winandy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Both Ikaros and Notch are essential for normal T cell development. Collaborative 
mutations causing a reduction in Ikaros activity and an increase in Notch
activation promote T cell leukemogenesis. Although the molecular mechanisms of
this cooperation have been studied, its consequences in thymocyte development
remain unexplored. In this study, we show that Ikaros regulates expression of a
subset of Notch target genes, including Hes1, Deltex1, pTa, Gata3, and Runx1, in 
both Ikaros null T cell leukemia lines and Ikaros null primary thymocytes. In
Ikaros null leukemia cells, Notch deregulation occurs at both the level of Notch 
receptor cleavage and expression of Notch target genes, because re-expression of 
Ikaros in these cells down-regulates Notch target gene expression without
affecting levels of intracellular cleaved Notch. In addition, abnormal expression
of Notch target genes is observed in Ikaros null double-positive thymocytes, in
the absence of detectable intracellular cleaved Notch. Finally, we show that this
role of Ikaros is specific to double-positive and single-positive thymocytes
because derepression of Notch target gene expression is not observed in Ikaros
null double-negative thymocytes or lineage-depleted bone marrow. Thus, in this
study, we provide evidence that Ikaros and Notch play opposing roles in
regulation of a subset of Notch target genes and that this role is restricted to 
developing thymocytes where Ikaros is required to appropriately regulate the
Notch program as they progress through T cell development.

PMCID: PMC2778602
PMID: 18941217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(3):251-60. doi: 10.1159/000161585. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

Safety and immunogenicity of a cluster specific immunotherapy in children with
bronchial asthma and mite allergy.

Schubert R(1), Eickmeier O, Garn H, Baer PC, Mueller T, Schulze J, Rose MA,
Rosewich M, Renz H, Zielen S.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Pulmonology and Allergology, Department of Internal Medicine III,
J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ralf.schubert@kgu.de

BACKGROUND: Cluster specific immunotherapy (SIT) is a modern form of allergen
immunotherapy allowing safe administration of high allergen doses in a short time
interval compared to classic SIT. In the current study, we investigated the
safety profile and immunological effect of cluster SIT in children with allergic 
asthma due to house dust mite allergy.
METHODS: A total of 34 children (6-18 years) with allergic asthma were assigned
to cluster (n = 22) or classic SIT (n = 12). To achieve a maintenance dose of
allergen extract, cluster patients received 14 injections of house dust mite
allergen within 6 weeks, whereas the classic SIT group received 14 injections
within 14 weeks. Safety was monitored by recording adverse events. Immunogenicity
was measured by specific IgG(Mite) and IgG4(Mite), by antibody-blocking
properties on basophil activation, and by the T cell subset transcription factors
Foxp3, T-bet, and GATA-3.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in local and systemic side effects
between the two groups. In the cluster group, serum levels of specific IgG(Mite) 
(p < 0.001) and specific IgG4(Mite) (p < 0.001) significantly increased after 8
weeks, while it took 12 weeks in the classic SIT group. These data were confirmed
by blocking CD63 expression as well as release of cysteinyl leukotrienes after in
vitro basophil stimulation. No differences in transcription factor expression
were found in the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Cluster SIT is safe in children. Additionally, our data demonstrated 
an even more rapid induction of specific immune tolerance. Cluster SIT is an
attractive alternative to conventional up-dosing schedules with fewer
consultations for the patients.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18849616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):34563-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804271200. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

Significance of NF-kappaB/GATA axis in tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced
expression of 6-sulfated cell recognition glycans in human T-lymphocytes.

Chen GY(1), Sakuma K, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya 464-8681,
Japan.

Sulfated glycans play critical roles in various cell recognition events among
leukocytes. The 6-sulfated lactosamine glycans in particular have been widely
noted for their importance because they are involved in cell recognition events
mediated by cell-adhesion molecules such as selectins and sialic acid-recognizing
molecules such as siglecs and also in the activation of CD44 in binding to
extracellular matrix hyaluronate. A pro-inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, induces expression of 6-sulfated glycans on human leukocytes. Here 
we report that the transcription of the GlcNAc6ST-1 gene, the gene encoding a
sulfotransferase for 6-sulfated glycan synthesis, is induced in human T-lymphoid 
cells through tandem NF-kappaB and GATA motifs in its 5'-regulatory region.
Results of our reporter assays, immunoprecipitation, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses indicated that GATA-3 and/or GATA-2, but not GATA-1,
associates with NF-kappaB in a transcription factor complex on the 5'-regulatory 
region of the gene and acts synergistically with NF-kappaB in triggering
GlcNAc6ST-1 transcription. Recently, a skin-homing subset of helper memory T
cells exhibiting the Th2 marker CCR4 was shown to specifically express 6-sulfated
glycans. The transactivation mechanism described here suggested that GlcNAc6ST-1 
transcription is coordinated with the NF-kappaB/GATA-3 axis, which is known to
figure heavily in Th2 cell differentiation. In line with this, in vitro
differentiation of human T cells to Th2 cells was found to significantly induce
GlcNAc6ST-1 transcription and 6-sulfated glycan expression.

PMCID: PMC3259878
PMID: 18849568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Jul;43(7):494-8.

[Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms of GATA3 with allergic rhinitis
phenotypes in Chinese].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XD(1), Zhang L, Duan H, She WY, Zhao Y, Liu S, Han DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) of GATA3 and Chinese with allergic rhinitis.
METHODS: This study included 109 patients with allergic rhinitis and 112 healthy 
control people. SNP of two loci with restriction fragment length polymorphism was
detected, rs1269486 at promoter region and rs2229360 located 92 bp downstream of 
STOP codon. Total IgE and specific IgE of Der p and Der f with different
genotypes of the two loci were compared.
RESULTS: There was SNP at both loci of rs1269486 and rs2229360. The genotypes of 
rs1269486 were GG, GA and AA, and the genotypes of rs2229360 were CC, CT and TT. 
The frequency of genotype GG and allele G in patient group was significantly
higher than that in control group (chi2 = 13.75, P <0.01; chi2 = 12.91, P <0.01),
and the frequency of genotype GA and allele A in patient group was significantly 
lower than that in control group (chi2 = 11.90, P <0.01; chi2 =12.91, P <0.01).
There were no significant differences between patient group and control group for
the frequencies of genotypes and alleles at rs2229360 (P > 0.05). The haplotype
frequency of GC in patient group was significantly higher than that in control
group (chi2 = 114.59, P < 0.01), and the haplotype frequency of AC in patient
group was significantly lower than that in control group (chi2 = 87.52, P <0.01).
There was no significant difference of the levels of serum total IgE and specific
IgE to Der p and Der f with the genotypes at the two loci (P >0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The SNP at rs1269486 of GATA3 is associated with allergic rhinitis
in Chinese.

PMID: 18826115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Am J Nephrol. 2009;29(4):283-91. doi: 10.1159/000159275. Epub 2008 Sep 29.

Endogenous hepatocyte growth factor attenuates inflammatory response in
glycerol-induced acute kidney injury.

Homsi E(1), Janino P, Amano M, Saraiva Camara NO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medical Sciences,
State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. ehomsi@aclnet.com.br

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is overexpressed after acute kidney
injury (AKI). The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of endogenous HGF in
the progression of the inflammatory response in glycerol-induced AKI (Gly-AKI) in
rats.
METHODS: Renal and systemic HGF expressions were evaluated during the development
of Gly-AKI. Subsequently, the blockade of endogenous HGF was analyzed in rats
treated with anti-HGF antibody concomitant to glycerol injection. Apoptosis, cell
infiltration and chemokine and cytokine profiles were investigated.
RESULTS: We detected an early peak of renal and plasma HGF protein expressions 3 
h after glycerol injection. The pharmacological blockade of the endogenous HGF
exacerbated the renal impairment, the tubular apoptosis, the renal expression of 
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and the macrophage, CD43+, CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes renal infiltration. The analysis of mRNA expressions of Th1 (t-bet,
TNF-alpha, IL-1beta) and Th2 (gata-3, IL-4, IL-10) cytokines showed a
Th1-polarized response in Gly-AKI rats that was aggravated with the anti-HGF
treatment.
CONCLUSION: Endogenous HGF attenuates the renal inflammatory response, leukocyte 
infiltration and Th1 polarization after glycerol injection. The control of
cellular immune response may partly explain the protective effect of endogenous
HGF in the development of Gly-AKI.

PMID: 18824844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4780-90.

IL-33 induces antigen-specific IL-5+ T cells and promotes allergic-induced airway
inflammation independent of IL-4.

Kurowska-Stolarska M(1), Kewin P, Murphy G, Russo RC, Stolarski B, Garcia CC,
Komai-Koma M, Pitman N, Li Y, Niedbala W, McKenzie AN, Teixeira MM, Liew FY, Xu
D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):8170. Niedbala, Wanda [added].

Type 2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) play a pivotal role in helminthic
infection and allergic disorders. CD4(+) T cells which produce type 2 cytokines
can be generated via IL-4-dependent and -independent pathways. Although the
IL-4-dependent pathway is well documented, factors that drive IL-4-independent
Th2 cell differentiation remain obscure. We report here that the new cytokine
IL-33, in the presence of Ag, polarizes murine and human naive CD4(+) T cells
into a population of T cells which produce mainly IL-5 but not IL-4. This
polarization requires IL-1R-related molecule and MyD88 but not IL-4 or STAT6. The
IL-33-induced T cell differentiation is also dependent on the phosphorylation of 
MAPKs and NF-kappaB but not the induction of GATA3 or T-bet. In vivo, ST2(-/-)
mice developed attenuated airway inflammation and IL-5 production in a murine
model of asthma. Conversely, IL-33 administration induced the IL-5-producing T
cells and exacerbated allergen-induced airway inflammation in wild-type as well
as IL-4(-/-) mice. Finally, adoptive transfer of IL-33-polarized IL-5(+)IL-4(-)T 
cells triggered airway inflammation in naive IL-4(-/-) mice. Thus, we demonstrate
here that, in the presence of Ag, IL-33 induces IL-5-producing T cells and
promotes airway inflammation independent of IL-4.

PMID: 18802081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Jan;62(1):6-12. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.059899. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

Oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer: towards bridging histopathological and
molecular classifications.

Badve S(1), Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Internal Medicine,
Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. sbadve@iupui.edu

The oestrogen receptor (ER) pathway is key for survival and progression in a
significant proportion of breast cancers. The ER can be activated by oestrogen or
activated due to "crosstalk" with growth factor receptor pathways. Activated ER
signals through transcriptional and non-transcriptional mechanisms.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC), in spite of the shortcomings, remains the method of
choice as it provides for in situ assessment of ER expression within the tumour
cells. This capability is lost in tissue grinding methods that assess
oestrogen-binding activity or messenger RNAs in tumours. IHC is also not
influenced by the presence of non-tumoural cells or low amounts of tumour cells
within samples examined. It is clear that ER-positive tumours do not represent a 
single entity. Irrespective of the terminology used, low-grade ER-positive (also 
known as luminal A) tumours need to be differentiated from high-grade/highly
proliferative ER-positive tumours. This can be done in a variety of ways
including but not limited to analysis of FOXA1 and GATA-3 by IHC, and limited
molecular profiling by Oncotype DX, MGH2-gene signature, intrinsic gene signature
or MapQuant Dx. Several areas of ER biology are still poorly understood; these
include: its function in the cytoplasm/plasma membrane, its role in the
differentiation to proliferation switch, and pathways associated with resistance 
to hormonal therapy. A detailed understanding of these areas will permit better
classification and a personalised approach to management of ER-positive breast
cancers.

PMID: 18794199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2009 Mar;4(1):92-102. doi: 10.1007/s11481-008-9126-2.
Epub 2008 Sep 16.

CB(1) and CB(2) cannabinoid receptors mediate different aspects of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-induced T helper cell shift following immune
activation by Legionella pneumophila infection.

Newton CA(1), Chou PJ, Perkins I, Klein TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL
33612, USA. cnewton@health.usf.edu

Legionella pneumophila infection of mice induces proinflammatory cytokines and
Th1 immunity as well as rapid increases in serum levels of IL-12 and IFNgamma and
splenic IL-12Rbeta2 expression. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) treatment
prior to infection causes a shift from Th1 to Th2 immunity and here we
demonstrate that CB(1) and CB(2) cannabinoid receptors mediate different aspects 
of the shift. Using cannabinoid receptor antagonists and cannabinoid receptor
gene deficient mice (CB(1) (-/-) and CB(2) (-/-)), we showed that both CB(1) and 
CB(2) receptors were involved in the THC-induced attenuation of serum IL-12 and
IFNgamma. IFNgamma production is dependent upon signaling through IL-12Rbeta2
(beta2) and THC treatment suppressed splenic beta2 message; moreover, this effect
was CB(1) but not CB(2)-dependent from studies with receptor antagonists and
CB1(-/-) and CB2(-/-) mice. Furthermore, observed increases in IL-4 induced by
THC, were not involved in the drug effect on beta2 from studies with IL-4
deficient mice. The GATA-3 transcription factor is necessary for IL-4 production 
and is selectively expressed in Th2 cells. GATA-3 message levels were elevated in
spleens of THC-treated and L. pneumophila-infected mice and the effect was shown 
to be CB(2) but not CB(1)-dependent. Furthermore, GATA-3 regulatory factors were 
modulated in that Notch ligand Delta4 mRNA was decreased and Jagged1 increased by
THC also in a CB2-dependent manner and splenic NFkappaB p65 was increased.
Together, these results indicate that CB(1) and CB(2) mediate the THC-induced
shift in T helper activity in L. pneumophila-infected mice, with CB(1) involved
in suppressing IL-12Rbeta2 and CB(2) involved in enhancing GATA-3.

PMID: 18792785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2573-86. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737840.

Enforced expression of GATA3 allows differentiation of IL-17-producing cells, but
constrains Th17-mediated pathology.

van Hamburg JP(1), de Bruijn MJ, Ribeiro de Almeida C, van Zwam M, van Meurs M,
de Haas E, Boon L, Samsom JN, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GATA3 serves as a master regulator of
T-helper-2 (Th2) differentiation by inducing expression of the Th2 cytokines
IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 and by suppressing Th1 development. Here, we investigated
how GATA3 affects Th17 differentiation, using transgenic mice with enforced GATA3
expression. We activated naïve primary T cells in vitro in the presence of
transforming growth factor-beta and IL-6, and found that enforced GATA3
expression induced co-expression of Th2 cytokines in IL-17-producing T cells.
Although the presence of IL-4 hampered Th17 differentiation, transforming growth 
factor-beta/IL-6 cultures from GATA3 transgenic mice contained substantial
numbers of IL-17(+) cells, partially because GATA3 supported Th17 differentiation
by limiting IL-2 and IFN-gamma production. GATA3 additionally constrained Th17
differentiation in vitro through IL-4-independent mechanisms, involving
downregulating transcription of STAT3, STAT4, NFATc2 and the nuclear factor
RORgammat, which is crucial for Th17 differentiation. Remarkably, upon myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein immunization in vivo, GATA3 transgenic mice
contained similar numbers of IL-17-producing T cells in their lymph nodes as
wild-type mice, but were not susceptible to autoimmune encephalomyelitis,
possibly due to concomitant production of IL-4 and IL-10 induction. We therefore 
conclude that although GATA3 allows Th17 differentiation, it acts as an inhibitor
of Th17-mediated pathology, through IL-4-dependent and IL-4-independent pathways.

PMID: 18792410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Jul;36(6):1597-604. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9356-7. Epub 2008 
Sep 10.

Dual role of shikonin in early and late stages of collagen type II arthritis.

Dai Q(1), Fang J, Zhang FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Bao Jian Road, Harbin, 150086, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the anti-inflammatory or immunomodulatory effect of
shikonin on early stage and established murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Mouse were injected intraperitoneally with shikonin (5 mg/kg) for 10
days along before or after the onset of CIA. The arthritis response was monitored
visually by macroscopic scoring. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
and western blotting were employed to determine the mRNA and protein expression
of cytokine in patella with adjacent synovium in CIA mouse. Histology of knee was
used to assess the occurrence of cartilage destruction and bone erosion.
RESULTS: Shikonin (5 mg/kg) treatment along had no effect on macroscopic score
and incidence of arthritis on early stage of CIA. However, a pronounced
amelioration of macroscopic score and cartilage destruction was found in mouse
treated with shikonin on established CIA for 10 days. Moreover, The mRNA levels
of Th1 cytokines [tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin (IL)-12] was
significantly inhibited both in the synovial tissue and in the articular
cartilage in treated groups compared with those in control groups, whereas the
mRNA and protein levels of Th2 cytokines (IL-10 and IL-4) remained elevated
throughout the treatment period. Moreover, the inflammatory cytokine, the mRNA
and protein levels of IL-6 was down-regulated in mice with established CIA after 
treatment with shikonin. T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) mRNA levels were
decreased in shikonin compared with control group, and GATA-3 mRNA levels were
higher than that in control group.
CONCLUSION: Shikonin treatment on established CIA can inhibit Th1 cytokines
expression and induce Th2 cytokines expression in mice with established CIA. The 
inhibited effect of shikonin on Th1 cytokines expression may be mediated not only
by inhibiting Th1 responses through T-bet mechanism, but also by inducing
anti-inflammatory mediators such as IL-10 and IL-4 through a GATA-3 dependent
mechanism.

PMID: 18781399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1122-30. doi: 10.1038/ni.1647. Epub 2008 Sep 7.

Distinct functions for the transcription factors GATA-3 and ThPOK during
intrathymic differentiation of CD4(+) T cells.

Wang L(1), Wildt KF, Zhu J, Zhang X, Feigenbaum L, Tessarollo L, Paul WE, Fowlkes
BJ, Bosselut R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;87(2):109-12.

The transcription factors GATA-3 and ThPOK are required for intrathymic
differentiation of CD4(+) T cells, but their precise functions in this process
remain unclear. Here we show that, contrary to previous findings, Gata3
disruption blocked differentiation into the CD4(+) T cell lineage before
commitment to the CD4(+) lineage and in some contexts permitted the 'redirection'
of major histocompatibility complex class II-restricted thymocytes into the
CD8(+) lineage. GATA-3 promoted ThPOK expression and bound to a region of the
locus encoding ThPOK established as being critical for ThPOK expression. Finally,
ThPOK promoted differentiation into the CD4(+) lineage in a way dependent on
GATA-3 but inhibited differentiation into the CD8(+) lineage independently of
GATA-3. We propose that GATA-3 acts as a specification factor for the CD4(+)
lineage 'upstream' of the ThPOK-controlled CD4(+) commitment checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC2805063
PMID: 18776904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):31030-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805929200. Epub 2008
Sep 4.

Cyclic AMP-induced chromatin changes support the NFATc-mediated recruitment of
GATA-3 to the interleukin 5 promoter.

Klein-Hessling S(1), Bopp T, Jha MK, Schmidt A, Miyatake S, Schmitt E, Serfling
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Würzburg,
Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany.
stefan.klein-hessling@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

Elevated intracellular cyclic AMP levels, which suppress the proliferation of
naive T cells and type 1 T helper (Th1) cells are a property of T helper 2 (Th2) 
cells and regulatory T cells. While cyclic AMP signals interfere with the IL-2
promoter induction, they support the induction of Th2-type genes, in particular
of il-5 gene. We show here that cyclic AMP signals support the generation of
three inducible DNase I hypersensitive chromatin sites over the il-5 locus,
including its promoter region. In addition, cyclic AMP signals enhance histone H3
acetylation at the IL-5 promoter and the concerted binding of GATA-3 and NFATc to
the promoter. This is facilitated by direct protein-protein interactions
involving the C-terminal Zn(2+)-finger of GATA-3 and the C-terminal region of the
NFATc1 DNA binding domain. Because inhibition of NFATc binding to the IL-5
promoter in vivo also affects the binding of GATA-3, one may conclude that upon
induction of Th2 effector cells NFATc recruits GATA-3 to Th2-type genes. These
data demonstrate the functional importance of cyclic AMP signals for the
interplay between GATA-3 and NFATc factors in the transcriptional control of
lymphokine expression in Th2 effector cells.

PMCID: PMC2662173
PMID: 18772129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Oct;7(10):1607-18. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Gene microarray analysis of human renal cell carcinoma: the effects of HDAC
inhibition and retinoid treatment.

Tavares TS(1), Nanus D, Yang XJ, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor treatments can augment the anti-tumor
effects of retinoids in renal cancer cells. We studied the effects of the HDAC
inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and 13-cis retinoic acid (cRA)
on two human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) lines. Cells were cultured in the
presence of each drug for six days to determine the responses to monotherapy and 
to combination therapy. The proliferation of SKRC06 was inhibited with cRA
treatment; the proliferation of SKRC39 was not. However, both RCC lines were
sensitive to growth inhibition by dibutyryl cyclic AMP, with or without 13-cis
RA. SAHA alone also reduced cell proliferation in both cell lines. To identify
the alterations in gene expression that correlate with the responsiveness to
treatment, gene microarray analyses were performed. Several retinoid-regulated
genes exhibited much higher mRNA levels in SKRC06 than in SKRC39, even in the
absence of drugs; these included crabp2, rargamma and cyp26A1. Combination
treatment of cells with both SAHA and cRA induced several transcripts with known 
anti-cancer/immunomodulatory effects, including dhrs9, gata3, il1beta, phlda1,
txk and vhl. Immunostaining confirmed the decreased expression of gata3 in human 
RCC specimens compared to normal kidney. Together, our results show that
treatment of RCC with cRA and/or SAHA increases the expression of several genes
and gene families that result in reduced cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3060607
PMID: 18769122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Semin Immunol. 2008 Aug;20(4):236-46. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2008.07.006. Epub 2008 
Sep 3.

Competition and collaboration: GATA-3, PU.1, and Notch signaling in early T-cell 
fate determination.

Rothenberg EV(1), Scripture-Adams DD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. evroth@its.caltech.edu

T-cell precursors remain developmentally plastic for multiple cell generations
after entering the thymus, preserving access to developmental alternatives of
macrophage, dendritic-cell, and even mast-cell fates. The underlying regulatory
basis of this plasticity is that early T-cell differentiation depends on
transcription factors which can also promote alternative developmental programs. 
Interfactor competition, together with environmental signals, keep these
diversions under control. Here the pathways leading to several lineage
alternatives for early pro-T-cells are reviewed, with close focus on the
mechanisms of action of three vital factors, GATA-3, PU.1, and Notch-Delta
signals, whose counterbalance appears to be essential for T-cell specification.

PMCID: PMC2634812
PMID: 18768329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Int Immunol. 2008 Oct;20(10):1269-77. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn093. Epub 2008 Sep
2.

From the two-dimensional Th1 and Th2 phenotypes to high-dimensional models for
gene regulation.

van den Ham HJ(1), de Boer RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Biology and Bioinformatics, Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. h.j.vandenham@uu.nl

The T(h)1/T(h)2 paradigm has been used for decades to characterize phenotypically
different immune responses. Recent discoveries, e.g. T(h)17 cells are adding more
dimensions to the helper T cell framework, and the T(h)1/T(h)2 paradigm is
currently being extended to include these new phenotypes. Previous mathematical
models cannot easily be extended to accommodate these new phenotypes, and
therefore these discoveries call for a new type of models. We devised a new model
of helper T cell differentiation that describes expression of, and interactions
between, the master regulators determining the phenotypic polarization of helper 
T cells. The model is able to describe any number of master regulators and is
grounded on transcription factors binding promoter sites and binding each other. 
The model allows for stable switches between several different phenotypes.
Furthermore, the model accounts for the kinetics of FoxP3 and GATA3 mRNA
expression measured after stimulating naive helper (CD4+CD45RA+) T cells under
various circumstances. Due to its n-dimensional character, this model may easily 
be applied to other developmental processes that involve master regulators.

PMID: 18765426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2008 Sep;53(12 Suppl):1525-32.

[Transcriptional regulation of selectin ligand expression in human leukocytes].

[Article in Japanese]

Kannagi R(1), Chen GY, Sakuma K, Ohmori K.

Author information: 
(1)rkannagi@aichi-cc.jp

PMID: 21089360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 25;3(8):e3050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003050.

Bradykinin [corrected] B1 receptor antagonism is beneficial in renal
ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Wang PH(1), Campanholle G, Cenedeze MA, Feitoza CQ, Gonçalves GM, Landgraf RG,
Jancar S, Pesquero JB, Pacheco-Silva A, Câmara NO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunologia Clínica e Experimental, Division of Nephrology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS ONE. 2008;3(9). doi:
10.1371/annotation/bde714c3-7f6d-4f03-83b3-e291005c3a39.

Previously we have demonstrated that bradykinin B1 receptor deficient mice (B1KO)
were protected against renal ischemia and reperfusion injury (IRI). Here, we
aimed to analyze the effect of B1 antagonism on renal IRI and to study whether
B1R knockout or antagonism could modulate the renal expression of pro and
anti-inflammatory molecules. To this end, mice were subjected to 45 minutes
ischemia and reperfused at 4, 24, 48 and 120 hours. Wild-type mice were treated
intra-peritoneally with antagonists of either B1 (R-954, 200 microg/kg) or B2
receptor (HOE140, 200 microg/kg) 30 minutes prior to ischemia. Blood samples were
collected to ascertain serum creatinine level, and kidneys were harvested for
gene transcript analyses by real-time PCR. Herein, B1R antagonism (R-954) was
able to decrease serum creatinine levels, whereas B2R antagonism had no effect.
The protection seen under B1R deletion or antagonism was associated with an
increased expression of GATA-3, IL-4 and IL-10 and a decreased T-bet and IL-1beta
transcription. Moreover, treatment with R-954 resulted in lower MCP-1, and higher
HO-1 expression. Our results demonstrated that bradykinin B1R antagonism is
beneficial in renal IRI.

PMCID: PMC2516176
PMID: 18725957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Genes Immun. 2008 Oct;9(7):640-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.67. Epub 2008 Aug 21.

A T-cell-specific CD154 transcriptional enhancer located just upstream of the
promoter.

Brunner M(1), Zhang M, Genin A, Ho IC, Cron RQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

CD154 (CD40-ligand) is a critical immune regulator. CD154 expression is tightly
regulated and largely restricted to activated CD4 T cells. Using DNase I
hypersensitivity site (HSS) mapping, we identified two novel HSS mapping to the
human CD154 promoter element and just upstream. Both HSS were activation
independent and CD4 T-cell specific. Approximately 350 bp of DNA sequence
flanking the upstream HSS site was highly conserved between mouse and man, and
was rich in binding sites for GATA and NFAT proteins. Gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated both NFAT1 and the Th2 factor, GATA-3,
bound this enhancer element in vitro and in vivo, respectively. A PstI/XbaI 345
bp fragment of this region acted as a transcriptional enhancer of the CD154
promoter in primary human CD4 T cells. Overexpression of repressor of GATA and a 
dominant negative GATA-3 protein independently inhibited transcription, whereas
overexpression of wild-type GATA-3 enhanced transcriptional activity, by this
element in primary CD4 T cells. Moreover, more interleukin-4-producing CD4 T
cells expressed CD154 following activation than interferon-gamma-producing CD4 T 
cells. Thus, we identified a novel T-cell-specific, GATA-3 responsive, CD154
transcriptional enhancer, which may contribute to increased propensity of Th2
cells to express CD154.

PMID: 18719603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3346-52.

Transcription factor-dependent chromatin remodeling of Il18r1 during Th1 and Th2 
differentiation.

Yu Q(1), Chang HC, Ahyi AN, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The IL-18Ralpha-chain is expressed on Th1 but not Th2 cells. We have recently
shown that Stat4 is an important component of programming the Il18r1 locus
(encoding IL-18Ralpha) for maximal expression in Th1 cells. Il18r1 is
reciprocally repressed during Th2 development. In this report, we demonstrate the
establishment of DH patterns that are distinct among undifferentiated CD4 T, Th1,
and Th2 cells. Stat6 is required for the repression of Il18r1 expression and in
Stat6-deficient Th2 cultures, mRNA levels, histone acetylation, and H3K4
methylation levels are intermediate between levels observed in Th1 and Th2 cells.
Despite the repressive effects of IL-4 during Th2 differentiation, we observed
only modest binding of Stat6 to the Il18r1 locus. In contrast, we observed robust
GATA-3 binding to a central region of the locus where DNase hypersensitivity
sites overlapped with conserved non-coding sequences in Il18r1 introns. Ectopic
expression of GATA-3 in differentiated Th1 cells repressed Il18r1 mRNA and
surface expression of IL-18Ralpha. These data provide further mechanistic insight
into transcription factor-dependent establishment of Th subset-specific patterns 
of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2625301
PMID: 18714006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 17;283(42):28216-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804174200. Epub 2008
Aug 13.

Gfi1-mediated stabilization of GATA3 protein is required for Th2 cell
differentiation.

Shinnakasu R(1), Yamashita M, Kuwahara M, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Motohashi S,
Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into Th2 cells requires the T cell
receptor-mediated activation of the ERK MAPK cascade. Little is known, however,
in regard to how the ERK MAPK cascade regulates Th2 cell differentiation. We
herein identified Gfi1 (growth factor independent-1) as a downstream target of
the ERK MAPK cascade for Th2 cell differentiation. In the absence of Gfi1,
interleukin-5 production and the change of histone modification at the
interleukin-5 gene locus were severely impaired. Furthermore, the interferon
gamma gene showed a striking activation in the Gfi1(-/-) Th2 cells. An enhanced
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent degradation of GATA3 protein was observed in
Gfi1(-/-) Th2 cells, and the overexpression of GATA3 eliminated the defect of Th2
cell function in Gfi1-deficient Th2 cells. These data suggest that the T cell
receptor-mediated induction of Gfi1 controls Th2 cell differentiation through the
regulation of GATA3 protein stability.

PMCID: PMC2661392
PMID: 18701459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009 Jan;8(1):32-44. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800139-MCP200. Epub
2008 Aug 12.

Quantitative proteomics reveals GIMAP family proteins 1 and 4 to be
differentially regulated during human T helper cell differentiation.

Filén JJ(1), Filén S, Moulder R, Tuomela S, Ahlfors H, West A, Kouvonen P,
Kantola S, Björkman M, Katajamaa M, Rasool O, Nyman TA, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Tykistökatu 6B, FI-20520 Turku, Finland.

T helper (Th) cells differentiate into functionally distinct effector cell
subsets of which Th1 and Th2 cells are best characterized. Besides T cell
receptor signaling, IL-12-induced STAT4 and T-bet- and IL-4-induced STAT6 and
GATA3 signaling pathways are the major players regulating the Th1 and Th2
differentiation process, respectively. However, there are likely to be other yet 
unknown factors or pathways involved. In this study we used quantitative
proteomics exploiting cleavable ICAT labeling and LC-MS/MS to identify
IL-4-regulated proteins from the microsomal fractions of CD4(+) cells extracted
from umbilical cord blood. We were able to identify 557 proteins of which 304
were also quantified. This study resulted in the identification of the
down-regulation of small GTPases GIMAP1 and GIMAP4 by IL-4 during Th2
differentiation. We also showed that both GIMAP1 and GIMAP4 genes are
up-regulated by IL-12 and other Th1 differentiation-inducing cytokines in cells
induced to differentiate toward Th1 lineage and down-regulated by IL-4 in cells
induced to Th2. Our results indicate that the GIMAP (GTPase of the
immunity-associated protein) family of proteins is differentially regulated
during Th cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2621005
PMID: 18701445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Aug;8(5):330-4.

Role of GATA-3 in allergic diseases.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Diseases Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, 
London, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

GATA-3 is a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in T helper 2
(Th2) cells and plays a critical role in the differentiation of Th2 cells from
uncommitted CD4+ lymphocytes. In addition GATA-3 is essential for the gene
expression of the cytokines IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 that mediate allergic
inflammation. In human T lymphocytes GATA-3 is normally localized to the
cytoplasm, but on activation by antigen-presenting cells via the T cell receptor 
(CD3) and co-stimulatory receptor CD28 GATA-3 is phosphorylated by p38 MAP kinase
and translocates to the nucleus via the nuclear import protein importin-alpha.
Corticosteroids bound to glucocorticoid receptors inhibit GATA-3 function by
competing for nuclear entry via importin-alpha and also by inhibiting p38 MAP
kinase through the induction of MAP kinase phosphatase-1. GATA-3 is inhibited by 
the Th1 master regulatory transcription T-bet but in turn inhibits STAT-4 and
thus T-bet so that Th2 polarization is maintained. Since GATA-3 appears to be a
critical transcription factor for allergic inflammation it is an obvious target
for inhibition. However, direct inhibition by inhaled specific oligonucleotides
or interference RNA is not yet possible. Corticosteroids act as indirect
inhibitors and in patients with corticosteroid resistance p38 MAP kinase
inhibitors may also prove to be useful in the future.

PMID: 18691059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Development. 2008 Sep;135(18):3149-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.022202. Epub 2008 Aug 6.

Dlx3 is a crucial regulator of hair follicle differentiation and cycling.

Hwang J(1), Mehrani T, Millar SE, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Unit, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Dlx homeobox transcription factors regulate epidermal, neural and osteogenic
cellular differentiation. Here, we demonstrate the central role of Dlx3 as a
crucial transcriptional regulator of hair formation and regeneration. The
selective ablation of Dlx3 in the epidermis results in complete alopecia owing to
failure of the hair shaft and inner root sheath to form, which is caused by the
abnormal differentiation of the cortex. Significantly, we elucidate the
regulatory cascade that positions Dlx3 downstream of Wnt signaling and as an
upstream regulator of other transcription factors that regulate hair follicle
differentiation, such as Hoxc13 and Gata3. Colocalization of phospho-Smad1/5/8
and Dlx3 is consistent with a regulatory role for BMP signaling to Dlx3 during
hair morphogenesis. Importantly, mutant catagen follicles undergo delayed
regression and display persistent proliferation. Moreover, ablation of Dlx3
expression in the telogen bulge stem cells is associated with a loss of BMP
signaling, precluding re-initiation of the hair follicle growth cycle. Taken
together with hair follicle abnormalities in humans with Tricho-Dento-Osseous
(TDO) syndrome, an autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia linked to mutations in
the DLX3 gene, our results establish that Dlx3 is essential for hair
morphogenesis, differentiation and cycling programs.

PMCID: PMC2707782
PMID: 18684741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2008 Jul;17(4):353-6. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328304651c.

The development of the parathyroid gland: from fish to human.

Zajac JD(1), Danks JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health & Northern
Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia. j.zajac@unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to describe the development and 
function of the parathyroid gland from fish to mammals. We describe the molecular
mechanisms regulating parathyroid gland embryogenesis and the clinical syndromes 
related to mutations in control genes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have shown that fish express parathyroid hormone.
This is contrary to the long held view that the earliest animals to possess
parathyroid hormone were amphibians. Two fish species have been demonstrated to
express parathyroid hormone but the source and physiological function of this
peptide in fish remains to be determined. There is strong recent evidence that
regulation and development of the parathyroid gland in mammals is controlled by a
cascade of genes. A number of these regulatory factors have been identified using
genetically modified mouse models or as genes causing human disease. These
include, Gcm2/GCMB, Pax1 and Pax9, Hox3a, Tbx1, GATA3, TBCE, Sox3, Eya1 and
Six1/4. Expression of a number of these factors occurs in the gill in fish.
SUMMARY: The function of parathyroid hormone and the parathyroid gland in humans 
is to regulate serum calcium levels to maintain homeostasis. Parathyroid hormone 
genes are present in fish but their function remains to be elucidated.
Parathyroid development is regulated by a cascade of genes, which are now being
rapidly defined in mouse models and in human mutations.

PMID: 18660669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Dev Comp Immunol. 2008;32(12):1467-81. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2008.06.012. Epub 2008 
Jul 25.

Differential expression of two interferon-gamma genes in common carp (Cyprinus
carpio L.).

Stolte EH(1), Savelkoul HF, Wiegertjes G, Flik G, Lidy Verburg-van Kemenade BM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Immunology Group, Wageningen University, Marijkeweg 40, 6709 
PG Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Two interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) genes are expressed in immune cells of teleost
fish and are potentially implicated in B- and T-lymphocyte responses. IFN-gamma-2
shows structural and functional characteristics to other vertebrate IFN-gamma
genes and is associated with T-lymphocyte function. Expression profiling shows
IFN-gamma-2 upregulation in T-lymphocytes after phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
stimulation in vitro. Unexpectedly, we found IFN-gamma-1, which is structurally
different from IFN-gamma-2, to be expressed in lipopolysacharide (LPS)-stimulated
IgM+ (B- lymphocyte enriched) fractions. Expression of T-box transcription factor
T-bet, but not of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3), correlated with expression of
both IFN-gamma genes. In-vivo parasite infection, but as predicted not
zymosan-induced inflammation, resulted in concomitant upregulation of T-bet and
IFN-gamma-2. This corroborates a genuine T-lymphocyte associated role for
IFN-gamma-2.

PMID: 18657572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Immunol Res. 2009;45(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s12026-008-8024-2.

Molecular signatures distinguishing active from latent tuberculosis in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, after in vitro antigenic stimulation with purified
protein derivative of tuberculin (PPD) or Candida: a preliminary report.

Stern JN(1), Keskin DB, Romero V, Zuniga J, Encinales L, Li C, Awad C, Yunis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. jstern@fas.harvard.edu

Purified protein derivative (PPD) or tuberculin skin testing is used to identify 
infected individuals with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and to assess
cell-mediated immunity to Mtb. In the present study, we compared PBMC cultures in
the presence of tuberculin or Candida antigens using cytokine bead arrays and RNA
microarrays. Measurements of different cytokines and chemokines in supernatants
of PMBC cultures in the presence of PPD showed increased levels of interferon
(IFN)-gamma in active tuberculosis infection (ATBI) and latent TB infected (LTBI)
compared to controls, and increased levels of TNF-alpha in ATBI compared with
LTBI. Also, we found increase of IL-6 in cultures of PPD positive and controls
but not in the cultures with Candida. We also report the molecular signature of
tuberculosis infection, in ATBI patients, the following genes were found to be
up-regulated and absent in LTBI individuals: two kinases (JAK3 and p38MAPK), four
interleukins (IL-7, IL-2, IL-6, and IFNbeta1), a chemokine (HCC-4) a chemokine
receptor (CxCR5), two interleukin receptors (IL-1R2 and IL-18R1), and three
additional ones (TRAF5, Smad2, CIITA, and NOS2A). By contrast, IL-17 and IGFBP3
were significantly up-regulated in LTBI. And, STAT4, GATA3, Fra-1, and ICOS were 
down-regulated in ATBI but absent in LTBI. Conversely, TLR-10, IL-15, DORA, and
IKK-beta were down-regulated in LTBI but not in ATBI. Interestingly, the majority
of the up-regulated genes found in ATBI were found in cultures stimulated with
tuberculin (PPD) or Candida antigens, suggesting that these pathogens stimulate
similar immunological pathways. We believe that the molecular signature
distinguishing active from latent tuberculosis infection may require using
cytokine bead arrays along with RNA microarrays testing cell cultures at
different times following in vitro proliferation assays using several bacterial
antigens and PPD.

PMID: 18648750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008 Sep;38(9):1422-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2008.03067.x. 
Epub 2008 Jul 19.

Control of cytokine gene transcription in Th1 and Th2 cells.

Bowen H(1), Kelly A, Lee T, Lavender P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC and Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Summary Analysis of T-helper cell differentiation to T-helper type 1 (Th1) and
Th2 lineages has begun to reveal a complex mechanism whereby transcription
factors, enzymes that either deposit or remove covalent modifications from
histone tails and DNA methylating enzymes are recruited to cytokine genes. Each
resultant cell lineage subsequently displays a programme of transcriptional
restrictions that firstly, facilitates expression of a particular subset of
signature cytokines and secondly, silences expression of the cytokines normally
recognized as being markers of the opposite differentiation limb. Some essential 
proteins in this differentiative paradigm, such as the transcription factors
GATA3 and T-bet, are well studied; however, the types of enzymatic activities
that these proteins recruit in order to implement differentiation are more
obscure. Recent genome-wide studies of histone modifications have begun to
clarify how specific modifications of histones impact upon both transcriptional
regulation and chromatin organization. Here we review how this information has
enlightened our knowledge of how Th1/Th2 differentiation is orchestrated.

PMID: 18647314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 1;181(3):2211-9.

Excessive production of IFN-gamma in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
and its contribution to induction of B lymphocyte stimulator/B cell-activating
factor/TNF ligand superfamily-13B.

Harigai M(1), Kawamoto M, Hara M, Kubota T, Kamatani N, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacovigilance, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. mharigai.mpha@tmd.ac.jp

Expression and immunological significance of IFN-gamma, a pivotal cytokine in
murine lupus, have not been clearly demonstrated in human systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). In the present study we investigated the expression of
IFN-gamma in peripheral blood T cells from patients with SLE and its role in the 
production of the soluble B lymphocyte stimulator (sBLyS). Peripheral blood T
cells from patients with SLE expressed significantly larger amounts of IFN-gamma 
in response to stimulation with anti-CD3 mAb plus anti-CD28 mAb than those from
normal controls as shown by three analytical methods, including ELISA, flow
cytometry, and quantitative RT-PCR. The ratio of IFN-gamma-producing T cells to
effector memory T cells in CD3(+)CD4(+) and CD3(+)CD8(+) populations in patients 
with SLE was significantly higher than that of normal controls. The T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) mRNA/GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3) mRNA ratio was 
significantly higher in patients with SLE than in normal controls. T cell culture
supernatants from patients with SLE contained significantly higher sBLyS-inducing
activity than normal controls; this was almost completely inhibited by the
addition of anti-human IFN-gamma mAb. Percentages of BLyS-expressing peripheral
blood monocytes in patients with SLE were significantly higher than those of
normal controls. Monocytes from patients with SLE produced significantly larger
amounts of sBLyS in response to IFN-gamma than those from normal controls. Taken 
together, these data strongly indicate that the overexpression of IFN-gamma in
peripheral blood T cells contributes to the immunopathogenesis of SLE via the
induction of sBLyS by monocytes/macrophages, which would promote B cell
activation and maturation.

PMID: 18641361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 19;374(2):248-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.032. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Lycopene suppresses ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation in a murine model of
asthma.

Lee CM(1), Chang JH, Moon DO, Choi YH, Choi IW, Park YM, Kim GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pusan National University College
of Medicine, Busan 602-739, Republic of Korea.

In this study, we attempt to determine whether lycopene regulates inflammatory
mediators in the ovalbumin (OVA)-induced murine asthma model. To address this,
mice were sensitized and challenged with OVA, and then treated with lycopene
before the last OVA challenge. Administration of lycopene significantly
alleviated the OVA-induced airway hyperresponsiveness to inhaled methacholine.
Administration of lycopene also resulted in a significant inhibition of the
infiltration of inflammatory immunocytes into the bronchoalveolar lavage, and
attenuated the gelatinolytic activity of matrix metalloproteinase-9 and the
expression of eosinophil peroxidase. Additionally, lycopene reduced the increased
levels of GATA-3 mRNA level and IL-4 expression in OVA-challenged mice. However, 
it increased T-bet mRNA level and IFN-gamma expression in lycopene-challenged
mice. These findings provide new insight into the immunopharmacological role of
lycopene in terms of its effects in a murine model of asthma.

PMID: 18638450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Mol Biol. 2008 Sep 19;381(5):1292-306. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.072. Epub
2008 Jul 2.

Crystal structures of multiple GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA reveal new insights
into DNA recognition and self-association by GATA.

Bates DL(1), Chen Y, Kim G, Guo L, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors (GATA1-6) binds selected GATA sites in
vertebrate genomes to regulate specific gene expression. Although vertebrate GATA
factors have two highly conserved zinc finger motifs, how the two fingers act
together to recognize functional DNA elements is not well understood. Here we
determined the crystal structures of the C-terminal zinc finger of mouse GATA3
bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. Our structures
and accompanying biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by
GATA to closely arranged sites. One mode involves cooperative binding by two GATA
factors that interact with each other through protein-protein interactions. The
other involves simultaneous binding of the N-terminal zinc finger (N-finger) and 
the C-terminal zinc finger of the same GATA factor. Our studies represent the
first crystallographic analysis of GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA and provide new
insights into the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal 
structure also reveals a dimerization interface in GATA that has previously been 
shown to be important for GATA self-association. These findings significantly
advance our understanding of the structure and function of GATA and provide an
important framework for further investigating the in vivo mechanisms of
GATA-dependent gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4559223
PMID: 18621058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Sep;122(3):512-20.e11. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.06.004. Epub 2008 Jul 11.

Repressor of GATA regulates TH2-driven allergic airway inflammation and airway
hyperresponsiveness.

Hirahara K(1), Yamashita M, Iwamura C, Shinoda K, Hasegawa A, Yoshizawa H, Koseki
H, Gejyo F, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Studies of human asthma and of animal models of allergic
inflammation/asthma highlight a crucial role for T(H)2 cells in the pathogenesis 
of allergic asthma. Repressor of GATA (ROG) is a POZ (BTB) domain-containing
Kruppel-type zinc finger family (or POK family) repressor. A repressive function 
to GATA3, a master transcription factor for T(H)2 cell differentiation, is
indicated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to clarify the regulatory roles of ROG in
the pathogenesis of T(H)2-driven allergic diseases, such as allergic asthma.
METHODS: We examined allergic airway inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness 
(AHR) in 3 different mouse models, which use either ROG-deficient (ROG(-/-))
mice, ROG transgenic mice, or adoptive transfer of cells.
RESULTS: In ROG(-/-) mice T(H)2 cell differentiation, T(H)2 responses,
eosinophilic airway inflammation, and AHR were enhanced. In ROG transgenic mice
the levels of eosinophilic airway inflammation and AHR were dramatically reduced.
Furthermore, adoptive transfer of T(H)2 cells with increased or decreased levels 
of ROG expression into the asthmatic mice resulted in reduced or enhanced airway 
inflammation, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that ROG regulates allergic airway
inflammation and AHR in a negative manner, and thus ROG might represent another
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of asthmatic patients.

PMID: 18620745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Surg Res. 2009 Mar;152(1):118-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.01.027. Epub 2008 Mar
13.

Preoperative GATA3 mRNA expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells is
up-regulated in patients with postoperative infection following hepatobiliary
pancreatic surgery.

Kawamoto J(1), Kimura F, Yoshitomi H, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Ohtsuka M, Kato A, 
Nozawa S, Furukawa K, Mitsuhashi N, Takeuchi D, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aggressive hepatobiliary pancreatic surgery has been associated with 
high complication rates. Correlations of Th1/Th2 balance and toll-like receptor
(TLR) 2/4 expression with postoperative infection following surgery were
prospectively evaluated.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, soluble lymphocyte
activation gene (sLAG)-3, and soluble CD30 were determined by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, and expression levels of T-bet, GATA-3, TLR2, and TLR4 mRNA 
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells were assayed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction perioperatively in 56 consecutive
patients who underwent hepatobiliary pancreatic surgery.
RESULTS: Of the 56 patients, 30 patients had postoperative infection.
Postoperative plasma levels of IL-6 and IL-10 were significantly higher in
patients with postoperative infection than in those without infection (P < 0.05).
Plasma soluble CD30 level and GATA-3 mRNA expression level were significantly
higher preoperatively, and remained higher by postoperative d 7 in patients with 
postoperative infection (P < 0.05). Soluble lymphocyte activation gene levels
were not significantly different between the two groups. T-bet mRNA expression
level was significantly higher on postoperative d 3, 7, and 14 in patients with
postoperative infection (P < 0.05). Preoperative expression levels of GATA-3 mRNA
correlated significantly with those of TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that in patients with postoperative infection,
Th1/Th2 balance shifts toward Th2 dominance preoperatively.

PMID: 18619618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Acta Otolaryngol. 2009 Feb;129(2):190-4. doi: 10.1080/00016480802139846.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in GATA-3 with allergic rhinitis.

Zhang L(1), Wang X, Han D, Duan H, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory Otolaryngology, Capital Medical University, Ministry of
Education of China, Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, Beijing, PR China. 
luozhang@trhos.com

CONCLUSION: The results of our study demonstrated the association between the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of GATA-3 and allergic rhinitis (AR).
OBJECTIVE: AR is considered to be controlled by T-helper type 2 (Th2) cells.
GATA-3 is the crucial transcription factor controlling the differentiation and
function of Th2 cells. We aimed to evaluate the association between the SNPs of
GATA-3 and AR.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: GATA-3 SNPs in 109 AR patients and 112 healthy controls in 
China were detected with restriction fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: The genotypes at rs1269486 were GG, GA, and AA, and the genotypes at
rs2229360 were CC, CT, and TT. The frequency of the G allele in the patient group
was significantly higher than that in the control group (p<0.01), while the
frequency of the A allele in the patient group was significantly lower than that 
in the control group (p<0.01). Meanwhile, the haplotype frequency of GC at the
two loci in the patient group was significantly higher than that in the control
group (p<0.01), and the haplotype frequency of AC in the patient group was
significantly lower than that in the control group (p<0.01).

PMID: 18607915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 15;181(2):869-77.

Impaired SLAM-SLAM homotypic interaction between invariant NKT cells and
dendritic cells affects differentiation of IL-4/IL-10-secreting NKT2 cells in
nonobese diabetic mice.

Baev DV(1), Caielli S, Ronchi F, Coccia M, Facciotti F, Nichols KE, Falcone M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Diabetes Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

The regulatory function of invariant NKT (iNKT) cells for tolerance induction and
prevention of autoimmunity is linked to a specific cytokine profile that
comprises the secretion of type 2 cytokines like IL-4 and IL-10 (NKT2 cytokine
profile). The mechanism responsible for iNKT cell differentiation toward a type 2
phenotype is unknown. Herein we show that costimulatory signals provided by the
surface receptor signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) on myeloid
dendritic cells (mDC) to iNKT cells is crucial for NKT2 orientation.
Additionally, we demonstrate that the impaired acquisition of an NKT2 cytokine
phenotype in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice that spontaneously develop autoimmune
diabetes is due to defective SLAM-induced signals generated by NOD mDC. Mature
mDC of C57BL/6 mice express SLAM and induce C57BL/6 or NOD iNKT cells to acquire 
a predominant NKT2 cytokine phenotype in response to antigenic stimulation with
the iNKT cell-specific Ag, the alpha-galactosylceramide. In contrast, mature NOD 
mDC express significantly lower levels of SLAM and are unable to promote GATA-3
(the SLAM-induced intracellular signal) up-regulation and IL-4/IL-10 production
in iNKT cells from NOD or C57BL/6 mice. NOD mice carry a genetic defect of the
Slamf1 gene that is associated with reduced SLAM expression on double-positive
thymocytes and altered iNKT cell development in the thymus. Our data suggest that
the genetic Slamf1 defect in NOD mice also affects SLAM expression on other
immune cells such as the mDC, thus critically impairing the peripheral
differentiation of iNKT cells toward a regulatory NKT2 type.

PMCID: PMC2587206
PMID: 18606638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Nov;199(5):543.e1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2008.04.043.
Epub 2008 Jul 3.

GATA3 expression in estrogen receptor alpha-negative endometrial carcinomas
identifies aggressive tumors with high proliferation and poor patient survival.

Engelsen IB(1), Stefansson IM, Akslen LA, Salvesen HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway. ingeborg.engelsen@helse-bergen.no

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor GATA3 has recently been found to be involved 
in the carcinogenesis for numerous cancers. We investigated this marker in
relation to clinicopathologic characteristics, hormone receptors, other
biomarkers, and survival in endometrial carcinoma.
STUDY DESIGN: A population-based study of 316 endometrial carcinomas with
complete follow-up was studied for GATA3, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha, ERbeta2, 
and progesterone receptor (PR) expression.
RESULTS: Positive GATA3 expression in hysterectomy specimens significantly
correlated to high International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage,
serous papillary/clear cell subtypes, high histologic grade, loss of PR
expression, aneuploidy, high proliferation, pathologic p53 and p16 expression,
and poor prognosis (P = .003). Loss of hormone receptors significantly correlated
with aggressive phenotype and poor prognosis. Pathologic expression of
GATA3/ERalpha in combination added independent prognostic information.
CONCLUSION: GATA3 expression is associated with an aggressive phenotype and adds 
independent prognostic information in addition to receptor status. Further
studies of its value in tailored treatment protocols seem justified.

PMID: 18599012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Aug 20;590(1-3):409-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.06.035. 
Epub 2008 Jun 14.

YM-341619 suppresses the differentiation of spleen T cells into Th2 cells in
vitro, eosinophilia, and airway hyperresponsiveness in rat allergic models.

Ohga K(1), Kuromitsu S, Takezawa R, Numazaki M, Ishikawa J, Nagashima S, Shimizu 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Labs, Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21 
Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan. keiko.ohga@jp.astellas.com

T helper (Th) 2 cells play a central role in the pathogenesis of allergic
diseases such as allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis, and allergic rhinitis. We
have found that YM-341619 hydrochloride, which suppressed IL-4-induced
STAT6-dependent reporter gene expression, inhibited the differentiation of mouse 
spleen T cells into Th2 cells in vitro. YM-341619 suppressed the production of
IL-4 and the expression of GATA-3 mRNA, a Th2 transcription factor, in T cells
cultured with anti-CD3 antibody and anti-CD28 antibody in the presence of IL-4.
In contrast, the production of IFN-gamma and the expression of T-bet mRNA, a Th1 
transcription factor, in T cells cultured with anti-CD3 antibody in the presence 
of IL-12, were not effected by YM-341619. Orally administered YM-341619
(0.003-0.03 mg/kg) reduced the plasma IgE level of DNP-Ascaris-sensitized rats,
but not the IgG(2a) level. YM-341619 suppressed IL-4 and IL-13 production in the 
splenocytes of these DNP-Ascaris-sensitized rats without augmenting IFN-gamma
production. YM-341619 also dose-dependently suppressed eosinophil accumulation in
the lung (0.003-3 mg/kg, p.o.) and airway hyperresponsiveness (0.3-3 mg/kg, p.o.)
induced by repeated exposure to ovalbumin in ovalbumin-sensitized rats. These
results suggest that YM-341619 has the ability to suppress allergen-induced Th2
responses by selectively inhibiting the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into
the Th2 subset.

PMID: 18590722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Brain Res. 2008 Jul 30;1222:42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.04.072. Epub 2008
May 6.

Expression and function of Nkx6.3 in vertebrate hindbrain.

Hafler BP(1), Choi MY, Shivdasani RA, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA.

Homeodomain transcription factors serve important functions in organogenesis and 
tissue differentiation, particularly with respect to the positional identity of
individual cells. The Nkx6 subfamily controls tissue differentiation in the
developing central nervous system where they function as transcriptional
repressor proteins. Recent work indicates that Nkx6.3 is expressed in hindbrain
V2 interneurons that co-express Nkx6.1, suggesting the possibility of functional 
redundancy. Here, we report that Nkx6.3 expression is specific to Chx10+ V2a
interneurons but not to Gata3+ V2b interneurons of the hindbrain, and that Nkx6.3
expression appears to mark cells of the prospective medullary reticular
formation. Molecular analysis of Nkx6.3 null embryonic mouse hindbrain did not
reveal detectable defects in progenitor markers, motor neuron or V2 interneuron
sub-types. Forced expression of Nkx6.3 and Nkx6.1 promote V2 interneuron
differentiation in the developing chick hindbrain. These findings indicate Nkx6.3
function is dispensable for CNS development and lead to the proposal that absence
of overt defects is due to functional compensation from a related homeodomain
transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2555971
PMID: 18586225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2008 Aug;15(8):1165-70. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00084-08. Epub
2008 Jun 25.

Differential expression of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-4 delta 2 mRNA, but not
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, gamma
interferon, T-bet, or GATA-3 mRNA, in patients with fast and slow responses to
antituberculosis treatment.

Djoba Siawaya JF(1), Bapela NB, Ronacher K, Beyers N, van Helden P, Walzl G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, MRC Centre for Molecular and
Cellular Biology, DST and NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical TB Research,
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town 7505, South Africa. joe@sun.ac.za

This study investigated interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-4 delta 2, transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-beta), TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, GATA-3, T-bet, and gamma interferon 
(IFN-gamma) transcription in peripheral blood samples of adult pulmonary
tuberculosis patients prior to and after 1 week of therapy. Twenty patients with 
positive results for sputum culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were enrolled 
and treated with directly observed short-course antituberculosis chemotherapy.
Early treatment response was assessed. At the end of the intensive phase of
treatment (month 2), 12 patients remained sputum culture positive (slow
responders) and 8 converted to a negative culture (fast responders). Only the
expression levels of IL-4 (4-fold decrease) and IL-4 delta 2 (32-fold increase)
changed significantly during the first week of therapy in the 20 patients. No
baseline differences were present between the responder groups, but fast
responders had significantly higher IL-4 transcripts than slow responders at week
1. Fast responders showed a 19-fold upregulation and slow responders a 47-fold
upregulation of IL-4 delta 2 at week 1. Only slow responders also showed a
significant decrease in IL-4 expression at week 1. There were no significant
differences in expression of TGF-beta, TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, IFN-gamma, and GATA-3
between the groups. These data show that differential IL-4-related gene
expression in the early stage of antituberculosis treatment accompanies
differential treatment responses and may hold promise as a marker for treatment
effect.

PMCID: PMC2519297
PMID: 18579694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Rev Med Chil. 2008 Mar;136(3):367-75. doi: /S0034-98872008000300014. Epub 2008
Jun 3.

[Inflammatory bowel diseases: an immunological approach].

[Article in Spanish]

Sepúlveda SE(1), Beltrán CJ, Peralta A, Rivas P, Rojas N, Figueroa C, Quera R,
Hermoso MA.

Author information: 
(1)Programa Disciplinario de Inmunología, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are inflammatory diseases with a multifactorial
component that involve the intestinal tract. The two relevant IBD syndromes are
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). One factor involved in IBD
development is a genetic predisposition, associated to NOD2/CARD15 and Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) polymorphisms that might favor infectious enterocolitis that is
possibly associated to the development of IBD. The identification of specific
immunologic alterations in IBD and their relationship to the etiology of the
disease is a relevant research topic. The role of intra and extracellular
molecules, such as transcription factors and cytokines that are involved in the
inflammatory response, needs to be understood. The relevance of immunologic
molecules that might drive the immune response to a T helper (Th) 1, Th 2 or the 
recently described Th 17 phenotype, has been demonstrated in animal models and
clinical studies with IBD patients. CD and UC predominantly behave with a Th 1
and Th 2 immune phenotype, respectively. Recently, an association between CD and 
Th 17 has been reported. The knowledge acquired from immunologic and molecular
research will help to develop accurate diagnostic methods and efficient
therapies.

PMID: 18575665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Immunol. 2008 Sep;128(3):392-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.04.009. Epub 2008
Jun 20.

CC-4047 promotes Th1 cell differentiation and reprograms polarized human Th2
cells by enhancing transcription factor T-bet.

Xu W(1), Celeridad M, Sankar S, Webb DR, Bennett BL.

Author information: 
(1)Celgene Corporation, 4550 Towne Centre Court, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
wxu@celgene.com

The IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs are an expanding family of compounds under
investigation in a broad range of diseases because they exhibit immunomodulatory 
and anti-tumorigenic properties. Although the molecular targets remain
unidentified, the broad activity of select IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs on cell
signaling pathways and transcription regulation has been partly described. One
characteristic of these compounds is their ability to act as a co-stimulus of TCR
ligation leading to increased IL-2, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma expression indicative
of a Th1 phenotype. Because clinical evidence for this response has been observed
in thalidomide and lenalidomide treated patients, we investigated the effect of
CC-4047 on T cell activation and differentiation at the molecular level. We used 
primary human CD4(+) T cells as a model and found that CC-4047 enhances the
expression of transcription factor T-bet in both naive and pre-polarized Th2
cells. This modulation leads to upregulation of Th1 markers and cytokine
production. By increasing the expression of T-bet, CC-4047 promotes the
differentiation of naive T-cells to Th1 as well as effectively reverting Th2
cells into Th1-like effector cells in vitro. These findings elucidate a novel
mechanism of action of CC-4047 on T cell differentiation, suggesting that certain
IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs may have expanded clinical application in treating
both allergic diseases and certain T cell lymphomas where a predominant Th2
phenotype is displayed.

PMID: 18565795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Neurosci Res. 2008 Aug;61(4):420-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2008.04.014. Epub 2008 
May 8.

Expression of the transcription factor GATA3 in the postnatal mouse central
nervous system.

Zhao GY(1), Li ZY, Zou HL, Hu ZL, Song NN, Zheng MH, Su CJ, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an 710038, China.

GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is an important regulator of central nervous
system (CNS) development, but its expression pattern in the postnatal CNS has not
been studied. In the present study, we examined the distribution of GATA3 mRNA in
the mouse CNS at different postnatal stages by in situ hybridization. During the 
first 2 weeks of postnatal development, numerous GATA3-expressing cells were
found in the intergeniculate leaf, ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, pretectal 
nucleus, nucleus of the posterior commissure, superior colliculus, inferior
colliculus, periaqueductal grey, substantia nigra and raphe nuclei. Few notable
changes in the profile of GATA3 expression occurred over this time period. As
postnatal development progressed, however, GATA3 expression weakened, and was
maintained in only a few regions of the adult CNS. Throughout the brain, we found
that GATA3-expressing cells were NeuN-positive, and no colocalization with glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was observed. In the substantia nigra, GATA3 was
exclusively expressed in cells of the reticulate part and some of which were
found to be GABAergic. This study presents a comprehensive overview of GATA3
expression in the CNS throughout postnatal life, and the dynamics that we
observed provide insights for further investigations of the roles of GATA3 in
postnatal development and the maintenance of the mature CNS.

PMID: 18554735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Tissue Antigens. 2008 Aug;72(2):91-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01068.x. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

Epigenetic regulation of Th2 cytokine expression in atopic diseases.

van Panhuys N(1), Le Gros G, McConnell MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Malaghan Institute of Medical Research, Wellington South, Wellington, New
Zealand.

The immune response to allergens starts with stimulation of a naïve T helper (Th)
cell and its differentiation into a Th2 cell, expressing the cytokines
interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-13 responsible for the allergic response. The
initial pattern of cytokine expression is retained during restimulation and
division of the Th2 cell to create a population of specific allergen-responsive
memory Th2 cells. Both, the coordinate cytokine expression and the inherited
cytokine memory are specified by epigenetic mechanisms. Th2-specific changes in
chromatin configuration at the Th2 locus act locally to open DNA, allowing
recruitment of transcriptional machinery and rapid induction of cytokine
expression. Induction of the transcription factor GATA3 is critical to this
process. Loss of DNA methylation at the Th2 locus during differentiation from a
naïve Th cell correlates to increased histone acetylation, consistent with the
expression of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13. The silencing of the Th2 locus in Th1 cells
was associated with repressive histone methylation. These data indicate the
formation of a 'poised' chromatin configuration at the Th2 locus that in
combination with specific transcription factors specifies the cytokine repertoire
in daughter cells and allows the immediate, rapid induction of cytokines by those
cells in response to allergen.

PMID: 18554247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;121(1):50-4. doi: 10.1159/000124381. Epub 2008 May 7.

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis.

Szczerbal I(1), Chmurzynska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis was determined. BAC clones harboring sequences of
selected genes CEBPA (SSC6q12), CEBPB (SSC17q23), CEBPD (SSC4q15), CEBPG
(SSC6q12), PPARG (SSC13q24), SREBF1 (SSC10q17), DDIT3 (SSC12q15), GATA2 (SSC13q24
-->q31) and GATA3 (SSC5p12) were mapped by FISH. The positions of these genes in 
the human and pig genomes were compared. A potential role of the genes encoding
adipogenesis factors as candidate genes for fatness traits as well as
obesity-related phenotypes is discussed.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18544926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 4;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-49.

Meta-analysis of human cancer microarrays reveals GATA3 is integral to the
estrogen receptor alpha pathway.

Wilson BJ(1), Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Room H5-45, McGill University Health Centre, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1A1, Canada. brian.wilson2@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA3 has recently been shown to be
necessary for mammary gland morphogenesis and luminal cell differentiation. There
is also an increasing body of data linking GATA3 to the estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) pathway. Among these it was shown that GATA3 associates with the
promoter of the ERalpha gene and ERalpha can reciprocally associate with the
GATA3 gene. GATA3 has also been directly implicated in a differentiated phenotype
in mouse models of mammary tumourigenesis. The purpose of our study was to
compare coexpressed genes, by meta-analysis, of GATA3 and relate these to a
similar analysis for ERalpha to determine the depth of overlap.
RESULTS: We have used a newly described method of meta-analysis of multiple
cancer studies within the Oncomine database, focusing here predominantly upon
breast cancer studies. We demonstrate that ERalpha and GATA3 reciprocally have
the highest overlap with one another. Furthermore, we show that when both
coexpression meta-analysis lists for ERalpha and GATA3 are compared there is a
significant overlap between both and, like ERalpha, GATA3 coexpresses with
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2 (TFF1), TFF3, FOXA1, BCL2, ERBB4, XBP1,
NRIP1, IL6ST, keratin 18(KRT18) and cyclin D1 (CCND1). Moreover, as these data
are derived from human tumour samples this adds credence to previous cell-culture
or murine based studies.
CONCLUSION: GATA3 is hypothesized to be integral to the ERalpha pathway given the
following: (1) The large overlap of coexpressed genes as seen by meta-analysis,
between GATA3 and ERalpha, (2) The highest coexpressing gene for GATA3 was
ERalpha and vice-versa, (3) GATA3, like ERalpha, coexpresses with many well-known
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2.

PMCID: PMC2430971
PMID: 18533032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 4;3(6):e2361. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002361.

NS1 specific CD8+ T-cells with effector function and TRBV11 dominance in a
patient with parvovirus B19 associated inflammatory cardiomyopathy.

Streitz M(1), Noutsias M, Volkmer R, Rohde M, Brestrich G, Block A, Klippert K,
Kotsch K, Ay B, Hummel M, Kühl U, Lassner D, Schultheiss HP, Volk HD, Kern F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is the most commonly detected virus in
endomyocardial biopsies (EMBs) from patients with inflammatory cardiomyopathy
(DCMi). Despite the importance of T-cells in antiviral defense, little is known
about the role of B19V specific T-cells in this entity.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: An exceptionally high B19V viral load in EMBs
(115,091 viral copies/mug nucleic acids), peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) and serum was measured in a DCMi patient at initial presentation,
suggesting B19V viremia. The B19V viral load in EMBs had decreased substantially 
6 and 12 months afterwards, and was not traceable in PBMCs and the serum at these
times. Using pools of overlapping peptides spanning the whole B19V proteome,
strong CD8(+) T-cell responses were elicited to the 10-amino-acid peptides
SALKLAIYKA (19.7% of all CD8(+) cells) and QSALKLAIYK (10%) and additional weaker
responses to GLCPHCINVG (0.71%) and LLHTDFEQVM (0.06%). Real-time RT-PCR of
IFNgamma secretion-assay-enriched T-cells responding to the peptides, SALKLAIYKA 
and GLCPHCINVG, revealed a disproportionately high T-cell receptor Vbeta (TRBV)
11 expression in this population. Furthermore, dominant expression of type-1
(IFNgamma, IL2, IL27 and T-bet) and of cytotoxic T-cell markers (Perforin and
Granzyme B) was found, whereas gene expression indicating type-2 (IL4, GATA3) and
regulatory T-cells (FoxP3) was low.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that B19V Ag-specific CD8(+) T-cells with
effector function are involved in B19V associated DCMi. In particular, a dominant
role of TRBV11 and type-1/CTL effector cells in the T-cell mediated antiviral
immune response is suggested. The persistence of B19V in the endomyocardium is a 
likely antigen source for the maintenance of CD8(+) T-cell responses to the
identified epitopes.

PMCID: PMC2394660
PMID: 18523634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7629-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803439105. Epub 2008 May 30.

Notch2 paves the way to mast cells by Hes1 and Gata3.

Dedhia P(1), Kambayashi T, Pear WS.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7839-44.

PMCID: PMC2409425
PMID: 18515423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Curr Opin Immunol. 2008 Jun;20(3):265-71. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2008.03.011. Epub
2008 May 22.

Initiation and maintenance of Th2 cell identity.

Nakayama T(1), Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp

T helper type 2 (Th2) cells produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and play an important
role in humoral immunity and allergic reactions. During Th2 cell differentiation,
naïve CD4 T cells acquire 'Th2 cell identity', that is, the capability to produce
selectively a large amount of Th2 cytokines. Th2 cell identity is maintained in
memory Th2 cells. Significant advances in understanding of the molecular
requirement for these processes have been made. The expression of GATA3, a master
transcription factor for Th2 cell differentiation, is uniquely regulated by
several distinct mechanisms. Molecular analyses of memory Th2 cells revealed that
cell survival and the maintenance of Th2 cell function are epigenetically
regulated by various nuclear factors, including Polycomb and Trithorax molecules.

PMID: 18502111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 15;319(2):179-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.036. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

Conditional deletion of Hand2 reveals critical functions in neurogenesis and cell
type-specific gene expression for development of neural crest-derived
noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons.

Hendershot TJ(1), Liu H, Clouthier DE, Shepherd IT, Coppola E, Studer M, Firulli 
AB, Pittman DL, Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Program in Neurosciences and Degenerative
Disease, University of Toledo Health Sciences Center, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Neural crest-derived structures that depend critically upon expression of the
basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein Hand2 for normal development include
craniofacial cartilage and bone, the outflow tract of the heart, cardiac cushion,
and noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons. Loss of Hand2 is embryonic lethal
by E9.5, obviating a genetic analysis of its in-vivo function. We have overcome
this difficulty by specific deletion of Hand2 in neural crest-derived cells by
crossing our line of floxed Hand2 mice with Wnt1-Cre transgenic mice. Our
analysis of Hand2 knock-out in neural crest-derived cells reveals effects on
development in all neural crest-derived structures where Hand2 is expressed. In
the autonomic nervous system, conditional disruption of Hand2 results in a
significant and progressive loss of neurons as well as a significant loss of TH
expression. Hand2 affects generation of the neural precursor pool of cells by
affecting both the proliferative capacity of the progenitors as well as affecting
expression of Phox2a and Gata3, DNA binding proteins important for the cell
autonomous development of noradrenergic neurons. Our data suggest that Hand2 is a
multifunctional DNA binding protein affecting differentiation and cell
type-specific gene expression in neural crest-derived noradrenergic sympathetic
ganglion neurons. Hand2 has a pivotal function in a non-linear cross-regulatory
network of DNA binding proteins that affect cell autonomous control of
differentiation and cell type-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2517160
PMID: 18501887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Prostate. 2008 Aug 1;68(11):1248-56. doi: 10.1002/pros.20792.

Identification of candidate prostate cancer genes through comparative
expression-profiling of seminal vesicle.

Thompson M(1), Lapointe J, Choi YL, Ong DE, Higgins JP, Brooks JD, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-5176,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among men in 
the United States. In contrast, cancer of the seminal vesicle is exceedingly
rare, despite that the prostate and seminal vesicle share similar histology,
secretory function, androgen dependency, blood supply, and (in part) embryonic
origin. We hypothesized that gene-expression differences between prostate and
seminal vesicle might inform mechanisms underlying the higher incidence of
prostate cancer.
METHODS: Whole-genome DNA microarrays were used to profile gene expression of 11 
normal prostate and 7 seminal vesicle specimens (including six matched pairs)
obtained from radical prostatectomy. Supervised analysis was used to identify
genes differentially expressed between normal prostate and seminal vesicle, and
this list was then cross-referenced to genes differentially expressed between
normal and cancerous prostate. Expression patterns of selected genes were
confirmed by immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray.
RESULTS: We identified 32 genes that displayed a highly statistically significant
expression pattern with highest levels in seminal vesicle, lower levels in normal
prostate, and lowest levels in prostate cancer. Among these genes was the known
candidate prostate tumor suppressor GSTP1 (involved in xenobiotic
detoxification). The expression pattern of GSTP1 and four other genes, ABCG2
(xenobiotic transport), CRABP2 (retinoic acid signaling), GATA3 (lineage-specific
transcription), and SLPI (immune response), was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify candidate prostate cancer genes whose reduced 
expression in prostate (compared to seminal vesicle) may be permissive to
prostate cancer initiation. Such genes and their pathways may inform mechanisms
of prostate carcinogenesis, and suggest new opportunities for prostate cancer
prevention.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2516917
PMID: 18500686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7839-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801074105. Epub 2008 May 22.

Coordinated regulation of transcription factors through Notch2 is an important
mediator of mast cell fate.

Sakata-Yanagimoto M(1), Nakagami-Yamaguchi E, Saito T, Kumano K, Yasutomo K,
Ogawa S, Kurokawa M, Chiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Therapy and Transplantation Medicine, University of Tokyo
Hospital, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7629-30.

Mast cells are thought to participate in a wide variety of pathophysiological
conditions. Mechanisms of regulation, however, of mast cell production and
maturation are still to be elucidated. Mast cell developmental process is likely 
to be profoundly affected by cell-autonomous transcriptional regulators such as
the GATA family and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family members.
Extracellular regulators such as stem cell factor and IL-3 have essential roles
in basal and inducible mast cell generation, respectively. The relationship,
however, between the extracellular signaling and cellular transcriptional control
is unclear, and the trigger of the mast cell development remains elusive. Notch
signaling plays a fundamental role in the lymphopoietic compartment, but its role
in myeloid differentiation is less clear. Here, we demonstrate that Notch
signaling connects environmental cues and transcriptional control for mast cell
fate decision. Delta1, an established Notch ligand, instructs bone marrow common 
myeloid progenitors and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors toward mast cell
lineage at the expense of other granulocyte-macrophage lineages, depending on the
function of the Notch2 gene. Notch2 signaling results in the up-regulation of
Hes-1 and GATA3, whereas simultaneous overexpression of these transcription
factors remarkably biases the progenitor fate toward the mast cell-containing
colony-forming cells. C/EBPalpha mRNA was down-regulated in myeloid progenitors
as a consequence of Hes-1 overexpression, in agreement with the recent proposal
that the down-regulation of C/EBPalpha is necessary for mast cell fate
determination. Taken together, signaling through Notch2 determines the fate of
myeloid progenitors toward mast cell-producing progenitors, via coordinately
up-regulating Hes-1 and GATA3.

PMCID: PMC2409420
PMID: 18499801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. PLoS One. 2008 May 21;3(5):e2241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002241.

Generation of a novel regulatory NK cell subset from peripheral blood CD34+
progenitors promoted by membrane-bound IL-15.

Giuliani M(1), Giron-Michel J, Negrini S, Vacca P, Durali D, Caignard A, Le
Bousse-Kerdiles C, Chouaib S, Devocelle A, Bahri R, Durrbach A, Taoufik Y,
Ferrini S, Croce M, Mingari MC, Moretta L, Azzarone B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 542, Université de Paris XI, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif,
France.

BACKGROUND: NK cells have been long time considered as cytotoxic lymphocytes
competent in killing virus-infected cells and tumors. However, NK cells may also 
play essential immuno-regulatory functions. In this context, the real existence
of a defined NK subset with negative regulatory properties has been hypothesized 
but never clearly demonstrated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Herein, we show the in vitro generation from
human peripheral blood haematopoietic progenitors (PB-HP), of a novel subset of
non-cytolytic NK cells displaying a mature phenotype and remarkable
immuno-regulatory functions (NK-ireg). The main functional hallmark of these
NK-ireg cells is represented by the surface expression/release of HLA-G, a major 
immunosuppressive molecule. In addition, NK-ireg cells secrete two powerful
immuno-regulatory factors: IL-10 and IL-21. Through these factors, NK-ireg cells 
act as effectors of the down-regulation of the immune response: reconverting
mature myeloid DC (mDC) into immature/tolerogenic DC, blocking cytolytic
functions on conventional NK cells and inducing HLA-G membrane expression on
PB-derived monocytes. The generation of "NK-ireg" cells is obtained, by default, 
in culture conditions favouring cell-to-cell contacts, and it is strictly
dependent on reciprocal trans-presentation of membrane-bound IL-15 forms
constitutively and selectively expressed by human CD34(+) PB-HP. Finally, a small
subset of NKp46(+) HLA-G(+) IL-10(+) is detected within freshly isolated decidual
NK cells, suggesting that these cells could represent an in vivo counterpart of
the NK-ireg cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, NK-ireg cells represent a novel truly
differentiated non-cytolytic NK subset with a self-sustainable phenotype (CD56(+)
CD16(+) NKp30(+) NKp44(+) NKp46(+) CD94(+) CD69(+) CCR7(+)) generated from
specific pSTAT6(+) GATA3(+) precursors. NK-ireg cells could be employed to
develop new immuno-suppressive strategies in autoimmune diseases, transplant
rejection or graft versus host diseases. In addition, NK-ireg cells can be easily
derived from peripheral blood of the patients and could constitute an autologous 
biotherapic tool to be used combined or in alternative to other immuno-regulatory
cells.

PMCID: PMC2376096
PMID: 18493613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Immunol. 2008 Jun 1;180(11):7385-93.

CD43 regulates Th2 differentiation and inflammation.

Cannon JL(1), Collins A, Mody PD, Balachandran D, Henriksen KJ, Smith CE, Tong J,
Clay BS, Miller SD, Sperling AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. jlcanno@uchicago.edu

CD43 is a highly glycosylated transmembrane protein that regulates T cell
activation. CD43(-/-) T cells are hyperproliferative and the cytoplasmic tail of 
CD43 has been found to be sufficient to reconstitute wild-type proliferation
levels, suggesting an intracellular mechanism. In this study, we report that upon
TCR ligation CD43(-/-) T cells demonstrated no increase in tyrosine
phosphorylation but a decreased calcium flux. Interestingly, CD43(-/-) T cells
preferentially differentiated into Th2 cells in vitro, and CD43(-/-) T cells show
increased GATA-3 translocation into the nucleus. In vivo, CD43(-/-) mice
exhibited increased inflammation in two separate models of Th2-mediated allergic 
airway disease. In contrast, in Th1-mediated diabetes, nonobese diabetic
CD43(-/-) mice did not significantly differ from wild-type mice in disease onset 
or progression. Th1-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis to
MOG(35-55) was also normal in the CD43(-/-) mice. Nonetheless, the CD43(-/-) mice
produced more IL-5 when restimulated with MOG(35-55) in vitro and demonstrated
decreased delayed-type hypersensitivity responses. Together, these data
demonstrate that although CD43(-/-) T cells preferentially differentiate into Th2
cells, this response is not sufficient to protect against Th1-mediated autoimmune
responses.

PMCID: PMC2669414
PMID: 18490738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3085-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.03.018. Epub
2008 May 8.

Cooperation of Gata3, c-Myc and Notch in malignant transformation of double
positive thymocytes.

van Hamburg JP(1), de Bruijn MJ, Dingjan GM, Beverloo HB, Diepstraten H, Ling KW,
Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Gata transcription factors are critical regulators of proliferation and
differentiation implicated in various human cancers, but specific genes activated
by Gata proteins remain to be identified. We previously reported that enforced
expression of Gata3 during T cell development in CD2-Gata3 transgenic mice
induced CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) T cell lymphoma. Here, we show that the
presence of the DO11.10 T-cell receptor transgene, which directs DP cells towards
the CD4 lineage, resulted in enhanced lymphoma development and a dramatic
increase in thymocyte cell size in CD2-Gata3 transgenic mice. CD2-Gata3 DP cells 
expressed high levels of the proto-oncogene c-Myc but the Notch1 signaling
pathway, which is known to induce c-Myc, was not activated. Gene expression
profiling showed that in CD2-Gata3 lymphoma cells transcription of c-Myc and its 
target genes was further increased. A substantial fraction of CD2-Gata3 lymphomas
had trisomy of chromosome 15, leading to an increased c-Myc gene dose.
Interestingly, most lymphomas showed high expression of the Notch targets Deltex1
and Hes1, often due to activating Notch1 PEST domain mutations. Therefore, we
conclude that enforced Gata3 expression converts DP thymocytes into a
pre-malignant state, characterized by high c-Myc expression, whereby subsequent
induction of Notch1 signaling cooperates to establish malignant transformation.
The finding that Gata3 regulates c-Myc expression levels, in a direct or indirect
fashion, may explain the parallel phenotypes of mice with overexpression or
deficiency of either of the two transcription factors.

PMID: 18471881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Immunology. 2008 Nov;125(3):377-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02854.x. Epub
2008 Apr 26.

Lymphoid enhancer factor interacts with GATA-3 and controls its function in T
helper type 2 cells.

Hossain MB(1), Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Watarai H, Taniguchi M, Yamashita M,
Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

GATA-3 is the master transcription factor for T helper 2 (Th2) cell
differentiation and is critical for the expression of Th2 cytokines. Little is
known, however, about the nature of the functional molecular complexes of GATA-3.
We identified a high-mobility group (HMG)-box type transcription factor, lymphoid
enhancer factor 1 (LEF-1), in the GATA-3 complex present in Th2 cells using a
Flag-calmodulin-binding peptide (CBP)-tag based proteomics method. The
interaction between GATA-3 and LEF-1 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation
experiments using LEF-1-introduced T-cell lineage TG40 cells. The HMG-box domain 
of LEF-1 and two zinc finger domains of GATA-3 were found to be important for the
physical association. The introduction of LEF-1 into developing Th2 cells
resulted in the suppression of Th2 cytokine production. The suppression was
significantly lower in the cells into which a HMG-box-deleted LEF-1 mutant was
introduced. Moreover, LEF-1 inhibited the binding activity of GATA-3 to the
interleukin (IL)-5 promoter. These results suggest that LEF-1 is involved in the 
GATA-3 complex, while also regulating the GATA-3 function, such as the induction 
of Th2 cytokine expression via the inhibition of the DNA-binding activity of
GATA-3.

PMCID: PMC2669141
PMID: 18445004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. BMC Med Genomics. 2008 Apr 28;1:13. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-13.

The gene expression profiles of primary and metastatic melanoma yields a
transition point of tumor progression and metastasis.

Riker AI(1), Enkemann SA, Fodstad O, Liu S, Ren S, Morris C, Xi Y, Howell P,
Metge B, Samant RS, Shevde LA, Li W, Eschrich S, Daud A, Ju J, Matta J.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute-University of South Alabama, 315 North University
Boulevard, MSB 2015, Mobile, Alabama 36688, USA. ariker@usouthal.edu

BACKGROUND: The process of malignant transformation, progression and metastasis
of melanoma is poorly understood. Gene expression profiling of human cancer has
allowed for a unique insight into the genes that are involved in these processes.
Thus, we have attempted to utilize this approach through the analysis of a series
of primary, non-metastatic cutaneous tumors and metastatic melanoma samples.
METHODS: We have utilized gene microarray analysis and a variety of molecular
techniques to compare 40 metastatic melanoma (MM) samples, composed of 22 bulky, 
macroscopic (replaced) lymph node metastases, 16 subcutaneous and 2 distant
metastases (adrenal and brain), to 42 primary cutaneous cancers, comprised of 16 
melanoma, 11 squamous cell, 15 basal cell skin cancers. A Human Genome U133 Plus 
2.0 array from Affymetrix, Inc. was utilized for each sample. A variety of
statistical software, including the Affymetrix MAS 5.0 analysis software, was
utilized to compare primary cancers to metastatic melanomas. Separate analyses
were performed to directly compare only primary melanoma to metastatic melanoma
samples. The expression levels of putative oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
were analyzed by semi- and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) and Western blot 
analysis was performed on select genes.
RESULTS: We find that primary basal cell carcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas and
thin melanomas express dramatically higher levels of many genes, including
SPRR1A/B, KRT16/17, CD24, LOR, GATA3, MUC15, and TMPRSS4, than metastatic
melanoma. In contrast, the metastatic melanomas express higher levels of genes
such as MAGE, GPR19, BCL2A1, MMP14, SOX5, BUB1, RGS20, and more. The transition
from non-metastatic expression levels to metastatic expression levels occurs as
melanoma tumors thicken. We further evaluated primary melanomas of varying
Breslow's tumor thickness to determine that the transition in expression occurs
at different thicknesses for different genes suggesting that the "transition
zone" represents a critical time for the emergence of the metastatic phenotype.
Several putative tumor oncogenes (SPP-1, MITF, CITED-1, GDF-15, c-Met, HOX loci) 
and suppressor genes (PITX-1, CST-6, PDGFRL, DSC-3, POU2F3, CLCA2, ST7L), were
identified and validated by quantitative PCR as changing expression during this
transition period. These are strong candidates for genes involved in the
progression or suppression of the metastatic phenotype.
CONCLUSION: The gene expression profiling of primary, non-metastatic cutaneous
tumors and metastatic melanoma has resulted in the identification of several
genes that may be centrally involved in the progression and metastatic potential 
of melanoma. This has very important implications as we continue to develop an
improved understanding of the metastatic process, allowing us to identify
specific genes for prognostic markers and possibly for targeted therapeutic
approaches.

PMCID: PMC2408576
PMID: 18442402  [PubMed]


407. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Jun;121(6):1435-41, 1441.e1-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.02.018.

T-cell regulation in chronic paranasal sinus disease.

Van Bruaene N(1), Pérez-Novo CA, Basinski TM, Van Zele T, Holtappels G, De Ruyck 
N, Schmidt-Weber C, Akdis C, Van Cauwenberge P, Bachert C, Gevaert P.

Author information: 
(1)Upper Airway Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis is an inflammatory disease with distinct
cytokine and remodeling patterns. Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps
(CRSwNP) is characterized by a T(H)2-skewed eosinophilic inflammation, whereas
chronic rhinosinusitis without nasal polyps (CRSsNP) represents a predominant
T(H)1 milieu.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to study the direct tissue expression of transcription
factors for T-cell subpopulations, including T regulatory cells, in relation to
the cytokine expression patterns in the different disease subgroups.
METHODS: The expression of forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), T-box transcription factor
(T-bet), GATA-3, retinoid acid-related orphan receptor C (RORc), the suppressive 
cytokines TGF-beta1 and IL-10, and T(H)1/ T(H)2/ T(H)17 cytokines (IFN-gamma,
IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-17) were analyzed by means of RT-PCR in 13 CRSsNP, 16
CRSwNP, and 10 control samples. Additional protein measurements were performed
for TGF-beta1 and IFN-gamma.
RESULTS: In CRSwNP, we observed a significantly lower FOXP3 mRNA and TGF-beta1
protein expression, but a significantly higher T-bet, GATA-3, IL-5, and IL-13
mRNA expression compared with controls, whereas RORc was not significantly
different compared with controls. In CRSsNP, FOXP3, T-bet, GATA-3, and RORc
expression was not significantly different from controls, whereas TGF-beta1 mRNA,
IFN-gamma mRNA, and protein were significantly higher in CRSsNP compared with
controls. For IL-17, no significant differences were noted among all groups.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate for the first time a decreased FOXP3 expression
accompanied by an upregulation of T-bet and GATA-3 and a downregulation of
TGF-beta1 in CRSwNP versus controls and CRSsNP.

PMID: 18423831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Jun;158(6):1315-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08565.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Polymorphisms in the interleukin 13 and GATA binding protein 3 genes and the
development of eczema during childhood.

Arshad SH(1), Karmaus W, Kurukulaaratchy R, Sadeghnejad A, Huebner M, Ewart S.

Author information: 
(1)The David Hide Asthma and Allergy Research Centre, St Mary's Hospital,
Newport, Isle of Wight and IIR Research Division, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK. sha@soton.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Atopic eczema is characterized by Th2-dominant immunity with the
cytokine interleukin 13 and the transcription factor GATA binding protein 3
playing a critical role.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the association of polymorphisms in the IL13 and GATA3
genes with childhood eczema.
METHODS: A birth cohort (n = 1456) was established on the Isle of Wight in 1989
and followed at the ages of 1 (n = 1167), 2 (n = 1174), 4 (n = 1218) and 10 years
(n = 1373) to determine the prevalence of allergic disease including eczema. At 4
and 10 years, skin prick testing was performed. Whole blood samples (n = 923)
were obtained at the 10-year assessment, stored frozen, and genotyped. Five
polymorphisms from IL13 and seven from GATA3 were genotyped for this analysis.
Repeated measurement analyses were conducted for the occurrence of eczema at ages
1, 2, 4 and 10 years. All analyses were adjusted for maternal and paternal
eczema, low birth weight (< 2500 g), breastfeeding >or= 3 months and age.
RESULTS: IL13 was not associated with childhood eczema. For GATA3, the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2275806 (promoter region) showed an increased
odds ratio for atopic eczema independent of whether the comparison group had a
positive skin prick test. The SNP rs444762 (intron 3 region) was associated with 
atopic eczema in comparison with children without eczema. The increased relative 
risks remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing only for
rs2275806 (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: A SNP in GATA3 is associated with atopic eczema. This finding
highlights the importance of GATA3 as an immune-modulating gene in atopic eczema.

PMCID: PMC2647137
PMID: 18410415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. PLoS Genet. 2008 Apr 11;4(4):e1000050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000050.

Bmp4 is essential for the formation of the vestibular apparatus that detects
angular head movements.

Chang W(1), Lin Z, Kulessa H, Hebert J, Hogan BL, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Angular head movements in vertebrates are detected by the three semicircular
canals of the inner ear and their associated sensory tissues, the cristae. Bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), a member of the Transforming growth factor family
(TGF-beta), is conservatively expressed in the developing cristae in several
species, including zebrafish, frog, chicken, and mouse. Using mouse models in
which Bmp4 is conditionally deleted within the inner ear, as well as chicken
models in which Bmp signaling is knocked down specifically in the cristae, we
show that Bmp4 is essential for the formation of all three cristae and their
associated canals. Our results indicate that Bmp4 does not mediate the formation 
of sensory hair and supporting cells within the cristae by directly regulating
genes required for prosensory development in the inner ear such as Serrate1
(Jagged1 in mouse), Fgf10, and Sox2. Instead, Bmp4 most likely mediates crista
formation by regulating Lmo4 and Msx1 in the sensory region and Gata3, p75Ngfr,
and Lmo4 in the non-sensory region of the crista, the septum cruciatum. In the
canals, Bmp2 and Dlx5 are regulated by Bmp4, either directly or indirectly.
Mechanisms involved in the formation of sensory organs of the vertebrate inner
ear are thought to be analogous to those regulating sensory bristle formation in 
Drosophila. Our results suggest that, in comparison to sensory bristles, crista
formation within the inner ear requires an additional step of sensory and
non-sensory fate specification.

PMCID: PMC2274953
PMID: 18404215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Apr;121(4):803-9; quiz 810-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.02.008.

Therapeutic approaches for control of transcription factors in allergic disease.

Cousins DJ(1), McDonald J, Lee TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom. david.cousins@kcl.ac.uk

The inflammatory response observed in allergic disease involves multiple cell
types but is orchestrated in part by the T(H)2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13.
In recent years, the transcription factors that control the expression and
function of these cytokines have been elucidated, including signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6, GATA3, nuclear factor of activated T cells, and
nuclear factor kappaB. These molecules are attractive targets for therapeutic
intervention because they regulate the expression of numerous effector molecules 
and functions simultaneously. For instance, the immunosuppressive agents
glucocorticoids and cyclosporin A both function by repressing the activity of
transcription factors through a variety of mechanisms. In this review we examine 
the role of each transcription factor in allergic disease and discuss approaches 
that have been taken to therapeutically interfere with transcription factor
function in allergic disease.

PMID: 18395546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):480-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-120261. Epub 2008 Apr
4.

Core binding factors are necessary for natural killer cell development and
cooperate with Notch signaling during T-cell specification.

Guo Y(1), Maillard I, Chakraborti S, Rothenberg EV, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):454.

CBFbeta is the non-DNA binding subunit of the core binding factors (CBFs). Mice
with reduced CBFbeta levels display profound, early defects in T-cell but not
B-cell development. Here we show that CBFbeta is also required at very early
stages of natural killer (NK)-cell development. We also demonstrate that T-cell
development aborts during specification, as the expression of Gata3 and Tcf7,
which encode key regulators of T lineage specification, is substantially reduced,
as are functional thymic progenitors. Constitutively active Notch or IL-7
signaling cannot restore T-cell expansion or differentiation of CBFbeta
insufficient cells, nor can overexpression of Runx1 or CBFbeta overcome a lack of
Notch signaling. Therefore, the ability of the prethymic cell to respond
appropriately to Notch is dependent on CBFbeta, and both signals converge to
activate the T-cell developmental program.

PMCID: PMC2481540
PMID: 18390836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Apr;38(4):977-85. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737688.

Notch signaling is necessary for GATA3 function in the initiation of T cell
development.

Hozumi K(1), Negishi N, Tsuchiya I, Abe N, Hirano K, Suzuki D, Yamamoto M, Engel 
JD, Habu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, and Research Center for Embryogenesis and
Organogenesis, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
hozumi@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

GATA3 and Notch1 are essential for T cell development at the earliest stage, but 
their mutual roles in this process remain to be clarified. In this study, we
demonstrated that impairment of T lymphopoiesis in hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPC) of GATA3-deficient fetal liver (FL) on day 11.5 of gestation (E11.5) was
rescued only by introduction of both GATA3 and the intracellular region of Notch1
but not by either alone. However, the introduction of GATA3 only was sufficient
for T cell induction in GATA3-deficient FL cells at the advanced stage, where
Notch signaling is well detectable. This indicates that Notch signaling is
necessary for GATA3 to function for T cell fate specification but is not
sufficient without GATA3. On the other hand, Notch signaling is sufficient for
blockage of B cell development without GATA3, suggesting that T cell fate
specification at the branching point does not result simply from the
developmental arrest of B cell lineage by Notch signaling.

PMID: 18383037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2008 Sep;13(3):297-312. doi: 10.1007/s12192-008-0028-2.
Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Cardiac expression of Brn-3a and Brn-3b POU transcription factors and regulation 
of Hsp27 gene expression.

Farooqui-Kabir SR(1), Diss JK, Henderson D, Marber MS, Latchman DS,
Budhram-Mahadeo V, Heads RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London School of Medicine, Department 
of Cardiology, The Rayne Institute, St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth Palace Road,
London, UK.

The Brn-3 family of transcription factors play a critical role in regulating
expression of genes that control cell fate, including the small heat shock
protein Hsp27. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between 
Brn-3a and Brn-3b and Hsp27 expression in the developing rodent heart. Brn-3a and
Brn-3b were detected from embryonic days 9.5-10.5 (E9.5-E10.5) in the mouse
heart, with significant increases seen later during development. Two isoforms
(long and short) of each protein were detected during embryogenesis and
postnatally. Brn-3a messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein were localized by E13.0 to
the atrio-ventricular (AV) valve cushions and leaflets, outflow tract (OFT),
epicardium and cardiac ganglia. By E14.5, Brn-3a was also localised to the septa 
and compact ventricular myocardium. An increase in expression of the long
Brn-3a(l) isoform between E17 and adult coincided with a decrease in expression
of Brn-3b(l) and a marked increase in expression of Hsp27. Hearts from Brn-3a-/- 
mice displayed a partially penetrant phenotype marked by thickening of the
endocardial cushions and AV valve leaflets and hypoplastic ventricular
myocardium. Loss of Brn-3a was correlated with a compensatory increase in Brn-3b 
and GATA3 mRNA but no change in Hsp27 mRNA. Reporter assays in isolated
cardiomyocytes demonstrated that both Brn-3a and Brn-3b activate the hsp27
promoter via a consensus Brn-3-binding site. Therefore, Brn-3 POU factors may
play an important role in the development and maintenance of critical cell types 
and structures within the heart, in part via developmental regulation of
myocardial Hsp27 expression. Furthermore, Brn-3a may be necessary for correct
valve and myocardial remodelling and maturation.

PMCID: PMC2673938
PMID: 18368538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;20(2):164-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2008.02.003. Epub 
2008 Mar 21.

GATA-3 and the regulation of the mammary luminal cell fate.

Kouros-Mehr H(1), Kim JW, Bechis SK, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and the Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0452,
United States.

The GATA family of transcription factors plays essential roles in the
specification and maintenance of differentiated cell types. GATA-3 was identified
in a microarray screen of the mouse mammary gland as the most highly expressed
transcription factor in the mammary epithelium and is expressed exclusively in
the luminal epithelial cell population. Targeted deletion of GATA-3 in mammary
glands leads to profound defects in mammary development and inability to specify 
and maintain the luminal cell fate in the adult mouse. In breast cancer, GATA-3
has emerged as a strong predictor of tumor differentiation, estrogen-receptor
status, and clinical outcome. GATA-3 maintains tumor differentiation and
suppresses tumor dissemination in a mouse model of breast cancer. This review
explores our current understanding of GATA-3 signaling in luminal cell
differentiation, both in mammary development and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2397451
PMID: 18358709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Neurochem Res. 2008 Sep;33(9):1821-31. doi: 10.1007/s11064-008-9639-3. Epub 2008 
Mar 13.

Transcription factor GATA-3 regulates the transcriptional activity of dopamine
beta-hydroxylase by interacting with Sp1 and AP4.

Hong SJ(1), Choi HJ, Hong S, Huh Y, Chae H, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, MRC215, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA, 02478, USA.

GATA-3 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in T cell lineages
as well as in the nervous system during development. In this study, we report
that forced expression of GATA-3 resulted in an increased number of dopamine
beta-hydroxylase (DBH)-expressing neurons in primary neural crest stem cell
(NCSC) culture, suggesting that the DBH gene may be a downstream target gene of
GATA-3. GATA-3 robustly transactivates the promoter function of the noradrenaline
(NA)-synthesizing DBH gene, via two specific upstream promoter domains; one at
-62 to -32 bp and the other at -891 to -853 bp. Surprisingly, none of these
domains contain GATA-3 binding sites but encompass binding motifs for
transcription factors Sp1 and AP4, respectively. Protein-protein interaction
analyses both in vitro and in vivo and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays showed that GATA-3 effects its transcriptional regulatory function through
physical interactions with these transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2712938
PMID: 18338249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cell Chromosome. 2008 Mar 10;7:1. doi: 10.1186/1475-9268-7-1.

Two mosaic terminal inverted duplications arising post-zygotically: Evidence for 
possible formation of neo-telomeres.

Daniel A(1), St Heaps L, Sylvester D, Diaz S, Peters G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The Children's
Hospital at Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia. artd@chw.edu.au.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the structure of terminal inverted duplications and to
investigate potential mechanisms of formation in two cases where there was
mosaicism with cells of apparently normal karyotype.
RESULTS: A karyotype [46,XY,inv dup(4)(p16.3p15.1)/46,XY] performed on blood
lymphocytes from a patient referred for developmental delay (case 1) demonstrated
a normal karyotype in 60% of cells with a terminal inverted duplication 4p in the
remainder. In case 2, referred for multiple fetal anomalies on an ultrasound
scan, 33% of amniocyte colonies were karyotypically normal, with a terminal inv
dup 10p in the remainder [46,XX,inv dup(10)(p15.3p11)/46,XX]. Duplicated FISH
signals for GATA3 and NEBL loci (in case 2), and for the Wolf-Hirschhorn locus
(case 1) confirmed the inverted structure of both duplications. In the GTL banded
normal cells from both cases, there was a cryptic deletion detected by FISH of
one copy of the subtelomere 4p (case 1, probe GS-36P21), and subtelomere 10p
(case 2, probe GS-306F7). At pter on both inv dup chromosomes there was no FISH
signal present for the specific subtelomere probe. However, a positive
pantelomeric probe signal was detected at 4 pter and 10 pter in both the
cryptically-deleted chromosomes and the inv dup chromosomes in the respective
cell lines of both cases.
CONCLUSION: An inv dup structure was evident for both cases on GTL bands, and
confirmed by the various FISH studies. The presence of telomere (TTAGGG repeat)
sequences at pter on the inv dup chromosomes (where more proximal chromosome
specific subtelomeric probes were negative) was indicated by the pantelomeric
probe signals in both cases. We conclude the most likely mechanism of origin in
both cases was by sub-telomeric breakage in the zygote at pter, and delayed
repair/rearrangement until after one or more subsequent mitotic divisions. In
these divisions, at least one breakage-fusion-bridge cycle occurred, to produce
inverted duplications. It is proposed then that two differently "repaired"
daughter cells proliferated in parallel. In one daughter cell line (with an
overtly normal karyotype) there was deletion of the subtelomere and presumed
repair through capping by a neo-telomere (i.e. "healing", as initially proposed
by McClintock). This occurred in both cases presented. In the other daughter cell
of each case, it is proposed that chromosome stabilization was achieved (after
replication) by sister chromatid reunion to form a dicentric, which broke at a
subsequent anaphase, to form an inverted duplication (with loss of the reciprocal
product, and the other daughter cell line). One inv dup was repaired without an
interstitial specific subtelomere (case 1) and one was repaired with a duplicated
specific interstitial subtelomere (case 2). After repair TTAGGG repeats were
detected by FISH at each respective new pter.

PMCID: PMC2292745
PMID: 18331649  [PubMed]


417. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Apr;121(4):910-916.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.12.1175. Epub 2008 Mar 5.

Effective prevention and therapy of experimental allergic asthma using a
GATA-3-specific DNAzyme.

Sel S(1), Wegmann M, Dicke T, Sel S, Henke W, Yildirim AO, Renz H, Garn H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics, Medical Faculty,
Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Allergic bronchial asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the
airways. The transcription factor GATA-3 was shown to play an important role in
TH2 cell activation, but also in the regulation of other cell types involved in
bronchial asthma including mast cells, eosinophils, and epithelial cells.
DNAzymes represent a new class of antisense molecules that combines the
specificity of DNA base pairing with an inherent RNA-cleaving enzymatic activity.
OBJECTIVE: To develop a GATA-3 mRNA-specific DNAzyme and analyze its
allergy-preventing activity in murine models of experimental allergic asthma.
METHODS: The most active DNAzyme (termed gd21) was selected by in vitro cleavage 
assays. Allergic airway inflammation was assessed by inflammatory cell and
cytokine analysis within bronchoalveolar lavage. Lung histology, including goblet
cell hyperplasia and lung function, was analyzed using head-out
body-plethysmography.
RESULTS: Intranasal administration of gd21 prevented airway inflammation and
mucus production and inhibited development of airway hyperresponsiveness to
methacholine in models of acute allergic airway inflammation. Similar effects
were also detected in a model of chronic experimental asthma. Interestingly, gd21
was at least as effective as other antisense molecules, and off-target effects
were not detected. Further experiments indicated that pulmonary surfactant may
facilitate the cellular uptake of gd21 by acting as an endogenous transfectant.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that topical application of the
GATA-3-specific DNAzyme is a promising novel approach for the treatment of
allergic bronchial asthma.

PMID: 18325571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. FASEB J. 2008 Jul;22(7):2223-31. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-104687. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

In vitro induction of natural killer T cells from embryonic stem cells prepared
using somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Wakao H(1), Wakao R, Sakata S, Iwabuchi K, Oda A, Fujita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
N15W7, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. hwakao@med.hokudai.ac.jp

The ectopic expression of the Notch receptor ligand delta-like 1 on stromal cells
allows the induction of T cells from embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, these 
in vitro-generated T cells are not transplantable because they are too immature
to mount an immune response in an immunocompromised animal. We efficiently
generated a subset of T cells called invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells from
ESCs derived from peripheral iNKT cells using somatic cell nuclear transfer
(ntESCs). These iNKT cells matured autonomously in vivo and exhibited an adjuvant
effect accompanying the production of interferon-gamma in an antigen-specific
manner. This adjuvant effect culminated in the inhibition of inoculated tumor
cell growth. Our results indicate that ntESC-derived iNKT cells are
transplantable lymphocytes that will be beneficial for the induction of immune
tolerance and the treatment of autoimmune diseases, tumors, and infections.

PMID: 18323403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Dev Comp Immunol. 2008;32(8):898-907. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2008.01.004. Epub 2008
Feb 11.

GATA3 mRNA in ginbuna crucian carp (Carassius auratus langsdorfii): cDNA cloning,
splice variants and expression analysis.

Takizawa F(1), Mizunaga Y, Araki K, Moritomo T, Ototake M, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of
Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

GATA3, a transcriptional activator, plays a critical role in the development of
T-cells and differentiation to T helper type 2 cells. To date, no information is 
available on the role of GATA3 in the teleost immune system. We identified
full-length cDNA and alternatively spliced variants of ginbuna crucian carp GATA3
(gbGATA3). The gbGATA3 gene is transcribed into multiple splice variants lacking 
either one or both zinc finger domains, although the sequences of both domains
are fully conserved between ginbuna and other vertebrates. We found that
alternative splice site and stop codon in gbGATA3 intron 3, located between exons
that separately encode the two zinc finger domains, are conserved among teleosts,
suggesting that teleost GATA3 gene can be translated into multiple isoforms.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that the gbGATA3 is strongly expressed in the brain,
thymus and gill of unstimulated fish. Moreover, gbGATA3 expression was detected
in surface-IgM-negative lymphocytes among kidney cells sorted by FACS. Real-time 
PCR demonstrated that expression levels of full-length gbGATA3 and the splice
variants differed with tissue type, but full length was always the predominantly 
expressed form. These results suggest that gbGATA3, including its splice
variants, is involved in teleost T-cell function.

PMID: 18313140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Apr;121(4):1000-5.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.01.004. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Human immature myeloid dendritic cells trigger a TH2-polarizing program via
Jagged-1/Notch interaction.

Liotta F(1), Frosali F, Querci V, Mantei A, Filì L, Maggi L, Mazzinghi B, Angeli 
R, Ronconi E, Santarlasci V, Biagioli T, Lasagni L, Ballerini C, Parronchi P,
Scheffold A, Cosmi L, Maggi E, Romagnani S, Annunziato F.

Author information: 
(1)Excellence Center for Research, Transfer, and High Education, De Novo Therapy,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms by which human dendritic cells (DCs) activate a
TH1-polarizing or TH2-polarizing program are still partially unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Study of the mechanisms responsible for the TH1/TH2-polarizing
activity of human circulating myeloid DCs before and after ligation of their
Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
METHODS: IL-4 and IFN-gamma production by CD4+ T cells was assessed in cocultures
with myeloid DCs before or after TLR triggering. Expression of Jagged-1 and
Delta-4 Notch ligands and of GATA-3 and T-box expressed in T cells transcription 
factors was evaluated by real-time quantitative PCR. Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 and 6 phosphorylation was assessed by flow
cytometry. Knockdown of Jagged-1 or Delta-4 was performed by transfection of DCs 
with appropriate silencing mRNAs.
RESULTS: Myeloid immature DCs constitutively expressed Jagged-1, which induces in
CD4+ T cells a TH2 polarization, as shown by Jagged-1 gene silencing. The TH2
polarization associated with high GATA-3/T-box expressed in T cells ratio and was
at least partially dependent on the early induction of IL-4. Maturation of DCs by
TLR ligation resulted in the reduction of Jagged-1 and upregulation of Delta-4,
which was at least in part responsible for the polarization of CD4+ T cells to
the TH1 phenotype.
CONCLUSION: CD4+ T-cell responses are usually characterized by a prevalent TH2
phenotype unless TLRs are triggered on DCs by microbial components.

PMID: 18313135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2008 Mar;233(3):344-55. doi: 10.3181/0707-RM-203.

Cytokine and chemokine expression associated with steatohepatitis and hepatocyte 
proliferation in rats fed ethanol via total enteral nutrition.

Ronis MJ(1), Butura A, Korourian S, Shankar K, Simpson P, Badeaux J, Albano E,
Ingelman-Sundberg M, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, 1120 Marshall Street, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. RonisMartinJ@uams.edu

To determine the temporal relationship between alcohol-induced changes in
cytokines and chemokines, development of liver pathology and stimulation of
hepatocyte proliferation, male Sprague-Dawley rats were intragastrically fed low 
carbohydrate-containing ethanol (EtOH) diets via total enteral nutrition (TEN)
for up to 49 d. Induction of EtOH metabolism and appearance of steatosis preceded
development of oxidative stress, inflammation, and cell death. A transitory peak 
of tumor necrosis factor (TNFalpha) and interferon gamma (IFN gamma) was observed
at 14 d followed by reduced expression of TNFalpha, IFN gamma and another Th1
cytokine IL-12 accompanied by reduced expression of the Th1 regulators T-bet and 
STAT4. After 35-49 d of EtOH, at a time when hepatocyte proliferation was
stimulated, IL-12 returned to control values and a second peak of TNFalpha
occurred. The Th2 cytokine IL-4 remained suppressed throughout the study and was 
accompanied by reductions in the Th2 regulator GATA3. There was no temporal
effect of EtOH on expression of IL-6 or TGFbeta. IL-5 and IL-13 mRNA were
undetectable. Chemokine CXCL-2 expression increased progressively up to 35 d and 
preceded the appearance of inflammatory infiltrates. These data suggest that
steatosis, increased ethanol metabolism, a transient induction of the innate
immune response and suppression of Th2 responses were acute consequences of
ethanol treatment and were followed by suppression of Th1 responses. However, the
majority of necrosis, apoptosis and a late peak of TNFalpha only occurred after
6-7 weeks of ethanol, coincided with the appearance of inflammatory infiltrates
and were associated with stimulation of hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 18296740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Dev Neurobiol. 2008 Apr;68(5):669-84. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20616.

Differentiation of inner ear stem cells to functional sensory neurons.

Martinez-Monedero R(1), Yi E, Oshima K, Glowatzki E, Edge AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Inner ear stem cells can be isolated by neurosphere formation from the vestibular
organs and the cochlea. The cells are pluripotent, with the potential to become
hair cells and neurons, the cochlear cell types whose loss causes deafness. Here 
we describe the control of cell fate decisions that determine the phenotype
adopted by these progenitors, and we determine whether differentiation to sensory
neurons is preferred over other types of neurons. Differentiation of progenitor
cells recapitulated developmental pathways of embryonic sensory neurons. Based on
marker expression, retinoic acid increased the yield of neurons and the
percentage of sensory neurons obtained and caused a sharp increase in Pax2, a key
transcription factor of cranial placodes. Markers of embryonic auditory and other
sensory neurons, GATA3, Brn3a, and islet1, could be detected after 3 days of
differentiation of the cells, and markers of the sensory phenotype, peripherin,
calretinin, TrkC, and TrkB were expressed after 10 days. The differentiated cells
had tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium currents and fired action potentials, and
recordings revealed functional AMPA type-glutamate receptors, further indicating 
that these cells had developed neuronal features. Neurons differentiated from
these stem cells grew processes to hair cells in vitro. Development of functional
activity in cells with the markers of sensory neurons suggested that the inner
ear stem cells might have the capacity to replace cells lost due to neural
degeneration.

PMID: 18278797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Haematologica. 2008 Mar;93(3):347-55. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12081. Epub 2008 Feb 
11.

Pegylated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilizes CD34+ cells with
different stem and progenitor subsets and distinct functional properties in
comparison with unconjugated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.

Bruns I(1), Steidl U, Fischer JC, Czibere A, Kobbe G, Raschke S, Singh R, Fenk R,
Rosskopf M, Pechtel S, von Haeseler A, Wernet P, Tenen DG, Haas R, Kronenwett R.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology,
Heinrich-Heine-University. Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
brunsin@med.uni-duessel-dorf.de

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2008 Mar;93(3):321-4.

BACKGROUND: Pegylated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has recently 
been introduced as a new compound for mobilization of CD34(+) hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells. In this study, we compared the molecular and functional
characteristics of CD34(+) cells mobilized by pegylated G-CSF with those
mobilized by unconjugated G-CSF.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Gene expression of immunomagnetically enriched CD34(+) cells 
from leukapheresis products of patients who were given pegylated-G-CSF or
unconjugated G-CSF was analyzed using Affymetrix HG Focus microarrays and
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Flow cytometry and 
fluorescence activated cell sorting was conducted to assess the CD34(+) subset
composition and to obtain Lin(-), CD34(+), CD38(-) hematopoietic stem cells. Cell
cycle assays and clonogenic assays were performed for functional corroboration.
RESULTS: Pegylated G-CSF and unconjugated G-CSF mobilized CD34(+) and
hematopoietic stem cells with different molecular phenotypes and functional
properties. The CD34(+) cells mobilized by pegylated G-CSF had higher expression 
levels of genes indicative of early hematopoiesis, including HOXA9, MEIS1 and
GATA3. We found lower expression of genes characteristic of erythroid and later
stages of myeloid differentiation and a lower functional burst-forming unit
erythroid/colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage ratio. Consistently, greater
numbers of hematopoietic stem cells and common myeloid progenitors and fewer
megakaryocyte-erthrocyte progenitors were found in the pegylated-G-CSF-mobilized 
CD34(+) cells. Additionally, sorted pegylated-G-CSF-mobilized hematopoietic stem 
cells displayed higher expression of HOXA9 in comparison to G-CSF-mobilized
hematopoietic stem cells. In line with the gene expression data, CD34(+) cells
mobilized by pegylated G-CSF, as well as sorted hematopoietic stem cells, showed 
a significantly greater cell cycle activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Stimulation with pegylated-G-CSF or G-CSF results in different
expression of key regulatory genes and different functional properties of
mobilized hematopoietic stem cells as well as their progeny, a finding that might
be relevant for the application of these cells in blood stem cell
transplantation.

PMID: 18268278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Feb;17(2):365-73. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-1090.

GATA-3 expression in breast cancer has a strong association with estrogen
receptor but lacks independent prognostic value.

Voduc D(1), Cheang M, Nielsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 4E6. dvoduc@bccancer.bc.ca

BACKGROUND: GATA-3 is a transcription factor involved in human growth and
differentiation. Gene expression profiling has shown that GATA-3 is highly
expressed in the Luminal A subtype of breast cancer. A recent study found GATA-3 
to be associated with favorable breast cancer pathologic features, including
negative lymph node and positive estrogen receptor (ER) status. GATA-3 levels
were also found to be an independent prognostic marker, with low expression
predicting for breast cancer recurrence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our case series consists of 3,119 cases of invasive breast
cancer in which GATA-3 expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry on tissue 
microarrays. We considered >5% nuclear staining to be a positive result for
GATA-3.
RESULTS: Thirty-two percent of cases were GATA-3 positive. GATA-3 is almost
exclusively expressed in ER+ patients and is also associated with lower tumor
grade, older age at diagnosis, and the absence of Her2 overexpression. In
univariate analysis, the presence of GATA-3 is a marker of good prognosis and
predicted for superior breast cancer-specific survival, relapse-free survival,
and overall survival. However, in multivariate models including patient age,
tumor size, histologic grade, nodal status, ER status, and Her2 status, GATA-3
was not independently prognostic for these same outcomes. In the subgroups of ER+
patients treated with or without tamoxifen, GATA-3 was again nonprognostic for
all outcomes.
DISCUSSION: GATA-3 is a molecular marker that is highly associated with ER
expression, but it does not seem to have prognostic value independent of ER, nor 
does it predict for response to tamoxifen among ER-positive patients.

PMID: 18268121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Dec;21(23):1087-9.

[Relationship between GATA-3 and IL-12 in patients with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao J(1), Zhou H, Xu M, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
College, Zhanjiang, 524001, China. Christyhui@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between GATA-3 and IL-12 in patients with 
allergic rhinitis.
METHOD: The expression of GATA-3 was detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 37 patients with allergic rhinitis and 12 control
samples. IL-12 was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULT: The relative density ratio of GATA-3 to GAPDH in AR patients was 0.579
+/- 0.102, and in control group was 0.128 +/- 0.021. The concentrations of IL-12 
were (53.7 +/- 12.3) ng/g and (121.9 +/- 20.4) ng/g in the two groups
respectively. The expression of GATA-3 was negatively correlated to the
expression of IL-12 in patients with allergic rhinitis.
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of GATA-3 in patients with allergic rhinitis was
related to the decrease of IL-12, and to increasing the expression of IL-12 in
topical tissue could suppress the expression of GATA-3 and may improve the
therapeutic effectiveness of AR.

PMID: 18260379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Feb 27;432(3):217-21. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.12.027. Epub
2007 Dec 23.

Chronic nicotine stimulation modulates the immune response of mucosal T cells to 
Th1-dominant pattern via nAChR by upregulation of Th1-specific transcriptional
factor.

Kikuchi H(1), Itoh J, Fukuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hirosaki University School of
Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori, Japan.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) consists of Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative 
colitis (UC). The etiology has not been clarified yet, but immune disorder is
thought to be involved in the pathogenic physiology. Recently, general consensus 
has been reached that CD and UC are distinct, especially in respect of the immune
response. Interestingly, smoking has diverse effects on CD, Th1-type enteritis,
and on UC, Th2-type. However, the mechanisms remain obscure. Therefore, we
hypothesized that nicotine altered the distinct immune responses in each form of 
IBD to affect their pathophysiology. In this study, we first demonstrated by
RT-PCR analysis that human lamina propria T (LPT) cells had nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), and express alpha7 nAChR subunit universally. In 
addition, the expression of T-bet mRNA in human LPT cells was significantly
upregulated after the culture with 10(-7)M and 10(-5)M nicotine for 9 days, while
chronic nicotine stimulation showed negligible effect on the expression of GATA-3
mRNA by real-time PCR. The effect of nicotine was inhibited by mecamylamine
(MEC). These results suggested that nicotine could modulate the immune balance to
Th1-dominant via nAChR in the intestine, to improve Th2-type enteritis. This may 
provide the experimental evidence for the fact that nicotine has a beneficial
influence on UC, and exacerbates CD. Furthermore, it is of great interest that
nicotine acts oppositely on CD and UC by modulation of the mucosal immune balance
via the neurotransmitter receptor.

PMID: 18248893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cancer Cell. 2008 Feb;13(2):141-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.01.011.

GATA-3 links tumor differentiation and dissemination in a luminal breast cancer
model.

Kouros-Mehr H(1), Bechis SK, Slorach EM, Littlepage LE, Egeblad M, Ewald AJ, Pai 
SY, Ho IC, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus 
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0452, USA.

How breast cancers are able to disseminate and metastasize is poorly understood. 
Using a hyperplasia transplant system, we show that tumor dissemination and
metastasis occur in discrete steps during tumor progression. Bioinformatic
analysis revealed that loss of the transcription factor GATA-3 marked progression
from adenoma to early carcinoma and onset of tumor dissemination. Restoration of 
GATA-3 in late carcinomas induced tumor differentiation and suppressed tumor
dissemination. Targeted deletion of GATA-3 in early tumors led to apoptosis of
differentiated cells, indicating that its loss is not sufficient for malignant
conversion. Rather, malignant progression occurred with an expanding
GATA-3-negative tumor cell population. These data indicate that GATA-3 regulates 
tumor differentiation and suppresses tumor dissemination in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2262951
PMID: 18242514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Life Sci. 2008 Mar 12;82(11-12):663-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2007.12.017. Epub 2007 
Dec 28.

Expression of T-cell immunoglobulin- and mucin-domain-containing molecule-1
(TIM-1) is increased in a mouse model of asthma and relationship to GATA-3.

Xu G(1), Cheng L, Lu L, Zhu Y, Xu R, Yao X, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)The Otorhinolarygology Hospital, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, and Otorhinolaryngology Institute of Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, 510080, China.

It has been suggested that T-cell immunoglobulin-and mucin-domain-containing
molecule-1 (TIM-1) plays an important role in the development of allergic asthma,
though its molecular mechanism remains unclear. Our aim was to examine the
expression of TIM-1 and Th2-associated transcription factor GATA-3 in asthmatic
mice, and to evaluate the correlation of TIM-1 and GATA-3 in the pathogenesis of 
allergic asthma. We examined TIM-1 expression in lung tissue and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of asthmatic mice by real-time PCR and flow cytometry, 
respectively; we also investigated TIM-1 and GATA-3 expression in the spleen
tissue of asthmatic mice by western blot. These results demonstrate that TIM-1
was significantly increased in pulmonary tissues and PBMCs in asthmatic mice
after ovalbumin (OVA) challenge (P<0.05), and that the production of TIM-1 as
well as GATA-3 was upregulated in the spleen of asthmatic mice. The production of
TIM-1 correlated significantly with the production of GATA-3 in the spleen of
asthmatic mice (r=0.753, P<0.05). The results of this study provide the first
evidence that increased expression of TIM-1 in asthmatic mice is associated with 
the Th2-associated transcription factor GATA-3. The findings suggest a possible
mechanism for how HAV infection and TIM-1 upregulation influence the development 
of allergic asthma.

PMID: 18234236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;14(2):370-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1127.

Ductal carcinoma in situ and the emergence of diversity during breast cancer
evolution.

Allred DC(1), Wu Y, Mao S, Nagtegaal ID, Lee S, Perou CM, Mohsin SK, O'Connell P,
Tsimelzon A, Medina D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
MO 63110, USA. dcallred@path.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;14(2):339-41.

PURPOSE: Human invasive breast cancers (IBC) show enormous histologic and
biological diversity. This study comprehensively evaluated diversity in ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), the immediate precursors of IBCs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The extent of diversity for conventional histologic grade
and standard prognostic biomarkers assessed by immunohistochemistry was evaluated
in a series of pure DCIS (n = 200) compared with a contemporaneous series of IBCs
(n = 200). A subset of the DCIS (n = 25) was evaluated by DNA microarrays for the
presence of luminal, basal, and erbB2 intrinsic subtypes. The extent of diversity
within individual cases of DCIS (n = 120) was determined by assessing multiple
regions independently for histologic (nuclear) grade and several biomarkers by
immunohistochemistry, which approximate microarrays in determining intrinsic
subtypes.
RESULTS: DCIS showed a broad distribution of conventional histologic grades and
standard biomarkers ranging from well to poorly differentiated, nearly identical 
to IBCs. Microarrays showed the same intrinsic subtypes in DCIS as in IBCs.
However, higher resolution analysis showed that multiple histologic grades,
biomarker phenotypes, and intrinsic subtypes often coexist within the same DCIS, 
and these diverse regions probably compete for dominance. Diversity within cases 
of DCIS was highly correlated with mutated p53 (P = 0.0007).
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the hypothesis that poorly differentiated DCIS
gradually evolve from well-differentiated DCIS by randomly acquiring genetic
defects resulting in increasingly abnormal cellular features. This diversity is
amplified by defects resulting in genetic instability (e.g., p53 mutation), and
the alterations are propagated to IBC in a manner independent of progression to
invasion.

PMID: 18223211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Ukr Biokhim Zh (1999). 2007 Jul-Aug;79(4):67-75.

[Some aspects of glutathione S-transferase P1-1 gene transcription regulation in 
human placenta].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Slonchak AM, Martseniuk OP, Rzeszowska-Wolny J, Vidlak P, Obolens'ka MIu.

Glutathione S-transferase P1-1 is the main phase II xenobiotic metabolism enzyme 
in human placenta. Low level of its gene expression and corresponding ineffective
protection of fetus from toxic compounds is associated with pregnancy disorders
such as preeclampsia and abnormalities of fetus development. It was previously
reported that environmental radioactive contamination caused down-regulation of
GSTP1 transcription in human placenta, but mechanisms responsible for such
changes were unclear. In the present study we have found that observed changes in
transcription of this gene are not caused by promoter methylation because GSTP1
promoter was not methylated in any of analyzed 91 placental samples. Regulation
of GSTP1 by methylation or transcription factors was not previously studied in
human placenta. Using "Gene Expression Atlas" online software the placental
expression profile of transcription factors known to interact with GSTP1 promoter
in other cell types, was identified. According to computer analysis the genes
coding for GATA2, GATA3, Fos-B, Nrf3 and MafK transcription factors are highly
expressed in human placenta, while genes coding for c-Fos, Juns, Mafs, ERbeta,
RARalpha and NF-kappaB factors have moderate level of expression. Competitive
EMSA provided the evidence that ARE and NF-kappaB-like sites specifically
interacted with placental nuclear proteins. Among these proteins transcription
factors AP-1 and NF-kappaB were identified using corresponding consensus
oligonucleotides as competitors in EMSA.

PMID: 18219993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2008 Sep-Oct;18(5):1051-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1525-1438.2007.01164.x. Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Microarray analysis of normal cervix, carcinoma in situ, and invasive cervical
cancer: identification of candidate genes in pathogenesis of invasion in cervical
cancer.

Song JY(1), Lee JK, Lee NW, Jung HH, Kim SH, Lee KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Korea University Anam Hospital, Korea
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The objective of this study was to identify genes that are related to
pathogenesis of carcinoma in situ (CIS) to invasive cervical cancer with the use 
of oligonucleotide microarray and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Each two cases of normal cervix, CIS, and invasive cervical cancer were
investigated with DNA microarray technology. Differential gene expression
profiles among them were analyzed. Expression levels of selected genes from the
microarray results were confirmed by RT-PCR. The expressions of 15,286 genes were
compared and 458 genes were upregulated or downregulated by twofold or more
compared with each other group. Among 458 genes, 22 genes were upregulated and 40
genes were downregulated by twofold or more in invasive cervical cancer group
compared with CIS group. RT-PCR analysis confirmed upregulation of 18 genes and
downregulation of 5 genes in invasive cervical cancer group. RBP1, TFRC, SPP1,
SAA1, ARHGAP8, and NDRG1, which were upregulated, and GATA3, PLAGL1, APOD, DUSP1,
and CYR61, which were downregulated, were considered as candidate genes
associated with invasion of cervical cancer.

PMID: 18217980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Reprod Sci. 2008 Jan;15(1):83-90. doi: 10.1177/1933719107309690.

Cyclic regulation of T-Bet and GATA-3 in human endometrium.

Inman D(1), Kawana K, Schust D, Lininger R, Young S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA. danielle_inman@med.unc.edu

Endometrial cytokine expression is poorly understood. T-Bet and GATA-3 regulate
cytokine expression in T-lymphocytes. Previous work has demonstrated expression
of T-Bet in human endometrium. Changes in human endometrial T-Bet and GATA-3 mRNA
and protein expression during the normal menstrual cycle were characterized.
Human endometrium from each phase of the menstrual cycle underwent real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry to
examine expression and localization. T-Bet and GATA-3 mRNA were increased in the 
late secretory phase. Progesterone receptor (PR) mRNA was increased during the
proliferative and early secretory phases. T-Bet and GATA-3 proteins localized
cytoplasmically in the late secretory phase. PR protein displayed nuclear
localization and maximal immunostaining during the early secretory phase. T-Bet
and GATA-3 are expressed in endometrial epithelium cyclically during the
menstrual cycle. T-Bet and GATA-3 are both upregulated during the late secretory 
phase and in the same cell types. The expression patterns of T-Bet and GATA-3
oppose PR, suggesting antagonistic function and/or regulation between PR and
T-Bet/GATA-3.

PMCID: PMC2645712
PMID: 18212358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 28;368(1):43-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.01.041. Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Expression analysis for inverted effects of serotonin transporter inactivation.

Ichikawa M(1), Okamura-Oho Y, Shimokawa K, Kondo S, Nakamura S, Yokota H, Himeno 
R, Lesch KP, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, 
Japan.

Inactivation of serotonin transporter (HTT) by pharmacologically in the neonate
or genetically increases risk for depression in adulthood, whereas
pharmacological inhibition of HTT ameliorates symptoms in depressed patients. The
differing role of HTT function during early development and in adult brain
plasticity in causing or reversing depression remains an unexplained paradox. To 
address this we profiled the gene expression of adult Htt knockout (Htt KO) mice 
and HTT inhibitor-treated mice. Inverted profile changes between the two
experimental conditions were seen in 30 genes. Consistent results of the upstream
regulatory element search and the co-localization search of these genes indicated
that the regulation may be executed by Pax5, Pax7 and Gata3, known to be involved
in the survival, proliferation, and migration of serotonergic neurons in the
developing brain, and these factors are supposed to keep functioning to regulate 
downstream genes related to serotonin system in the adult brain.

PMID: 18211820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):5223-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115857. Epub 2008 
Jan 17.

Repression via the GATA box is essential for tissue-specific erythropoietin gene 
expression.

Obara N(1), Suzuki N, Kim K, Nagasawa T, Imagawa S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance (TARA), University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4836-7.

In response to anemia, erythropoietin (Epo) gene transcription is markedly
induced in the kidney and liver. To elucidate how Epo gene expression is
regulated in vivo, we established transgenic mouse lines expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of a 180-kb mouse Epo gene locus. GFP
expression was induced by anemia or hypoxia specifically in peritubular
interstitial cells of the kidney and hepatocytes surrounding the central vein.
Surprisingly, renal Epo-producing cells had a neuronlike morphology and expressed
neuronal marker genes. Furthermore, the regulatory mechanisms of Epo gene
expression were explored using transgenes containing mutations in the GATA motif 
of the promoter region. A single nucleotide mutation in this motif resulted in
constitutive ectopic expression of transgenic GFP in renal distal tubules,
collecting ducts, and certain populations of epithelial cells in other tissues.
Since both GATA-2 and GATA-3 bind to the GATA box in distal tubular cells, both
factors are likely to repress constitutively ectopic Epo gene expression in these
cells. Thus, GATA-based repression is essential for the inducible and cell
type-specific expression of the Epo gene.

PMID: 18202227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Crit Rev Immunol. 2007;27(6):539-46.

Immune mechanisms of allergic airway disease: regulation by transcription
factors.

Yamashita M(1), Onodera A, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Allergic asthma is an airway inflammatory disease characterized by chronically
increased expression of multiple inflammatory proteins, including cytokines,
chemokines, adhesion molecules, enzymes, and receptors. Several transcription
factors are known to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of chronic
inflammatory diseases such as asthma, including signal transducer and activator
of transcription factors, nuclear factor-kappaB, nuclear factor of activated T
cells, activator protein-1 family proteins, and Th2 cellrelated transcription
factors including GATA3, JunB, and c-Maf. Modulation of the activity of certain
transcription factors has been shown to result in the inhibition of inflammation 
during asthma. Therefore, both agonists and inhibitors of transcription factors
may be potential tools for the treatment of asthma. In this review, we summarize 
the current knowledge of the role of well-established transcription factors in
asthma.

PMID: 18197799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Am J Chin Med. 2007;35(6):1011-20.

Effect and mechanism of ligustrazine on Th1/Th2 cytokines in a rat asthma model.

Xiong L(1), Fang ZY, Tao XN, Bai M, Feng G.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Pulmonary Diseases of Ministry of Health, Department of Respiratory
Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

Ligustrazine is an alkaloid isolated from the rhizome of Chuanxiong (Ligusticum
chuanxiong Hort), which is known to possess antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
anti-fibrosis and immunomodulative effects. It is used clinically to treat asthma
as an assistant therapy of glucocorticoid. The purpose of this study was to
explore the effects of intraperitoneal ligustrazine on Th1/Th2 cytokines in a rat
asthma model and the underlying mechanism. SD rats were sensitized and challenged
with ovalbumin (OVA) to establish an asthmatic model. Within 24 hours after the
last ovalbumin challenge, changes in airway histology were observed. The
concentrations of IL-4 and IFN-gamma in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were 
measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The protein expressions of
GATA-3 and T-bet in lung were measured by Western blot. The results showed that
an increase of Th2 cytokine and an inhibition of Th1 cytokine were accompanied by
an increased expression of GATA-3 protein and a decreased expression of T-bet
protein in rat asthmatic airways compared to those in normal control group.
Intraperitoneal ligustrazine administration could significantly lower the level
of IL-4 in BALF and the expression of GATA-3 protein in lung and also increase
the level of IFN-gamma and T-bet in asthmatic rats, resulting in a decreased
percentage of eosinophils (EOS) in BALF and ameliorated airway inflammatory cell 
infiltration. In conclusion, ligustrazine inhibits OVA induced airway
inflammation by modulating key master switches GATA-3 and T-bet that result in
reversing the Th2 cytokine patterns in asthma.

PMID: 18186587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Immunol. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):1050-9.

Distinct structural requirements of GATA-3 for the regulation of thymocyte and
Th2 cell differentiation.

Pai SY(1), Kang BY, Sabadini AM, Parisini E, Truitt ML, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA-3, the only T cell-specific member of the GATA family of transcription
factors, is essential for the intrathymic development of CD4+ T cells and for the
differentiation of Th2 cells. However, whether distinct biochemical features,
unique to GATA-3 compared with other GATA family members, are required to drive T
cell transcriptional programs or whether the T cell-specific functions of GATA-3 
can simply be ascribed to its expression pattern is unclear. Nor do we understand
the protein structural requirements for each individual function of GATA-3. In
this study, we report that a heterologous GATA factor, GATA-4, was competent in
supporting the development of CD4+ T cells but could not fully compensate for
GATA-3 in regulating the expression of Th cytokines. Specifically, GATA-3 was
more potent than GATA-4 in driving the production of IL-13 due to a mechanism
independent of DNA binding or chromatin remodeling of the IL-13 locus. The
difference was mapped to a partially conserved region C-terminal to the second
zinc finger. Converting a single proline residue located in this region of GATA-4
to its counterpart, a methionine of GATA-3, was sufficient to enhance the
IL-13-promoting function of GATA-4 but had no effect on other cytokines. Taken
together, our data demonstrate that the unique function of GATA-3 is conferred by
both its cell type-specific expression and distinct protein structure.

PMID: 18178845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 15;105(2):646-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0709969105. Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Functional deficit of T regulatory cells in Fulani, an ethnic group with low
susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Torcia MG(1), Santarlasci V, Cosmi L, Clemente A, Maggi L, Mangano VD, Verra F,
Bancone G, Nebie I, Sirima BS, Liotta F, Frosali F, Angeli R, Severini C,
Sannella AR, Bonini P, Lucibello M, Maggi E, Garaci E, Coluzzi M, Cozzolino F,
Annunziato F, Romagnani S, Modiano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Firenze, Viale
Pieraccini 6, 50139 Firenze, Italy. g.torcia@dfc.unifi.it

Previous interethnic comparative studies on the susceptibility to malaria
performed in West Africa showed that Fulani are more resistant to Plasmodium
falciparum malaria than are sympatric ethnic groups. This lower susceptibility is
not associated to classic malaria-resistance genes, and the analysis of the
immune response to P. falciparum sporozoite and blood stage antigens, as well as 
non-malaria antigens, revealed higher immune reactivity in Fulani. In the present
study we compared the expression profile of a panel of genes involved in immune
response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from Fulani and sympatric
Mossi from Burkina Faso. An increased expression of T helper 1 (TH1)-related
genes (IL-18, IFNgamma, and TBX21) and TH2-related genes (IL-4 and GATA3) and a
reduced expression of genes distinctive of T regulatory activity (CTLA4 and
FOXP3) were observed in Fulani. Microarray analysis on RNA from CD4+ CD25+ (T
regulatory) cells, performed with a panel of cDNA probes specific for 96 genes
involved in immune modulation, indicated obvious differences between the two
ethnic groups with 23% of genes, including TGFbeta, TGFbetaRs, CTLA4, and FOXP3, 
less expressed in Fulani compared with Mossi and European donors not exposed to
malaria. As further indications of a low T regulatory cell activity, Fulani
showed lower serum levels of TGFbeta and higher concentrations of the
proinflammatory chemokines CXCL10 and CCL22 compared with Mossi; moreover, the
proliferative response of Fulani to malaria antigens was not affected by the
depletion of CD25+ regulatory cells whereas that of Mossi was significantly
increased. The results suggest that the higher resistance to malaria of the
Fulani could derive from a functional deficit of T regulatory cells.

PMCID: PMC2206590
PMID: 18174328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Dec;17(12):2056-60.

A minor transactivation effect of GATA-3 on its target sites in the
extrachromosomal status.

Lee GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea.
grlee@soganf.ac.kr

Transcription factor GATA-3 is the critical transcription factor for Th2 cell
differentiation. In spite of its importance in Th2 cell differentiation, the
molecular mechanism for its action in Th2 differentiation is poorly understood.
Previous studies have suggested that GATA-3 may be involved in the chromatin
remodeling in the Th2 cytokine locus. To determine whether GATA-3 exerts its
effect on its target sites in the extrachromosomal status, cell transfection
assay was performed. In this assay, 800 bp IL4 promoter-luciferase constructs
linked with GATA-3 target sites were transfected into the M12 B cell line, D10
mouse Th2 cell lines, and human T lymphoma Jurkat cell lines with or without the 
GATA-3 expression vector. The GATA-3 effects on it target sites were minimal in
the extrachromosomal status, supporting the previous propositions that GATA-3
functions at the chromatin level by remodeling chromatin structure.

PMID: 18167455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008 Mar;38(3):438-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02913.x.
Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Association between suppressors of cytokine signalling, T-helper type 1/T-helper 
type 2 balance and allergic sensitization in children.

Daegelmann C(1), Herberth G, Röder S, Herbarth O, Giese T, Krämer U, Behrendt H, 
Borte M, Heinrich J, Emmrich F, Lehmann I; LISAplus study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Immunology, UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for
Environmental Research, Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) family members have been
shown to play an important role in the balance of cytokines that determine the
onset of T-helper type 1 (Th1)- and Th2-mediated immune responses. In particular,
for cytokine-induced Src-homology 2 protein (CIS), SOCS1, SOCS3 and SOCS5, a role
in the regulation of T cell differentiation has been discussed. However, only few
data exist so far in the human system.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to analyse the relationship between 
these suppressors and Th1/Th2 regulation as well as allergic sensitizations
within a population-based study.
METHODS: Within the Lifestyle-Immune system-Allergy plus cohort study, mRNA was
prepared from blood samples of 6-year-old children for the analysis of cytokines,
transcription factors for T cell regulation and SOCS molecule expression by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. In addition, total and specific
IgE concentrations have been measured by the Pharmacia CAP System. A complete
data set from 248 children was available. Results Among the SOCS molecules
investigated, only SOCS1 showed a strong positive correlation to allergic
sensitizations. In addition, an up-regulated SOCS1 expression correlated with
down-regulated T-box expressed in T cells (Tbet) and higher expression levels of 
GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) and IL-4. No association between SOCS1 and
forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) was observed. For SOCS3, SOCS5 and CIS, a contradictory
picture was found. The expression of these SOCS molecules was positively
correlated with Tbet and FOXP3 and (with the exception of CIS) negatively with
IL-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that SOCS3, SOCS5 and CIS, which correlate with an 
up-regulated Th1 and regulatory T cell activity, are without relevance for the
allergic status. In contrast, SOCS1 might be involved in the development of a
Th2-skewed immune response and subsequent allergic sensitizations.

PMID: 18167120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. PLoS Biol. 2007 Dec;5(12):e329.

GATA3-driven Th2 responses inhibit TGF-beta1-induced FOXP3 expression and the
formation of regulatory T cells.

Mantel PY(1), Kuipers H, Boyman O, Rhyner C, Ouaked N, Rückert B, Karagiannidis
C, Lambrecht BN, Hendriks RW, Crameri R, Akdis CA, Blaser K, Schmidt-Weber CB.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research Davos (SIAF), Davos-Platz,
Switzerland.

Transcription factors act in concert to induce lineage commitment towards Th1,
Th2, or T regulatory (Treg) cells, and their counter-regulatory mechanisms were
shown to be critical for polarization between Th1 and Th2 phenotypes. FOXP3 is an
essential transcription factor for natural, thymus-derived (nTreg) and inducible 
Treg (iTreg) commitment; however, the mechanisms regulating its expression are as
yet unknown. We describe a mechanism controlling iTreg polarization, which is
overruled by the Th2 differentiation pathway. We demonstrated that interleukin 4 
(IL-4) present at the time of T cell priming inhibits FOXP3. This inhibitory
mechanism was also confirmed in Th2 cells and in T cells of transgenic mice
overexpressing GATA-3 in T cells, which are shown to be deficient in transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta-mediated FOXP3 induction. This inhibition is mediated by
direct binding of GATA3 to the FOXP3 promoter, which represses its
transactivation process. Therefore, this study provides a new understanding of
tolerance development, controlled by a type 2 immune response. IL-4 treatment in 
mice reduces iTreg cell frequency, highlighting that therapeutic approaches that 
target IL-4 or GATA3 might provide new preventive strategies facilitating
tolerance induction particularly in Th2-mediated diseases, such as allergy.

PMCID: PMC2222968
PMID: 18162042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Med Sci (Paris). 2007 Dec;23(12):1077-80.

[Mammary stem and progenitor cells: critical role of the transcription factor
Gata-3].

[Article in French]

Asselin-Labat ML.

PMID: 18154704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Immunology. 2008 Jan;123(1):139-44.

Different regulation of T helper 1- and T helper 2-promoting cytokine signalling 
factors in human dendritic cells after exposure to protein versus contact
allergens.

Böttcher I(1), Bellinghausen I, König B, Knop J, Saloga J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Cytokine-dependent T helper 1 (Th1) differentiation versus T helper 2 (Th2)
differentiation is controlled by distinct transcription factors. Previously, we
have demonstrated that immature human dendritic cells (DC) from blood donors with
allergies show rapid phosphorylation of the Th2-associated signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) upon contact with protein allergens. In the 
present study we investigated whether this process is regulated by the downstream
molecules suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) and/or by the factors T-bet
and GATA3. Therefore, immature DC of grass or birch pollen-allergic donors were
treated with the respective Th2-promoting protein allergens, and, for comparison,
with the Th1-promoting contact allergen 5-chloro-2-methylisothiazolinone plus
2-methylisothiazolinone (MCI/MI) or with the antigen tetanus toxoid. Changes in
the mRNA levels of SOCS1, SOCS3, T-bet and GATA3 were analysed by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Exposure of DC to protein allergens led to
the up-regulation of the Th2-associated genes SOCS3 and GATA3, whereas the
contact allergen MCI/MI preferentially enhanced the expression of the
Th1-associated gene T-bet. Treatment of immature DC with the antigen tetanus
toxoid increased both Th1- and Th2-associated genes. Our data indicate that
polarization of type 1 versus type 2 immune responses takes place already at the 
level of antigen-presenting cells, involving molecules similar to those used in
T-cell polarization.

PMCID: PMC2433290
PMID: 18154619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Pediatr Nephrol. 2008 Mar;23(3):395-401. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Expression of mRNA for functional molecules in urinary sediment in
glomerulonephritis.

Tsugawa K(1), Oki E, Suzuki K, Imaizumi T, Ito E, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho,
Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan. kojituga@royal.ocn.ne.jp

Recent studies have suggested that gene expression studies using urinary sediment
might be a non-invasive approach to assessing activity and pathogenesis in
glomerulonephritis. However, little information is available regarding the mRNA
expression patterns of functional molecules, such as T-bet, GATA-3, FOXP3, and
retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), in urinary sediment, from patients with
immunocomplex-mediated glomerulonephritis. Fourteen lupus nephritis (LN)
patients, 13 IgA nephropathy (IgAN) patients, and 12 healthy controls were
enrolled in the study. The mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I in 
urinary sediment were measured using real time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. We also studied the expression of RIG-I in kidney tissue specimens
obtained from LN and IgAN patients. Significant differences in the expression
patterns of GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I, and marginal differences in T-bet
expression, were observed between the three study groups. Immunofluorescent
staining for RIG-I was observed in the tissue specimens from the LN patients, but
not in those from the IgAN patients. The mRNA expression patterns of T-bet,
GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I in urinary sediment differ according to diagnostic
category. These results suggest that the measurement of these target gene
expressions might be a useful, non-invasive method for clinical monitoring and
studying of pathogenesis in glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 18095005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):473-81. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Insm1 (IA-1) is a crucial component of the transcriptional network that controls 
differentiation of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

Wildner H(1), Gierl MS, Strehle M, Pla P, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany.

Insm1 (IA-1) encodes a Zn-finger factor that is expressed in the developing
nervous system. We demonstrate here that the development of the sympatho-adrenal 
lineage is severely impaired in Insm1 mutant mice. Differentiation of
sympatho-adrenal precursors, as assessed by the expression of neuronal
subtype-specific genes such as Th and Dbh, is delayed in a pronounced manner,
which is accompanied by a reduced proliferation. Sympathetic neurons eventually
overcome the differentiation blockade and mature correctly, but sympathetic
ganglia remain small. By contrast, terminal differentiation of adrenal chromaffin
cells does not occur. The transcription factors Mash1 (Ascl1), Phox2a, Gata3 and 
Hand2 (previously dHand) control the differentiation of sympatho-adrenal
precursor cells, and their deregulated expression in Insm1 mutant mice
demonstrates that Insm1 acts in the transcriptional network that controls
differentiation of this lineage. Pronounced similarities between Mash1 and Insm1 
phenotypes are apparent, which suggests that Insm1 might mediate aspects of Mash1
function in the subtype-specific differentiation of sympatho-adrenal precursors. 
Noradrenaline is the major catecholamine produced by developing sympatho-adrenal 
cells and is required for fetal survival. We demonstrate that the fetal lethality
of Insm1 mutant mice is caused by catecholamine deficiency, which highlights the 
importance of Insm1 in the development of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

PMID: 18094025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Dec;15(6):1261-5.

[Construction and selection of RNAi plasmid vector for suppressing GATA-3 gene
expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou B(1), Zheng M, Wang Y, DU ZY, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Tongren Hospital,
Capital University of Medical Science, Beijing 1000730, China. entzhou@263.net

GATA-3 plays a central role in the Th2-mediated immunoreaction. This study was
aimed to construct and select plasmid vectors of siRNA which can effectively and 
specifically suppress the gene expression of GATA-3. Plasmid including PSi338,
PSi717 and PSi1232 were designed and constructed for GATA-3 regarded as target
gene and transfected into murine P815 cells. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot were used to detect the inhibition of
GATA-3 mRNA as well as its protein in P815 cells. The results demonstrated that
the expressions of mRNA and protein of GATA-3 in P815 cells were inhibited
significantly by both of PSi338 and PSi717. It is concluded that PSi338 and
PSi717 siRNA plasmid vectors have been successfully constructed, and both vectors
are effective and specific siRNA plasmids for suppressing GATA-3 gene expression.

PMID: 18088480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Leukemia. 2008 Mar;22(3):600-7. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

MEF2C is activated by multiple mechanisms in a subset of T-acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cell lines.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C, Quentmeier H, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human and Animal Cell Cultures, DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) the cardiac homeobox gene NKX2-5
(at 5q35) is variously deregulated by regulatory elements coordinating with
BCL11B (at 14q32.2), or the T-cell receptor gene TRD (at 14q11.2), respectively. 
NKX2-5 is normally expressed in developing spleen and heart, regulating
fundamental processes, including differentiation and survival. In this study we
investigated whether NKX2-5 expression in T-ALL cell lines reactivates these
embryonal pathways contributing to leukemogenesis. Among 18 known targets
analyzed, we identified three genes regulated by NKX2-5 in T-ALL cells, including
myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C). Knockdown and overexpression assays confirmed
MEF2C activation by NKX2-5 at both the RNA and protein levels. Direct
interactions between NKX2-5 and GATA3 as indicated by co-immunoprecipitation data
may contribute to MEF2C regulation. In T-ALL cell lines LOUCY and RPMI-8402 MEF2C
expression was correlated with a 5q14 deletion, encompassing noncoding proximal
gene regions. Fusion constructs with green fluorescent protein permitted
subcellular detection of MEF2C protein in nuclear speckles interpretable as
repression complexes. MEF2C consistently inhibits expression of NR4A1/NUR77,
which regulates apoptosis via BCL2 transformation. Taken together, our data
identify distinct mechanisms underlying ectopic MEF2C expression in T-ALL, either
as a downstream target of NKX2-5, or via chromosomal aberrations deleting
proximal gene regions.

PMID: 18079734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Clin Sci (Lond). 2008 Jun;114(11):687-97.

Enhanced expression and activation of pro-inflammatory transcription factors
distinguish aneurysmal from atherosclerotic aorta: IL-6- and IL-8-dominated
inflammatory responses prevail in the human aneurysm.

Lindeman JH(1), Abdul-Hussien H, Schaapherder AF, Van Bockel JH, Von der Thüsen
JH, Roelen DL, Kleemann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular and Transplantation Surgery, Leiden University Medical 
Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. Lindeman@LUMC.nl

Inflammation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of an AAA (abdominal aortic
aneurysm); however, the nature of the inflammatory factors and cellular
response(s) involved in AAA growth is controversial. In the present study, we set
out to determine the aortic levels of inflammatory cytokines in relation to
downstream inflammatory transcription factors and cellular responses. A
comparison of AAA wall samples with atherosclerotic wall samples taken from the
same aortic region allowed AAA-specific inflammatory parameters to be identified 
that distinguish AAAs from ASD (aortic atherosclerotic disease). RT-PCR
(real-time PCR), ELISA, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry were combined
to assess cytokines and transcription factors at the mRNA and protein level, and 
their activation status. Compared with ASD, inflammatory parameters associated
with Th1-type [T-bet, IL (interleukin)-2, IFN-gamma (interferon-gamma), TNF-alpha
(tumour necrosis factor-alpha), IL-1alpha and cytotoxic T-cells] and Th2-type
[GATA3, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13 and B-cells] responses were all increased in AAA
samples. Evaluation of major downstream inflammatory transcription factors
revealed higher baseline levels of C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) alpha, 
beta and delta in the AAA samples. Baseline p65 NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB)
and c-Jun [AP-1 (activator protein-1)] levels were comparable, but their
activated forms were strongly increased in the AAA samples. Downstream target
genes of p65 NF-kappaB, c-Jun, IL-6 and IL-8 were hyperexpressed. Molecular and
cellular processes associated with IL-6 and IL-8 hyperactivation were enhanced in
the AAA samples, i.e. the expression of phospho-STAT-3 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription-3) and perforin were elevated, and the content of
plasma cells, neutrophils and vasa vasorum was increased. In conclusion, our
findings demonstrate that an AAA is a general inflammatory condition which is
characterized by enhanced expression and activation of pro-inflammatory
transcription factors, accompanied by IL-6 and IL-8 hyperexpression and
exaggerated downstream cellular responses, which together clearly distinguish an 
AAA from ASD.

PMID: 18078385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 15;179(12):8297-304.

Interaction between GATA-3 and the transcriptional coregulator Pias1 is important
for the regulation of Th2 immune responses.

Zhao X(1), Zheng B, Huang Y, Yang D, Katzman S, Chang C, Fowell D, Zeng WP.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute for
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology, University of Rochester School
of Medicine and Dentistry, NY 14642, USA.

Th2 cytokine expression is dependent on the transcription factor GATA-3. However,
the molecular interactions of GATA-3 leading to Th2 cytokine gene activation have
not been well characterized. Here, we reported a number of GATA-3 associated
proteins in Th2 cells, and one of such proteins Pias1 functioned as a positive
transcriptional coregulator for GATA-3. When overexpressed in Th2 cells, Pias1
enhanced the expression of IL-13, and to lesser degrees, IL-4 and -5. Conversely,
Pias1 siRNA down-regulated the Th2 cytokine expression. In Leishmania major
infection, manipulating Pias1 expression in parasite-reactive CD4 T cells altered
severity of disease caused by Th2 responses. Mechanistically, Pias1 markedly
potentiated GATA-3-mediated activation of the IL-13 promoter by facilitating the 
recruitment of GATA-3 to the promoter. In contrast, IL-5 promoter was modestly
enhanced by Pias1 and no effect was observed on IL-4 promoter. Thus, both
promoter activation and additional mechanisms are responsible for regulation by
Pias1.

PMID: 18056374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Feb;121(2):408-14. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Patterns of GATA3 and IL13 gene polymorphisms associated with childhood rhinitis 
and atopy in a birth cohort.

Huebner M(1), Kim DY, Ewart S, Karmaus W, Sadeghnejad A, Arshad SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics and Probability, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48823, USA. huebner@msu.edu

BACKGROUND: GATA3 activates transcription of the T(H)2 cytokines, including IL13,
an important step in the allergic inflammatory pathway.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
of the genes GATA3 and IL13 and their interactions with rhinitis and allergic
sensitization during childhood.
METHODS: We performed genetic association studies in a cohort of children (n =
923) who have been evaluated for the development of rhinitis and allergic
sensitization by means of skin prick tests (SPTs) at age 10 years. Pyrosequencing
was used to genotype 7 polymorphisms from GATA3 and 5 from IL13. A novel
model-selection procedure combining logistic regression models and classification
was used to study the contributions of the polymorphisms and their interactions.
RESULTS: Combinations of polymorphisms and their interactions increase the risk
for rhinitis and allergic sensitization at age 10 years. A model with rs1058240, 
rs379568, and rs4143094 (GATA3) and rs1800925 (IL13) and their interactions was
selected to predict rhinitis and positive SPT responses. rs1058240 was associated
with rhinitis and allergic rhinitis (P < .05), and the gene-gene interaction
rs1058240:rs1800925 was associated with rhinitis (P = .043). The odds ratios for 
4 genotype combinations were significant for rhinitis or SPTs (P < .044).
CONCLUSION: Gene-gene interaction between GATA3 and IL13 polymorphisms can
influence the risk of childhood rhinitis. Our study suggests that set
associations of polymorphisms are important in studying genetic associations for 
complex phenotypes, such as rhinitis and atopy.

PMCID: PMC2705662
PMID: 18037162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Genet Genomics. 2007 Nov;34(11):994-1000.

In silico cloning, expression and phylogenetic analysis of pig GATA-3 gene.

Yu H(1), Li J, Li L, Song Y, Yang X, Ding L, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science College, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030,
China.

Pig GATA-3 cDNA was obtained by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), using in silico cloning strategy based on pig dbEST. The length of pig 
GATA-3 cDNA is 1,760 bp containing a 1,335 bp open reading frame (ORF), which
encodes a 444 amino acid protein. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis of GATA-3
mRNA expression was done using the total RNAs from different normal tissues of a 
large white pig. The GATA-binding family of transcription factors comprised of a 
subgroup of DNA-binding proteins that both bound the consensus GATA motif and
contained the class IV zinc finger motif. The molecular evolution tree was
constructed based on the GATA-3 amino acid sequence and class IV zinc finger
motif using mega 3.1. Phylogeny analysis of GATA factors isolated from
vertebrates suggested that the six distinct vertebrate GATAs had descended from a
common ancestral sequence, and the topology also suggested multiple modes of
evolution including gene duplication and class IV zinc finger motif
recombination. These data helped the authors in illuminating the pathways of
divergent and convergent evolution of the GATA-binding family of transcription
factors.

PMID: 18037136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. BMC Immunol. 2007 Nov 23;8:30.

CD43 signals induce Type One lineage commitment of human CD4+ T cells.

Ramírez-Pliego O(1), Escobar-Zárate DL, Rivera-Martínez GM, Cervantes-Badillo MG,
Esquivel-Guadarrama FR, Rosas-Salgado G, Rosenstein Y, Santana MA.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Av,
Universidad 1001, Col, Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, 62210, Mexico.
raplos2002@yahoo.com.mx

BACKGROUND: The activation and effector phenotype of T cells depend on the
strength of the interaction of the TcR with its cognate antigen and additional
signals provided by cytokines and by co-receptors. Lymphocytes sense both the
presence of an antigen and also clues from antigen-presenting cells, which
dictate the requisite response. CD43 is one of the most abundant molecules on the
surface of T cells; it mediates its own signalling events and cooperates with
those mediated by the T cell receptor in T cell priming. We have examined the
role of CD43 signals on the effector phenotype of adult CD4+ and CD8+ human T
cells, both alone and in the presence of signals from the TcR.
RESULTS: CD43 signals direct the expression of IFNgamma in human T cells. In
freshly isolated CD4+ T cells, CD43 signals potentiated expression of the
IFNgamma gene induced by TcR activation; this was not seen in CD8+ T cells. In
effector cells, CD43 signals alone induced the expression of the IFNgamma gene in
CD4+ T cells and to a lesser extent in CD8+ cells. The combined signals from CD43
and the TcR increased the transcription of the T-bet gene in CD4+ T cells and
inhibited the transcription of the GATA-3 gene in both populations of T cells,
thus predisposing CD4+ T cells to commitment to the T1 lineage. In support of
this, CD43 signals induced a transient membrane expression of the high-affinity
chains of the receptors for IL-12 and IFNgamma in CD4+ T cells. CD43 and TcR
signals also cooperated with those of IL-12 in the induction of IFNgamma
expression. Moreover, CD43 signals induced the co-clustering of IFNgammaR and the
TcR and cooperated with TcR and IL-12 signals, triggering a co-capping of both
receptors in CD4+ populations, a phenomenon that has been associated with a T1
commitment.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a key role for CD43 signals in the
differentiation of human CD4+ T cells into a T1 pattern.

PMCID: PMC2235884
PMID: 18036228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Dec;26(11):2989-3002.

Phenotype of V2-derived interneurons and their relationship to the axon guidance 
molecule EphA4 in the developing mouse spinal cord.

Lundfald L(1), Restrepo CE, Butt SJ, Peng CY, Droho S, Endo T, Zeilhofer HU,
Sharma K, Kiehn O.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Locomotor Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Retzius väg 8, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The ventral spinal cord consists of interneuron groups arising from distinct,
genetically defined, progenitor domains along the dorsoventral axis. Many of
these interneuron groups settle in the ventral spinal cord which, in mammals,
contains the central pattern generator for locomotion. In order to better
understand the locomotor networks, we have used different transgenic mice for
anatomical characterization of one of these interneuron groups, called V2
interneurons. Neurons in this group are either V2a interneurons marked by the
postmitotic expression of the transcription factor Chx10, or V2b interneurons
which express the transcription factors Gata2 and Gata3. We found that all V2a
and most V2b interneurons were ipsilaterally projecting in embryos as well as in 
newborns. V2a interneurons were for the most part glutamatergic while V2b
interneurons were mainly GABAergic or glycinergic. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that a large proportion of V2 interneurons expressed the axon guidance molecule
EphA4, a molecule previously shown to be important for correct organization of
locomotor networks. We also showed that V2 interneurons and motor neurons alone
did not account for all EphA4-expressing neurons in the spinal cord. Together,
these findings enable a better interpretation of neural networks underlying
locomotion, and open up the search for as yet unknown components of the mammalian
central pattern generator.

PMID: 18028107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Nov;16(11):2269-75.

Common genetic variation in GATA-binding protein 3 and differential
susceptibility to breast cancer by estrogen receptor alpha tumor status.

Garcia-Closas M(1), Troester MA, Qi Y, Langerød A, Yeager M, Lissowska J, Brinton
L, Welch R, Peplonska B, Gerhard DS, Gram IT, Kristensen V, Børresen-Dale AL,
Chanock S, Perou CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
6120 Executive Boulevard, Room 7076, MSC 7234, Rockville, MD 20852-7234, USA.
montse@nih.gov

GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a transcription factor and a putative tumor
suppressor that is highly expressed in normal breast luminal epithelium and
estrogen receptor alpha (ER)-positive breast tumors. We hypothesized that common 
genetic variation in GATA3 could influence breast carcinogenesis. Four tag
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in GATA3 and its 3' flanking gene FLJ4598
were genotyped in two case control studies in Norway and Poland (2,726 cases and 
3,420 controls). Analyses of pooled data suggested a reduced risk of breast
cancer associated with two intronic variants in GATA3 in linkage disequilibrium
(rs3802604 in intron 3 and rs570613 in intron 4). Odds ratio (95% confidence
interval) for rs570613 heterozygous and rare homozygous versus common homozygous 
were 0.85 (0.75-1.95) and 0.82 (0.62-0.96), respectively (P(trend)=0.004).
Stronger associations were observed for subjects with ER-negative, than
ER-positive, tumors (P(heterogeneity)=0.01 for rs3802604; P(heterogeneity)=0.09
for rs570613). Although no individual SNPs were associated with ER-positive
tumors, two haplotypes (GGTC in 2% of controls and AATT in 7% of controls) showed
significant and consistent associations with increased risk for these tumors when
compared with the common haplotype (GATT in 46% of controls): 1.71 (1.27-2.32)
and 1.26 (1.03-1.54), respectively. In summary, data from two independent study
populations showed two intronic variants in GATA3 associated with overall
decreases in breast cancer risk and suggested heterogeneity of these associations
by ER status. These differential associations are consistent with markedly
different levels of GATA3 protein by ER status. Additional epidemiologic studies 
are needed to clarify these intriguing relationships.

PMID: 18006915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008 Feb;38(2):338-49. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Modulation of mucosal immunity in a murine model of food-induced intestinal
inflammation.

Cardoso CR(1), Teixeira G, Provinciatto PR, Godoi DF, Ferreira BR, Milanezi CM,
Ferraz DB, Rossi MA, Cunha FQ, Silva JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão
Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2008 Feb;38(2):229-32.

BACKGROUND: Hypersensitivity or uncontrolled responses against dietary antigens
can lead to inflammatory disorders like food allergy and current models reflect a
variety of causes but do not reveal the detailed modulation of gut immunity in
response to food antigens after breakdown in mucosal tolerance.
OBJECTIVE: To develop and characterize a murine model for food-induced intestinal
inflammation and to demonstrate the modulation of gut immune response by dietary 
allergenic antigens.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were sensitized with peanut proteins, challenged with
peanut seeds and their sera and gut segments were collected for subsequent
analyses.
RESULTS: Sensitization and challenged with peanut seeds led to alterations in gut
architecture with inflammatory response characterized by oedema in lamina propria
and cell infiltrate composed mainly by eosinophils, mast cells, phagocytes,
natural killer and plasma cells, together with low percentage of gammadelta+ and 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cells in Peyer's patches. These animals also presented high
levels of specific IgE and IgG1 in sera and modulation of mucosal immunity was
mediated by increased expression of GATA-3, IL-4, IL-13 and TNF-alpha in contrast
to low IFN-gamma in the gut.
CONCLUSION: A murine model for food-induced intestinal inflammation was
characterized in which modulation of gut immunity occurs by peanut antigens in
consequence of T-helper type 2 (Th2) allergic response and failure of regulatory 
mechanisms necessary for mucosa homeostasis, resembling food allergy. This work
shed some light on the understanding of the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal
disorders and intolerance in the gut and supports the development of therapies
for food-related enteropathies like food allergy, focusing on gut-specific immune
response.

PMID: 18005184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Vaccine. 2007 Dec 5;25(50):8395-404. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Use of a genetic cholera toxin B subunit/allergen fusion molecule as mucosal
delivery system with immunosuppressive activity against Th2 immune responses.

Bublin M(1), Hoflehner E, Wagner B, Radauer C, Wagner S, Hufnagl K, Allwardt D,
Kundi M, Scheiner O, Wiedermann U, Breiteneder H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Center for Physiology, Pathophysiology &
Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Induction of peripheral tolerance can be facilitated when the antigen is linked
to the B subunit of cholera toxin (CTB), an efficient mucosal carrier. In the
present study, a genetic fusion molecule of Bet v 1 and CTB was produced to test 
whether mucosal application of this construct would lead to suppression of Th2
responses. Intranasal pretreatment of BALB/c mice with rCTB-Bet v 1 prior to
allergic sensitisation with the allergen significantly decreased IgE but markedly
increased allergen-specific IgG2a levels in sera as well as IFN-gamma production 
of splenocytes. This Th1 shift was supported by an increased T-bet/GATA3 mRNA
ratio. IL-5 production within the airways was suppressed after the pretreatment
with rCTB-Bet v 1, while local allergen-specific IgA antibodies were markedly
enhanced by pretreatment with the construct. Upregulation of Foxp3, IL-10 and
TGF-beta mRNA expression was detected in splenocytes after pretreatment with
unconjugated allergen but not with the fusion molecule, indicating that antigen
conjugation to a mucosal carrier modifies the immunomodulating properties of an
antigen/allergen.

PMID: 17997199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 4;283(1):128-36. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

T helper cell-specific regulation of inducible costimulator expression via
distinct mechanisms mediated by T-bet and GATA-3.

Tan AH(1), Goh SY, Wong SC, Lam KP.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, 8A Biomedical Grove, Biopolis 138648,
Singapore.

Inducible costimulator (ICOS) expression is critical for T cell-mediated
immunity. We showed previously that T cell receptor and CD28 co-engagement
up-regulate ICOS expression in activated T cells via the induction of NFATc2.
Here, we examined the regulation of ICOS expression by Th-specific transcription 
factors T-bet and GATA-3. Overexpression of T-bet or GATA-3 alone could enhance, 
and NFATc2 could further synergize with either of them to increase, icos
transcription. Although T-bet acted on the icos promoter, GATA-3 operated via an 
icos 3'-un-translated region element. Interestingly, NFATc2 was found to bind
promiscuously the icos promoter in developing Th0, Th1, and Th2 cells but became 
selectively associated with T-bet at the promoter and with GATA-3 at the
3'-untranslated region in fully differentiated Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively.
Collectively, our results reveal a temporally evolving circuit in which the
non-selectively expressed NFATc2 cooperates with Th-restricted T-bet or GATA-3 to
direct transcription of a costimulatory gene via distinct regulatory elements in 
different Th cells undergoing differentiation.

PMID: 17986443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Allergy. 2007 Dec;62(12):1456-61.

STAT1 gene variations, IgE regulation and atopy.

Pinto LA(1), Steudemann L, Depner M, Klopp N, Illig T, Weiland SK, von Mutius E, 
Kabesch M.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian's University Munich, Munich,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), an
intracellular signal transducer and activator of transcription centrally involved
in many inflammatory pathways, was recently suggested to play an important role
in allergy related immune responses.
AIM: Thus, we investigated the effect of polymorphisms in the STAT1 gene on the
development of atopic sensitization and allergic diseases.
METHODS: Haplotype tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously
described in the STAT1 gene were genotyped by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry technology in a
cross-sectional study population of 3099 German children recruited and phenotyped
by the International Study of Asthma and Allergy in Childhood, phase II (ISAAC
II). Effects of single SNPs and haplotypes were studied using SAS/Genetics and
Haploview.
RESULTS: The polymorphism C39134A (rs3771300), located in a potentially cis
acting regulatory element in STAT1 intron 24, was inversely related to atopy
measured by skin prick test, total and specific serum IgE levels while no effect 
on atopic disease risk was observed.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that STAT1 SNP C39134A may protect from atopic
sensitization. Because of its location in a highly conserved noncoding sequence
near a putative GATA3 binding site, this polymorphism represents an interesting
target for further studies.

PMID: 17983380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncol Rep. 2007 Dec;18(6):1427-34.

Genomic imbalances associated with secondary acute leukemias in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Brusa G(1), Zuffa E, Hattinger CM, Serra M, Remondini D, Castellani G, Righi S,
Campidelli C, Pileri S, Zinzani PL, Gabriele A, Mancini M, Corrado P, Barbieri E,
Santucci MA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ematologia e Oncologia Medica Lorenzo e Ariosto Seràgnoli,
Università di Bologna - Medical School, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
gbrusa@alma.unibo.it

Secondary tumors and leukemias are major complications in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). 
They likely arise from clonal selection of cells that have accumulated genomic
lesions induced by chemo- and radiotherapy and may be further promoted by the
loss of DNA repair and/or other pathways ensuring the fidelity of replicated DNA.
To distinguish genomic imbalances associated with the development of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) in HL we used an array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) strategy on whole lymph node biopsies of HL patient. Genomic
imbalances (amplifications and deletions) associated with AML outcome in 3
classic HL patients, at clinical diagnosis they exhibited a discrete individual
variability. Three amplifications and 5 deletions were shared by all 3 patients. 
They involved AFM137XA11, a 9p11.2 pericentric region; FGFR1, the FGF receptor
most frequently translocated in AML; PPARBP, a co-activator of nuclear receptors 
RARalpha, RXR and TRbeta1; AFM217YD10, a 17q25 telomeric region; FGR, an SRC2
kinase involved in cytokine production by NK and CD4+ NKT cells; GATA3, a
Th2-specific transcription factor; TOP1, involved in DNA recombination and
repair; WT1, a transcription factor involved in CD8+ T cell response against
leukaemic blasts. Immunohistochemistry confirmed aCGH results and distinguished
the distribution of either amplified or deleted gene products in neoplastic Reed 
Sternberg (RS) cells and non-neoplastic lymph node components.

PMID: 17982626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Jan;121(1):57-63.e3. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Epigenetic regulation of established human type 1 versus type 2 cytokine
responses.

Su RC(1), Becker AB, Kozyrskyj AL, Hayglass KT.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute for Health Research, National Training Program in Allergy
and Asthma Research, Department of Immunology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Multiple biologic factors influence maintenance of immunologic
responsiveness. Here, we studied whether epigenetics has a regulatory function in
maintaining pre-established T(H)1-like and T(H)2-like immunity in human beings.
OBJECTIVE: We focused on delineating the role of endogenous histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity in regulating cytokine recall responses.
METHODS: Using RT-PCR and ELISA, the effect of increasing cellular acetylation on
T(H)1/T(H)2 cytokine expression was systematically examined in 58 children by
inhibiting HDAC activity with trichostatin A.
RESULTS: Phytohemagglutinin activation selectively stimulates antigen-experienced
CD45RO+ T cells, eliciting recall cytokine responses. Trichostatin A reduced HDAC
activity by approximately 1/3. The resulting cellular hyperacetylation led to
increased T(H)2-associated (IL-13, 139%; IL-5, 168%; P < .0001) and reduced
T(H)1-associated recall responses (IFN-gamma, 76%; CXCL10, 47%; P < .0001). IL-2 
and IL-10 production were reduced 25% to 55% (P < .0001). These alterations in
T(H)2-associated and T(H)1-associated recall responses were associated with
increased expression of Gata-3 and sphingosine kinase 1, a T(H)1-negative
regulator, independent of T-bet expression. Overall, inhibition of endogenous
HDAC activity shifted T(H)1:T(H)2 ratios by 3-fold to 8-fold (P < or = .0001),
skewing recall responses toward a more T(H)2-like phenotype, independent of the
stimulus used.
CONCLUSION: Endogenous HDAC activity plays a crucial role in maintaining the
balance of pre-established T(H)1-like and T(H)2-like responses, inhibiting
excessive T(H)2 immunity.

PMID: 17980413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;30(7):509-17.

[The effects of imiquimod on an animal model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin KS(1), Jin SX, Bian T, Wu QZ, Wang X, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the mechanism of imiquimod on asthma animals.
METHODS: (1) 40 mice and 48 rats were divided into 4 groups: control, asthma,
dexamethasone and imiquimod groups. The asthma model was established. The mice
and rats in the imiquimod group were exposed to an aerosol of 0.15% imiquimod.
Lung inflammation and airway responsiveness were measured 24 h after the last
ovalbumin (OVA) challenge. The expression of Interleukin-4 (IL-4), interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma), eotaxin, macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC), thymus and
activation-regulated chemokine (TARC), T-bet, GATA-3, STAT6 mRNA in the lung were
determined by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
levels of eotaxin, MDC, and TARC in sera were tested by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT6 proteins
in the lung were measured by Western blot. (2) Parabronchial lymphnodes (PBLN)
were isolated and cultured. The PBLN cells were divided into blank control,
positive control, dexamethasone and drug groups (1 - 3 subgroups), cultured for
different hours, and the expressions of IL-4 and IFN-gamma in supernatants were
determined by ELISA, The mRNA expressions of the cytokines in cells weredetected 
by RT-PCR. (3) Flow cytometry was used to detect intracellular IL-4 and IFN-gamma
production in spleen T lymphocytes. (4) CD(4)(+) T cell of spleen pellets were
subject to assessment of T-bet and GATA-3 protein and mRNA expression
respectively.
RESULTS: The expiration resistance was determined before and after injection of
acetylcholine chloride (20 - 160 microg/ml), and expiration resistances of the
asthmatic group (6.26 +/- 0.85), (11.55 +/- 3.09), (28.74 +/- 5.94), (3710.83 +/-
197.49) cm H(2)Oxml(-1)xs(-1), were significantly elevated compared with those of
the control group (1.34 +/- 0.16), (3.47 +/- 0.49), (9.29 +/- 1.27), (25.22 +/-
5.44) cm H(2)Oxml(-1)xs(-1), D = 88.98, 56.00, 45.00, 108.00, all P < 0.01). The 
numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes, the thicknesses of WA/Pi and ASM/Pi in
the asthmatic group [(26.0 +/- 1.6)/mm(2), (45.2 +/- 3.2)/mm(2), 12.0 +/- 1.4,
6.7 +/- 0.6] were all significantly higher than those of the imiquimod group
[(12.4 +/- 2.9)/mm(2), (24.2 +/- 3.7)/mm(2), 9.2 +/- 0.6, 4.0 +/- 0.5, D or q =
193.00, 16.92, 185.50, 7.66, all P < 0.01]. In the imiquimod group, the mRNA and 
protein expressions of T-bet (0.48 +/- 0.08, 0.48 +/- 0.17) were significantly
increased compared with those of the asthmatic group (0.08 +/- 0.12, 0.18 +/-
0.06, D = 120.96, 177.98, all P < 0.01), the mRNA and protein expressions of
GATA-3 in the imiquimod group were both significantly decreased compared with
those of the asthmatic group (D = 166.96, 310.97, all P < 0.01). In the control
group, only low concentrations of IFN-gamma [(22 +/- 5, 31 +/- 5) pg/ml] were
detected in PBLN cell cultures. After 24 or 48 h stimulation, the concentrations 
of IFN-gamma in drug 2 subgroup [(149 +/- 31), (154 +/- 28) pg/ml] and drug 3
subgroup [(166 +/- 30), (158 +/- 31) pg/ml] were increased significantly; Levels 
of IL-4 [druug 2 subgroup: (23 +/- 5), (39 +/- 11) pg/ml, drug 3 subgroup: (43
+/- 13), (56 +/- 12) pg/ml] were increased slowly compared with those in the OVA 
group (drug 2 subgroup 24 h IL-4, D = 9.90; drug 3 subgroup 24 h IL-4, D = 8.79, 
drug 2 subgroup 48 h IL-4, D = 8.80, drug 3 subgroup 48 h IL-4, D = 8.10, drug 2 
subgroup 24 h IFN-gamma, q = 4.80, drug 3 subgroup 24 h IFN-gamma, q = 6.40, drug
2 subgroup 48 h IFN-gamma, q = 3.95, drug 3 subgroup 48 h IFN-gamma, q = 4.31,
all P < 0.05). After imiquimod treatment, the mRNA and protein levels of T-bet in
imiquimod group CD(4)(+) T cells were increased significantly compared with those
in OVA group, and the mRNA and protein levels of GATA-3 were decreased
significantly in CD(4)(+) T cells of imiquimod group compared with those in OVA
group. The eotaxin, MDC and TARC levels of serum in asthma group [(593 +/- 41)
pg/ml, (170 +/- 20) pg/ml, (221 +/- 25) pg/ml] were significant different from
those in control group [(288 +/- 66) pg/ml, (100 +/- 33) pg/ml, (84 +/- 49)
pg/ml], (eotaxin: q = 12.20, MDC: q = 8.00, TARC: q = 10.50, all P < 0.01). MDC
and TARC levels of serum in imiquimod group [(84 +/- 13) pg/ml, (163 +/- 35)
pg/ml] decreased as compared with those in asthma group (MDC: q = 9.80, TARC: q =
4.50, all P < 0.01) and MDC levels in imiquimod group were no different with
normal group (q = 1.80, P > 0.05). eotaxin levels of serum in imiquimod group
[(501 +/- 76) pg/ml] increased as compared with those from normal group (q =
8.50, P < 0.01), and decreased as compared with those from asthma group (q =
3.70, P < 0.05). (4) The expression of eoaxin, MDC, TARC and STAT(6) on the
bronchial epithelium in imiquimod group was decreased as compared with asthma
group, but increased as compared with normal group. The eotaxin, MDC and TARC
mRNA expression of the lung in asthma group (0.85 +/- 0.11, 0.96 +/- 0.10, 0.94
+/- 0.28) had significant differences from those in the control group (0.45 +/-
0.08, 0.39 +/- 0.09, 0.24 +/- 0.08, eotaxin: q = 3.00, MDC: q = 15.40, TARC: q = 
5.90, all P < 0.01) and those in imiquimod group (0.65 +/- 0.17, 0.66 +/- 0.12,
0.66 +/- 0.34, eotaxin: q = 1.50, MDC: q = 8.10, TARC: q = 2.40, all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that imiquimod can inhibit the airway
inflammation of asthma animals by reducing GATA-3 mRNA and protein expression and
increasing T-bet, STAT(6) mRNA and protein expression.

PMID: 17961405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jan;83(1):212-9. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Hyperforin down-regulates effector function of activated T lymphocytes and shows 
efficacy against Th1-triggered CNS inflammatory-demyelinating disease.

Cabrelle A(1), Dell'Aica I, Melchiori L, Carraro S, Brunetta E, Niero R,
Scquizzato E, D'Intino G, Calzà L, Garbisa S, Agostini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experiment Medicine, Medical School, Padova, Italy.

Hyperforin (Hyp) is an active compound contained in the extract of Hypericum
perforatum, well known for its antidepressant activity. However, Hyp has been
found to possess several other biological properties, including inhibitory
effects on tumor invasion, angiogenesis, and inflammation. In this paper, we show
that treatment with Hyp inhibited IFN-gamma production, with down-regulation of
T-box (T-bet; marker of Th1 gene expression) and up-regulation of GATA-3 (marker 
gene of Th2) on IL-2/PHA-activated T cells. In parallel, we showed a strong
down-regulation of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 expression on activated T cells. 
The latter effect and the down-modulation of matrix metalloproteinase 9
expression may eventually lead to the inhibition of migratory capability and
matrix traversal toward the chemoattractant CXCL10 by activated lymphocytes that 
we observed in vitro. The effect of Hyp was thus evaluated on an animal model of 
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), a classic, Th1-mediated autoimmune
disease of the CNS, and we observed that Hyp attenuates the severity of the
disease symptoms significantly. Together, these properties qualify Hyp as a
putative, therapeutic molecule for the treatment of autoimmune inflammatory
disease sustained by Th1 cells, including EAE.

PMID: 17947392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 23;104(43):17052-7. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

Demethylation of a specific hypersensitive site in the Th2 locus control region.

Kim ST(1), Fields PE, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

A growing body of literature has examined and implicated DNA methylation as a
critical epigenetic modification in T helper (Th) cell differentiation. The
absence of DNA methyltransferases or methyl-binding proteins derepresses many
cytokine loci, allowing their ectopic expression, while methylation of specific
CpG residues is sufficient to prevent expression. Here, we characterize
demethylation events of the Th2 cytokine locus control region (LCR). rad50
hypersensitive site 7 (RHS7), a hypersensitive site within this LCR, becomes
demethylated in a STAT6-dependent manner and only in cells stimulated under type 
2 conditions. Robust demethylation appears to require signaling contributions
from both IL-4 receptor, via STAT6, and CD28, but it cannot be effected by GATA3.
Finally, RHS7 is demethylated independently of cell division, consistent with an 
"active," rather than passive, mechanism. Taken together, these findings firmly
connect RHS7 demethylation and Th2 LCR activation in the type 2 differentiation
program.

PMCID: PMC2040439
PMID: 17940027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Jan;324(1):23-33. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

Immune modulatory treatment of trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid colitis with
calcitriol is associated with a change of a T helper (Th) 1/Th17 to a Th2 and
regulatory T cell profile.

Daniel C(1), Sartory NA, Zahn N, Radeke HH, Stein JM.

Author information: 
(1)FEBG, First Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Clinical Nutrition, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590
Frankfurt, Germany.

A number of recent studies testify that calcitriol alone or in combination with
corticosteroids exerts strong immune modulatory activity. As a new approach, we
evaluated the protolerogenic potential of calcitriol and dexamethasone in acute T
helper (Th)1-mediated colitis in mice. A rectal enema of trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (TNBS) (100 mg/kg) was applied to BALB/c mice. Calcitriol and/or
dexamethasone were administered i.p. from days 0 to 3 or 3 to 5 following the
instillation of the haptenating agent. Assessment of colitis severity was
performed daily. Colon tissue was analyzed macroscopically and microscopically,
and myeloperoxidase activity, as well as cytokine levels [tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, interferon-gamma, interleukin (IL)-12p70, IL-1beta, IL-10, IL-4]
were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, T-bet, GATA family of
transcription factors 3, a Th2 master regulator (GATA3), Foxp3, cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4), IL-23p19 and IL-17 expression by
immunoblot analysis. The combination of the steroids most effectively reduced the
clinical and histopathologic severity of TNBS colitis. Th1-related parameters
were down-regulated, whereas Th2 markers like IL-4 and GATA3 were up-regulated.
Apart from known steroid effects, calcitriol in particular promoted regulatory T 
cell profiles as indicated by a marked increase of IL-10, TGFbeta, FoxP3, and
CTLA4. Furthermore, analysis of dendritic cell mediators responsible for a
proinflammatory differentiation of T cells revealed a significant reduction of
IL-12p70 and IL23p19 as well as IL-6 and IL-17. Thus, our data support a
rationale for a steroid-sparing, clinical application of calcitriol derivatives
in inflammatory bowel disease. Furthermore they suggest that early markers of
inflammatory dendritic cell and Th17 differentiation qualify as new target
molecules for both calcitriol and highly selective immune-modulating vitamin D
analogs.

PMID: 17911375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 30;363(4):948-53. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Characterization of the promoter of human CRTh2, a prostaglandin D2 receptor.

Quapp R(1), Madsen N, Cameron L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Pulmonary Research
Group, 574B Heritage Medical Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada T6G 2S2.

Chemoattractant-receptor homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells (CRTh2) is a 
receptor for prostaglandin (PG)D2, a lipid mediator involved in allergic
inflammation. CRTh2 is expressed by Th2 cells, eosinophils and basophils and
PDG(2)-CRTh2 signaling induces calcium mobilization, cell migration and
expression of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. Despite the role of CRTh2 
in allergic inflammation, transcriptional regulation of this gene has not been
studied. Here, we demonstrated that a reporter construct of the CRTh2 promoter
was induced following T cell stimulation. This activity could be further enhanced
by over-expression of GATA-3, but not NFAT2 or STAT6. Electromobility shift assay
demonstrated GATA-3 binding to a probe from the CRTh2 promoter. This study
provides the first detailed analysis of transcriptional regulation of the human
CRTh2 promoter. These findings may help identify strategies to attenuate
expression of this gene and influence the maintenance and proliferation of Th2
cells in allergic inflammation.

PMID: 17910949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 1;7:109.

Identification of genes differentially expressed during prenatal development of
skeletal muscle in two pig breeds differing in muscularity.

Muráni E(1), Murániová M, Ponsuksili S, Schellander K, Wimmers K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals (FBN), Research Unit
Molecular Biology, Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2, 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.
murani@fbn-dummerstorf.de

BACKGROUND: Postnatal muscle growth is largely depending on the number and size
of muscle fibers. The number of myofibers and to a large extent their metabolic
and contractile properties, which also influence their size, are determined
prenatally during the process of myogenesis. Hence identification of genes and
their networks governing prenatal development of skeletal muscles will provide
insight into the control of muscle growth and facilitate finding the source of
its variation. So far most of the genes involved in myogenesis were identified by
in vitro studies using gene targeting and transgenesis. Profiling of
transcriptome changes during the myogenesis in vivo promises to obtain a more
complete picture. In order to address this, we performed transcriptome profiling 
of prenatal skeletal muscle using differential display RT-PCR as on open system
with the potential to detect novel transcripts. Seven key stages of myogenesis
(days 14, 21, 35, 49, 63, 77 and 91 post conception) were studied in two breeds, 
Pietrain and Duroc, differing markedly in muscularity and muscle structure.
RESULTS: Eighty prominent cDNA fragments were sequenced, 43 showing
stage-associated and 37 showing breed-associated differences in the expression,
respectively. Out of the resulting 85 unique expressed sequence tags, EST, 52
could be assigned to known genes. The most frequent functional categories
represented genes encoding myofibrillar proteins (8), genes involved in cell
adhesion, cell-cell signaling and extracellular matrix synthesis/remodeling (8), 
genes regulating gene expression (8), and metabolism genes (8). Some of the EST
that showed no identity to any known transcripts in the databases are located in 
introns of known genes and most likely represent novel exons (e.g. HMGA2).
Expression of thirteen transcripts along with five reference genes was further
analyzed by means of real-time quantitative PCR. Nine of the target transcripts
showed higher than twofold differences in the expression between the two breeds
(GATA3, HMGA2, NRAP, SMC6L1, SPP1, RAB6IP2, TJP1 and two EST).
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed several genes and novel transcripts not
previously associated with myogenesis and expands our knowledge of genetic
factors operating during myogenesis. Genes that exhibited differences between the
divergent breeds represent candidate genes for muscle growth and structure.

PMCID: PMC2147030
PMID: 17908293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jan;83(1):41-7. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Chronic alcohol consumption perturbs the balance between thymus-derived and bone 
marrow-derived natural killer cells in the spleen.

Zhang H(1), Meadows GG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Prevention & Research Center, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, Washington State University, Box 646713, 110 McCoy Office
Trailer, Pullman, WA 99164-6713, USA.

Alcohol consumption reduces peripheral NK cell numbers and compromises NK cell
cytolytic activity; however, the underlying mechanism is not understood
completely. It was found recently that the peripheral NK cell pool consists
largely of bone marrow (BM)-derived and thymus-derived cells, which are
phenotypically and functionally different. The effects of alcohol consumption on 
these subpopulations have not been studied previously. Using a well-established
alcohol-feeding model, we found that chronic alcohol consumption decreases the
percentage and number of peripheral NK cells, especially those expressing a
mature phenotype. Alcohol consumption did not alter NK cells in the thymus. NK
cells in the BM were increased significantly; however, proliferation rate was not
altered by alcohol consumption, which increased CD127+ and decreased Ly49D+ NK
cells in the spleen but not in the BM. Chronic alcohol consumption increased
IFN-gamma-producing NK cells and GATA-3 expression in splenic NK cells.
Collectively, these results indicate that chronic alcohol consumption perturbs
the balance between thymus-derived and BM-derived NK cells. The increased
proportion of thymus-derived NK cells in the spleen likely results from impaired 
NK cell release from the BM.

PMID: 17906116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Oct;37(10):1455-66.

T-helper type 2-dependent early recruitment of antigen non-specific CD4+ T cells 
in experimental asthma.

Kinyanjui MW(1), Tamaoka M, Fixman ED.

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Following antigen challenge, adoptively transferred antigen-specific 
CD4(+) T cells induce allergic airway inflammation, comprised primarily of an
increase in lymphocytes and eosinophils.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to better understand the contribution of the GATA-3
transcription factor to the ability of adoptively transferred T cells to induce
airway inflammation in the Brown Norway rat model of adoptively transferred
asthma.
METHODS: We transduced antigen-stimulated CD4+ T cells with recombinant
retroviruses encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) only or EGFP and 
the GATA-3 transcription factor. Each population of transduced cells was
adoptively transferred to naïve recipients that were then challenged with
antigen. Airway inflammatory responses were then quantified.
RESULTS: Our data indicate that T cells transduced with retroviruses encoding
GATA-3 expressed high levels of GATA-3 protein as well as T-helper type 2
cytokines. Following adoptive transfer and airway antigen challenge, these
gene-modified T cells induced robust inflammatory responses in the lungs and
draining lymph nodes. Increased numbers of total inflammatory cells and
eosinophils were recovered in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). In
addition, the number of antigen non-specific CD4+ T cells recovered in the BALF
as well as the lung and draining lymph nodes was enhanced in recipients of GATA-3
overexpressing T cells following antigen challenge. Nevertheless, the transduced 
CD4+ T cells comprised only a small percentage of the population of CD4+ T cells 
infiltrating the lung and were not detectable at all in the draining lymph nodes.
CONCLUSION: These data provide evidence that GATA-3 plays a significant role in
the ability of antigen-specific T cells to amplify allergic inflammatory
responses in vivo by promoting the recruitment of endogenous antigen non-specific
T cells to the lung.

PMID: 17883725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Ther. 2008 Jan;16(1):60-5. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Lentiviral-mediated GATA-3 RNAi decreases allergic airway inflammation and
hyperresponsiveness.

Lee CC(1), Huang HY, Chiang BL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

GATA-3 is the key transcriptional factor for Th2 commitment in T cells and is
strongly associated with asthma and allergic disease. We studied the silencing of
the GATA-3 gene expression using RNA interference (RNAi) delivered by a
lentiviral vector, to evaluate the therapeutic role of GATA-3 short hairpin RNAs 
(shRNAs) in a murine model of asthma. Mice were sensitized with OVA and instilled
intratracheally (IT) with GATA-3 shRNAs lentiviral vector (Lenti-si-GATA-3) once,
48 hours before challenge. After three challenges with the OVA antigen, the mice 
were assessed for airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and inflammation. With
infection of Lenti-si-GATA-3 in EL-4 cells, GATA-3 gene expression was abrogated 
and downstream Th2 cytokines, such as interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-5, were also
significantly inhibited. IT delivery of Lenti-si-GATA-3 in OVA-immunized mice
resulted in a strong inhibition of local GATA-3 gene expression. Treatment with
Lenti-si-GATA-3 successfully alleviated OVA-induced airway eosinophilia and Th2
cytokine release. While evaluating AHR by means of enhanced pause (Penh) and
pulmonary resistance (R(L)) using body plethysmography, it was found that the
administration of Lenti-si-GATA-3 had significantly decreased AHR in
OVA-immunized mice. These results suggest that inhibition of GATA-3 gene
expression by shRNAs lentiviral vectors strongly attenuates antigen-induced
airway inflammation and hyper-responsiveness in mice.

PMID: 17878900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15478-83. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Nitric oxide induces CD4+CD25+ Foxp3 regulatory T cells from CD4+CD25 T cells via
p53, IL-2, and OX40.

Niedbala W(1), Cai B, Liu H, Pitman N, Chang L, Liew FY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection, and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical
Research Centre, 120 University Place, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA,
United Kingdom.

The principal aim of the immune system is to establish a balance between defense 
against pathogens and avoidance of autoimmune disease. This balance is achieved
partly through regulatory T cells (Tregs). CD4(+)CD25(+) Tregs are either
naturally occurring or induced by antigens and are characterized by the
expression of the X-linked forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Foxp3.
Here we report a previously unrecognized subset of CD4(+)CD25(+) Tregs derived
from CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells induced by nitric oxide (NO). The induction of Tregs
(NO-Tregs) is independent of cGMP but depends on p53, IL-2, and OX40. NO-Tregs
produced IL-4 and IL-10, but not IL-2, IFNgamma, or TGFbeta. The cells were
GITR(+), CD27(+), T-bet(low), GATA3(high), and Foxp3(-). NO-Tregs suppressed the 
proliferation of CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells in vitro and attenuated colitis- and
collagen-induced arthritis in vivo in an IL-10-dependent manner. NO-Tregs also
were induced in vivo in SCID mice adoptively transferred with CD4(+)CD25(-) T
cells in the presence of LPS and IFNgamma, and the induction was completely
inhibited by N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine, a pan NO synthase inhibitor. Therefore, 
our findings uncovered a previously unrecognized function of NO via the
NO-p53-IL-2-OX40-survivin signaling pathway for T cell differentiation and
development.

PMCID: PMC1978217
PMID: 17875988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Allergy. 2007 Oct;62(10):1131-8.

Eosinophilic inflammation: mechanisms regulating IL-5 transcription in human T
lymphocytes.

Wang J(1), Young IG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-5 is a key regulator of eosinophilia in allergic
inflammation and parasite infections but the mechanisms regulating IL-5
expression in activated human T lymphocytes are poorly understood. From studies
on mouse cells, the activation protein (AP)-1 and GATA-3 sites in the proximal
promoter region appear to be important in IL-5 regulation but the significance of
an adjacent Ets/nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT) site has been less
clear.
METHODS: Interleukin-5 transcriptional activity was measured by transfection of
reporter genes into the human HSB-2 cells and normal T lymphocytes. Expression
vectors encoding transcription factors were used for transactivation studies and 
IL-5 expression measured using reporter genes and mRNA levels. Transcription
factor binding was shown with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
RESULTS: HSB-2 cells showed high inducible expression of IL-5 mRNA. Mutation of
reporter gene plasmids showed the Ets/NFAT site was of equal importance to the
AP-1 and GATA-3 sites in regulating IL-5 transcription. Transactivation by Ets1
increased luciferase expression 15-fold, in the absence of stimulation, and AP-1 
(c-Fos/c-Jun) and GATA-3 gave transactivations of 85-fold, and 100-fold,
respectively. Synergistic interactions were demonstrated between Ets1, GATA-3 and
AP-1. Dominant-negative AP-1 inhibited IL-5 transcription. Transactivation by
GATA-3 and synergy between GATA-3, Ets1 and AP-1 were verified measuring IL-5
mRNA levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed increased binding of Ets1 and
GATA-3 to the IL-5 promoter after stimulation. The importance of the Ets1 site
and of synergistic interactions between the three transcription factors were
verified with primary human T cells.
CONCLUSION: Ets1, GATA-3 and AP-1 synergize to regulate IL-5 transcription in
human T cells.

PMID: 17845581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):605-13.

GATA factors induce mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation toward
extraembryonic endoderm.

Zhang C(1), Ye X, Zhang H, Ding M, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China.

The GATA family of transcription factors are implicated in early embryonic
development. There are six factors in this family in vertebrates. GATA4 and GATA6
have been demonstrated to induce mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). We investigated the effect of GATA3 on the 
differentiation of mES cells both in the ES cell and in the embryoid body (EB)
states. The results demonstrate that GATA3 overexpression can initiate the ES
cell differentiation program toward ExE. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA1 and
GATA2 in ES cells and EBs resulted in similar effects. We believe this finding
can augment our understanding of mouse ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17784834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov 15;176(10):1015-25. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

Overexpression of GATA-3 protects against the development of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis.

Matsuno Y(1), Ishii Y, Yoh K, Morishima Y, Haraguchi N, Kikuchi N, Iizuka T,
Kiwamoto T, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Ohtsuka M, Hizawa N, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

RATIONALE: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is mediated by a Th1 immune
response. Transcription factor GATA binding protein-3 (GATA-3) is believed to be 
a key regulator of Th2 differentiation and thus might play regulatory roles in
the pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP).
OBJECTIVES: We examined the effect of GATA-3 overexpression on the development of
HP in mice.
METHODS: Wild-type C57BL/6 mice and GATA-3-overexpressing mice of the same
background were used in this study. HP was induced by repeated exposure to
Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula, the causative antigen of farmer's lung.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Antigen exposure resulted in a marked inflammatory
response with enhanced pulmonary expression of T-bet and the Th1 cytokine
interferon (IFN)-gamma in wild-type mice. The degree of pulmonary inflammation
was much less severe in GATA-3-overexpressing mice. The induction of T-bet and
IFN-gamma genes was suppressed, but a significant induction of Th2 cytokines,
including IL-5 and IL-13, was observed in the lungs of GATA-3-overexpressing mice
after antigen exposure. Supplementation with recombinant IFN-gamma enhanced lung 
inflammatory responses in GATA-3-overexpressing mice to the level of wild-type
mice. Because antigen-induced IFN-gamma production predominantly occurred in CD4+
T cells, nude mice were transferred with CD4+ T cells from either wild-type or
GATA-3-overexpressing mice and subsequently exposed to antigen. Lung inflammatory
responses were significantly lower in nude mice transferred with CD4+ T cells
from GATA-3-overexpressing mice than in those with wild-type CD4+ T cells, with a
reduction of lung IFN-gamma level.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that overexpression of GATA-3 attenuates the 
development of HP by correcting the Th1-polarizing condition.

PMID: 17717199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;45(4):284-7.

[Expression of transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA and its effect on Tc1/Tc2 
balance in asthmatic children].

[Article in Chinese]

Tan WP(1), Mai XD, Wu BQ, Li XY, Li J, Wei J, Huang HR, Huang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Affiliated Hospital, SUN Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: In contrast to CD(4)(+) helper T-lymphocytes (T(H)), little is known
about the transcriptional regulation of CD(8)(+) cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (Tc) and
its role in the pathogenesis of asthma is unclear. This study was conducted to
investigate the effect of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression on profiles of type 1 
and type 2 cytotoxic T lymphocytes in asthmatic children.
METHOD: Totally 38 asthmatic children, including acute attack group composed of
20 cases (age 3 - 13 years, mean 6.2 +/- 2.9), remission group with 18 cases (age
3 - 12 years, mean 6.1 +/- 2.5) and 20 healthy control children (age 3 - 12, 6.9 
+/- 2.7) were recruited in this study from Sep. 2005 to Mar. 2006. The mRNA
expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells were
detected by using semi-quantitative PCR and Tc1, Tc2 cell numbers by flow
cytometry analysis system.
RESULT: T-bet mRNA in asthmatic children was lower than that in control group and
lower in attack stage than in remission stage (0.14 +/- 0.04, 0.21 +/- 0.03, 0.28
+/- 0.03, P < 0.05). In contrast, GATA-3 mRNA was higher in asthmatic children
than in control group and higher in attack stage than in remission stage (0.49
+/- 0.09, 0.44 +/- 0.08, 0.37 +/- 0.04, P < 0.05). It was shown that Tc1
percentage was lower in asthmatic children than those of control group and lower 
in attack stage than those of remission stage (6.6 +/- 2.4, 14.2 +/- 4.3, 31.2
+/- 3.8, P < 0.05). Tc2 percentage in asthmatic children was higher than that of 
control group and higher in attack stage than that of remission stage (10.0 +/-
4.2, 5.4 +/- 2.2, 3.5 +/- 1.1, P < 0.05). Spearman correlation analysis revealed 
that T-bet mRNA was positively correlated with Tc1 percentage (r = 0.704) and
negatively correlated with Tc2 percentage (r = -0.629). GATA3 mRNA was negatively
correlated with Tc1 percentage (r = -0.612) and positively correlated with Tc2
percentage (r = 0.673). The T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio was positively correlated
with Tc1 percentage (r = 0.731) and Tc1/Tc2 (r = 0.773), while negatively
correlated with Tc2 percentage (r = -0.642).
CONCLUSION: The imbalance of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression is closely correlated
with skewed Tc2 dominance in asthmatic children.

PMID: 17706066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Clin Calcium. 2007 Aug;17(8):1206-13.

[Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism due to abnormalities in parathyroid
organogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Japan.

Recent advance in mouse genomics has provided us lots of information concerning
genes playing critical roles during organogenesis of parathyroid gland. And human
counterparts of murine hypoparathyroidism produced by gene manipulation have been
identified. Large part of genes which is responsible for hypoparathyroidism
consisted from transcription factors such as TBX1, GATA3, SOX3. This may
contribute to the abnormalities in the other organogenesis. Systematic survey of 
the anomalies in face and the other organ is important to confirm the diagnosis. 
And people should keep in mind that PTH could not be produced only in parathyroid
in parathyroid agenesis.

PMID: 17660617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Clin Calcium. 2007 Aug;17(8):1175-81.

[Pathophysiology and classitication of parathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Endo I(1), Matsumoto T, Fukumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokushima Graduate School of Health Biosciences, Department of
Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, Japan.

Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by decreased actions of parathyroid hormone
(PTH) either by reduced secretion of or resistance to PTH. The understanding in
the pathogenesis of hypoparathyroidism has been greatly increased by recent
findings in genetic abnormalities of patients with hypoparathyroidism. A new
classification of hypoparathyroidism based upon these genetic abnormalities is
proposed, and a diagnostic approach to patients with hypoparathyroidism is
summarized.

PMID: 17660612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Immunity. 2007 Jul;27(1):89-99. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Direct regulation of Gata3 expression determines the T helper differentiation
potential of Notch.

Amsen D(1), Antov A, Jankovic D, Sher A, Radtke F, Souabni A, Busslinger M,
McCright B, Gridley T, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. d.amsen@amc.uva.nl

CD4(+) T helper cells differentiate into T helper 1 (Th1) or Th2 effector
lineages, which orchestrate immunity to different types of microbes. Both Th1 and
Th2 differentiation can be induced by Notch, but what dictates which of these
programs is activated in response to Notch is not known. By using T cell-specific
gene ablation of the Notch effector RBP-J or the Notch1 and 2 receptors, we
showed here that Notch was required on CD4(+) T cells for physiological Th2
responses to parasite antigens. GATA-3 was necessary for Notch-induced Th2
differentiation, and we identified an upstream Gata3 promoter as a direct target 
for Notch signaling. Moreover, absence of GATA-3 turned Notch from a Th2 inducer 
into a powerful inducer of Th1 differentiation. Therefore, Gata3 is a critical
element determining inductive Th2 differentiation and limiting Th1
differentiation by Notch.

PMCID: PMC2062505
PMID: 17658279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Immunity. 2007 Jul;27(1):100-10. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Notch directly regulates Gata3 expression during T helper 2 cell differentiation.

Fang TC(1), Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Del Bianco C, Knoblock DM, Blacklow SC, Pear WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Notch signaling plays multiple roles to direct diverse decisions regarding cell
fate during T cell development. During helper T (Th) cell differentiation, Notch 
is involved in generating optimal Th2 cell responses. Here, we present data
investigating how Notch mediates Th2 cell differentiation. Notch showed a CD4(+) 
T cell intrinsic role in promoting IL-4 expression that required GATA-3. In the
absence of Notch signals, Gata3 expression was markedly diminished. Introduction 
of an activated allele of Notch1 into CD4(+) T cells led to the specific and
direct upregulation of a developmentally regulated Gata3 transcript that included
the exon 1a sequences. Furthermore, Notch acted in parallel with GATA-3 to
synergistically activate IL-4 expression. Together, these data implicate Gata3 as
a direct transcriptional Notch target that acts in concert with Notch signaling
to generate optimal Th2 cell responses.

PMCID: PMC2801546
PMID: 17658278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hematology. 2007 Aug;12(4):331-5.

GATA-1, -2 and -3 genes expression in bone marrow microenviroment with chronic
aplastic anemia.

Wu X(1), Li Y, Zhu K, Wang Z, Chen S, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Institute of Hematology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, PR
China.

Both bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and transcription factors (GATA-1, GATA-2 
and GATA-3) are important in the normal hematopoiesis and the pathogenesis of
hematopoietic disease. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
expression of GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 genes in the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment from patients with chronic aplastic anemia (cAA) and normal
individuals. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were isolated from BM of patients with cAA 
(8 cases) and normal controls (9 cases). Adherent cells (i.e. BMSCs) were
collected after long-term culture in vitro. The semi-quantitative expression
levels of GATA genes were analyzed by using RT-PCR-enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay (RT-PCR-ELISA). The BMSCs with cAA grew slowly compared with the normal
BMSCs. In BMSCs, only the expression ratio of GATA-3 gene from cAA group (50.0%) 
was significant lower than the normal controls (P < 0.05), the expression ratios 
of other GATA genes from cAA group were similar to the normal controls. There was
no difference in the expression level of GATA-1 gene in the BMSCs between normal 
controls and cAA group. The expression level of GATA-2 gene in BMSCs from cAA was
significantly lower than that from normal controls (P < 0.05). The expression
level of GATA-3 gene in BMSCs from cAA was significantly higher than that from
normal controls (P < 0.05). The dominant expression of GATA-3 gene was found in
the BMSCs from cAA and normal controls. GATA genes can be expressed in the BMSCs 
and may play a role in the regulation of hematopoiesis in normal individuals, as 
well as in patients with cAA. The change of expression levels of GATA genes may
influence the hematopoiesis in BM microenvironment and relate to the pathogenesis
and development of aplastic anemia.

PMID: 17654061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2008 Mar;19(2):132-9. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Increased activation of GATA-3, IL-2 and IL-5 of cord blood mononuclear cells in 
infants with IgE sensitization.

Marschan E(1), Honkanen J, Kukkonen K, Kuitunen M, Savilahti E, Vaarala O.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. emma.marschan@hus.fi

Risk of allergic diseases has been linked to abnormal patterns of fetal immune
development, suggesting that priming of the immune system may occur in utero. The
aim of the study was to investigate whether the pattern of immune response in
cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMC) shows association with allergic diseases and 
IgE sensitization at 2 yr of age, and to study the effect of maternal probiotic
supplementation on CBMC immune responses. CBMC were isolated from 98 neonates in 
a randomized double-blinded intervention study. CBMC were stimulated with
beta-lactoglobulin, and phytohemaglutinin (PHA). Secretion of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), interleukin-5 (IL-5), and IL-13 was measured by an ELISA; IL-2,
IL-4, and IL-10 by a cytokine bead assay. T-cell polarization-associated IL-4
receptor and IL-12R expressions, and the respective transcription factors GATA-3 
and T-bet were analyzed with RT-PCR. The above responses were compared with the
development of allergic diseases and IgE sensitization at 2 yr of age, and with
the maternal probiotic or placebo supplementation. PHA-stimulated GATA-3
expression and IL-2 secretion in CBMC were higher in IgE-sensitized children at
an age of 2 yr than in the non-sensitized, non-allergic children (p = 0.03 and
0.026). PHA-induced expression of GATA-3 correlated with IL-5 (p = 0.003, r =
0.300) and IL-13 (p = 0.007, r = 0.278) secretion of CBMC, and IL-5 secretion of 
beta-lactoglobulin-stimulated CBMC was higher in IgE-sensitized children at 2 yr 
of age than in the non-sensitized, non-allergic children (p = 0.013). Probiotic
bacteria had no effect on CBMC immune responses. In CBMC-enhanced induction of
GATA-3, which activates several Th2 cytokines genes, was a risk factor for IgE
sensitization. The immune deviation towards Th2-type immunity developed already
in utero and seemed to modulate the pattern of immune response favoring an IgE
response to environmental antigens.

PMID: 17651376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2007 Apr;32(2):75-82.

[Influence of moxibustion on JAK-STAT signal transduction pathways of synovial
cells in rheumatoid arthritis rabbits].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang X(1), Li JS, Yang SQ, Zhang XX, Zhang TS, Zhou HY, Liu XG.

Author information: 
(1)Chengdu University of Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 610075, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of moxibustion on Janus kinase-signal transducer
and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway of synovial cells in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) rabbits for revealing the underlying mechanism of moxibustion in
the treatment of RA.
METHODS: A total of 30 rabbits (Japanese Big-ear White species) were randomized
(stratified random) into control, model and moxibustion groups with 10 cases in
each. RA model was established by injection of Freund's Complete Adjuvant (FCA,
0.5 mL/kg) into the animal's bilateral joint cavities. Moxibustion was applied to
bilateral "Shenshu" (BL 23), 5 cones every time, once daily (except Sundays), 3
weeks altogether. The synovial tissue of joint was sampled for analyzing the
expression of signal molecules associated with JAK-STAT pathway with gene chip
and bioinformation analytical techniques.
RESULTS: Compared with normal control group, the perimeters of both knee joints
in model group increased significantly from the 3rd day to 21st day after
injection of FCA (P < 0.01), while compared with model group, those in
moxibustion group decreased considerably from the 6th day on (P < 0.05, 0.01). In
comparison with control group, JAK-STAT pathway-associated genes with
up-regulated expression in model group were C/EBP beta, CBP, CRP, GATA3, IFNAR1, 
IFNAR2, IFNGR2, IL-10Rb, INDO, SH2B, STAT3, STAT6, JAK3 and GP130, and those with
down-regulated expression were A2M, MIG and IL-2Rr, suggesting an abnormal
activation of JAK-STAT pathway; while in comparison with model group, the related
gene up-regulated in moxibustion group in the expression was IL22R and those
down-regulated were Cyclin D1, C/EBP beta, CRP, GATA3, IFNAR2, INDO, JAK2, JAK3, 
V-JUN, STAT3, STAT5, SH2B and OSM, showing that moxibustion had an apparent
inhibitory effect on AR-induced abnormal activation of some genes as C/EBP beta, 
GATA3, IFNAR2, INDO, etc.
CONCLUSION: Moxibustion can resist inflammation and eliminate swelling in RA
rabbits, which may be closely with its effect in inhibiting abnormal activation
of JAK-STAT pathway in synovial cells.

PMID: 17650648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Hear Res. 2007 Nov;233(1-2):23-9. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

The human fetal cochlea can be a source for auditory progenitors/stem cells
isolation.

Chen W(1), Cacciabue-Rivolta DI, Moore HD, Rivolta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The development of new stem cell-based technologies is creating new hopes in
regenerative medicine. Hearing-impaired individuals should benefit greatly from
the development of a cell-based regenerative strategy to treat deafness. An
important achievement would be to develop a human-based system that could bring
the advances made in animal models closer to clinical application. In this work, 
we have explored the suitability of the developing fetal cochlea to be used as a 
source for the extraction of auditory progenitor/stem cells. We have established 
cultures that express critical markers such as NESTIN, SOX2, GATA3 and PAX2.
These cultures can be expanded in vitro for several months and differentiating
markers such as ATOH1/HATH1 and POU4F3/BRN3C can be induced by manipulating the
culture conditions using specific growth factors such as bFGF, EGF and retinoic
acid.

PMID: 17646067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. EMBO J. 2007 Aug 8;26(15):3629-40. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

c-Myb regulates lineage choice in developing thymocytes via its target gene
Gata3.

Maurice D(1), Hooper J, Lang G, Weston K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Cancer Research UK Centre for Cell and Molecular
Biology, London, UK.

During T-cell development, thymocytes with intermediate avidity for antigen-MHC
complexes are positively selected and then differentiate into functional
cytotoxic and helper T cells. This process is controlled by signalling from the
T-cell receptor (TCR). Here, we show that the c-Myb transcription factor is a
critical downstream regulator of positive selection, promoting the development of
helper T cells and blocking the development of cytotoxic T cells. A
gain-of-function c-Myb transgene stops development of cytotoxic T cells, instead 
causing accumulation of a precursor population. Conversely, loss of c-Myb in
selecting cells results in significantly fewer helper T cells. In c-Myb-null
thymocytes, Gata3, a critical inducer of T-helper cell fate, is not upregulated
in response to T-cell receptor signaling, following selection. We show that Gata3
is a direct target of c-Myb, and propose that c-Myb is an important regulator of 
Gata3, required for transduction of the T-cell receptor signal for subsequent
helper cell lineage differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1949015
PMID: 17641686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):796-8.

No DL1 Notch ligand? GATA be a mast cell.

Winandy S, Brown M.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):845-55.

PMID: 17641659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1693-9.

Eosinophils from lineage-ablated Delta dblGATA bone marrow progenitors: the
dblGATA enhancer in the promoter of GATA-1 is not essential for differentiation
ex vivo.

Dyer KD(1), Czapiga M, Foster B, Foster PS, Kang EM, Lappas CM, Moser JM, Naumann
N, Percopo CM, Siegel SJ, Swartz JM, Ting-De Ravin S, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases/National Institutes of Health (NIAID/NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
kdyer@niaid.nih.gov

A critical role for eosinophils in remodeling of allergic airways was observed in
vivo upon disruption of the dblGATA enhancer that regulates expression of GATA-1,
which resulted in an eosinophil-deficient phenotype in the DeltadblGATA mouse. We
demonstrate here that bone marrow progenitors isolated from DeltadblGATA mice can
differentiate into mature eosinophils when subjected to cytokine stimulation ex
vivo. Cultured DeltadblGATA eosinophils contain cytoplasmic granules with
immunoreactive major basic protein and they express surface Siglec F and
transcripts encoding major basic protein, eosinophil peroxidase, and GATA-1, -2, 
and -3 to an extent indistinguishable from cultured wild-type eosinophils.
Fibroblast coculture and bone marrow cross-transplant experiments indicate that
the in vivo eosinophil deficit is an intrinsic progenitor defect, and remains
unaffected by interactions with stromal cells. Interestingly, and in contrast to 
those from the wild type, a majority of the GATA-1 transcripts from cultured
DeltadblGATA progenitors express a variant GATA-1 transcript that includes a
first exon (1E(B)), located approximately 3700 bp downstream to the previously
described first exon found in hemopoietic cells (1E(A)) and approximately 42 bp
upstream to another variant first exon, 1E(C). These data suggest that cultured
progenitors are able to circumvent the effects of the DeltadblGATA ablation by
using a second, more proximal, promoter and use this mechanism to generate
quantities of GATA-1 that will support eosinophil growth and differentiation.

PMID: 17641035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Exp Med. 2007 Aug 6;204(8):1837-47. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

IL-25 augments type 2 immune responses by enhancing the expansion and functions
of TSLP-DC-activated Th2 memory cells.

Wang YH(1), Angkasekwinai P, Lu N, Voo KS, Arima K, Hanabuchi S, Hippe A,
Corrigan CJ, Dong C, Homey B, Yao Z, Ying S, Huston DP, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center of Cancer Immunology Research, University 
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interleukin (IL) 25 (IL-17E), a distinct member of the IL-17 cytokine family,
plays important roles in evoking T helper type 2 (Th2) cell-mediated inflammation
that features the infiltrations of eosinophils and Th2 memory cells. However, the
cellular sources, target cells, and underlying mechanisms remain elusive in
humans. We demonstrate that human Th2 memory cells expressing distinctive levels 
of IL-25 receptor (R) are one of the responding cell types. IL-25 promotes cell
expansion and Th2 cytokine production when Th2 central memory cells are
stimulated with thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP)-activated dendritic cells
(DCs), homeostatic cytokines, or T cell receptor for antigen triggering. The
enhanced functions of Th2 memory cells induced by IL-25 are associated with
sustained expression of GATA-3, c-MAF, and JunB in an IL-4-independent manner.
Although keratinocytes, mast cells, eosinophils, and basophils express IL-25
transcripts, activated eosinophils and basophils from normal and atopic subjects 
were found to secrete bioactive IL-25 protein, which augments the functions of
Th2 memory cells. Elevated expression of IL-25 and IL-25R transcripts was
observed in asthmatic lung tissues and atopic dermatitis skin lesions, linking
their possible roles with exacerbated allergic disorders. Our results provide a
plausible explanation that IL-25 produced by innate effector eosinophils and
basophils may augment the allergic inflammation by enhancing the maintenance and 
functions of adaptive Th2 memory cells.

PMCID: PMC2118667
PMID: 17635955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 14;361(1):1-6. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

Expression of GATA-3 in epidermis and hair follicle: relationship to p63.

Chikh A(1), Sayan E, Thibaut S, Lena AM, DiGiorgi S, Bernard BA, Melino G, Candi 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, via di Tor Vergata 135, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The epidermis is a multi-layered stratified epithelium continuously renewed by
differentiating keratinocytes that develops by the action of p63, a member of the
p53 family. The TP63 contains two promoters, resulting in the expression of
different proteins, containing (TAp63) or not (DeltaNp63) an amino-terminal
transactivation domain, which contribution in skin formation is not fully
understood. We found that p63 binds and transactivate GATA-3 promoter, which in
turn transactivate IKKalpha, two pivotal regulators of epithelial development.
Indeed, GATA-3 is a regulator of cell lineage in skin and hair follicles
formation. To further study the relationship between GATA-3 and p63 isoforms here
we investigated their expression during keratinocyte differentiation, in human
epidermis and hair follicle.

PMID: 17632082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;42(4):250-4.

[Relationship between transcription factor GATA-3 and cytokines expression in
chronic sinusitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu R(1), Xu G, Shi JB, Wen WP, Chen HX, Feng LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Otorhinolaryngology Hospital and Institute of the First Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the correlation between the expression of GATA-3 and the
level of local cytokines (IL-5, IL-6 and IL-8).
METHODS: The levels of IL-5, IL-6 and IL-8 in ethmoid sinus mucosa were titrated 
in 45 patients with chronic rhinosinusitis and 11 normal subjects by ELISA.
Patients were divided into AR group (with allergic rhinitis) and NAR group
(without allergic rhinitis) . Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical
staining were used to examine the GATA-3 expression in nasal mucosa. The
correlation between the expression of GATA-3 and the levels of cytokines was
evaluated.
RESULTS: IL-5, IL-6 and IL-8 levels in both AR and NAR groups were significantly 
elevated compared with normal group (all P < 0.01 for AR group; P < 0.05, 0.05,
0.01 for NAR group, respectively), and they were much higher in AR group in
comparison with NAR group (P < 0.01, 0.05, 0.01, respectively). Semi-quantitative
RT-PCR showed that AR and NAR groups had markedly greater level of GATA-3 mRNA
than that in control group (P < 0.01, respectively), and the level of GATA-3 mRNA
in AR group was further higher than that in NAR group (P < 0.01).
Immunohistochemical staining illustrated that GATA-3 was primarily presented in
cytoplasma and the GATA-3 positive cells were mainly infiltrating inflammatory
cells in submucosa. The mean GATA-3 positive-staining rate was (27. 90 +/-
16.75)% and (10.22 +/- 0.05)% in AR and NAR group, which were markedly higher
than (1.30 +/- 1.78)% in control group (P < 0.01, respectively). Pearson
correlation analysis demonstrated that GATA-3 positive-staining rate was closely 
correlated with IL-5 level, but not IL-6 and IL-8. The correlation coefficient
was 0. 712 for GATA-3 and IL-5 (P < 0.01), 0.200 for GATA-3 and IL-6 (P > 0.05), 
0.089 for GATA-3 and IL-8 (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of GATA-3 might be one of the mechanisms for induction of
IL-5 expression in chronic rhinosinusitis . Concomitance of allergic rhinitis
with chronic rhinosinusitis further increased expression of GATA-3, and
subsequently enhanced IL-5 expression. Chronic sinusitis may be related to
allergy, and GATA-3 may play a key role in the pathogenesis of chronic sinusitis.

PMID: 17628972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Oct;72(4):934-46. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Gemfibrozil ameliorates relapsing-remitting experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis independent of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-alpha.

Dasgupta S(1), Roy A, Jana M, Hartley DM, Pahan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Cohn
Research Building, Suite 320, 1735 West Harrison St, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The present study underlines the importance of gemfibrozil, a lipid-lowering drug
and an activator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha
(PPAR-alpha), in inhibiting the disease process of adoptively transferred
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Clinical symptoms of EAE, infiltration of
mononuclear cells, and demyelination were significantly lower in SJL/J female
mice receiving gemfibrozil through food chow than those without gemfibrozil. It
is noteworthy that the drug was equally effective in treating EAE in PPAR-alpha
wild-type as well as knockout mice. Gemfibrozil also inhibited the
encephalitogenicity of MBP-primed T cells and switched the immune response from a
Th1 to a Th2 profile independent of PPAR-alpha. Gemfibrozil consistently
inhibited the expression and DNA-binding activity of T-bet, a key regulator of
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) expression and stimulated the expression and
DNA-binding activity of GATA3, a key regulator of IL-4. Gemfibrozil treatment
decreased the number of T-bet-positive T cells and increased the number of
GATA3-positive T cells in spleen of donor mice. The histological and
immunohistochemical analyses also demonstrate the inhibitory effect of
gemfibrozil on the invasion of T-bet-positive T cells into the spinal cord of EAE
mice. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the differential effect of gemfibrozil on 
the expression of T-bet and GATA3 was due to its inhibitory effect on NO
production. Although excess NO favored the expression of T-bet, scavenging of NO 
stimulated the expression of GATA-3. Taken together, our results suggest
gemfibrozil, an approved drug for hyperlipidemia in humans, may find further
therapeutic use in multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 17625103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. BMC Genomics. 2007 Jul 10;8:230.

Genome wide transcriptional analysis of resting and IL2 activated human natural
killer cells: gene expression signatures indicative of novel molecular signaling 
pathways.

Dybkaer K(1), Iqbal J, Zhou G, Geng H, Xiao L, Schmitz A, d'Amore F, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA. kads@mb.au.dk <kads@mb.au.dk>

BACKGROUND: Human natural killer (NK) cells are the key contributors of innate
immune response and the effector functions of these cells are enhanced by
cytokines such as interleukine 2 (IL2). We utilized genome-wide transcriptional
profiling to identify gene expression signatures and pathways in resting and IL2 
activated NK cell isolated from peripheral blood of healthy donors.
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling of resting NK cells showed high expression of 
a number of cytotoxic factors, cytokines, chemokines and inhibitory and
activating surface NK receptors. Resting NK cells expressed many genes associated
with cellular quiescence and also appeared to have an active TGFbeta (TGFB1)
signaling pathway. IL2 stimulation induced rapid downregulation of quiescence
associated genes and upregulation of genes associated with cell cycle progression
and proliferation. Numerous genes that may enhance immune function and
responsiveness including activating receptors (DNAM1, KLRC1 and KLRC3), death
receptor ligand (TNFSF6 (FASL) and TRAIL), chemokine receptors (CX3CR1, CCR5 and 
CCR7), interleukin receptors (IL2RG, IL18RAB and IL27RA) and members of secretory
pathways (DEGS1, FKBP11, SSR3, SEC61G and SLC3A2) were upregulated. The
expression profile suggested PI3K/AKT activation and NF-kappaB activation through
multiple pathways (TLR/IL1R, TNF receptor induced and TCR-like possibly involving
BCL10). Activation of NFAT signaling was supported by increased expression of
many pathway members and downstream target genes. The transcription factor GATA3 
was expressed in resting cells while T-BET was upregulated on activation
concurrent with the change in cytokine expression profile. The importance of NK
cells in innate immune response was also reflected by late increased expression
of inflammatory chemotactic factors and receptors and molecules involved in
adhesion and lymphocyte trafficking or migration.
CONCLUSION: This analysis allowed us to identify genes implicated in cellular
quiescence and the cytokines and cytotoxic factors ready for immediate immune
response. It also allowed us to observe the sequential immunostimulatory effects 
of IL2 on NK cells improving our understanding of the biology and molecular
mediators behind NK cell activation.

PMCID: PMC1959522
PMID: 17623099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Allergy. 2007 Aug;62(8):949-53.

Allergen-induced in vitro expression of IL-18, SLAM and GATA-3 mRNA in PBMC
during sublingual immunotherapy.

Savolainen J(1), Nieminen K, Laaksonen K, Laiho T, Jacobsen L, Lahesmaa R, Terho 
EO, Valovirta E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Clinical Allergology, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Signalling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) and interleukin
(IL)-18 induce interferon (IFN)-gamma production from Th1 cells. The
allergen-induced SLAM and IL-18 mRNA expressions are increased during
subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT), but nothing is known about their role during
sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT). Transcription factor GATA-3 is associated with
Th2 cells but its role in SCIT and SLIT is yet unexplored. This study was
undertaken to analyse the allergen induced in vitro mRNA expression of IL-18,
SLAM and GATA-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of children with
allergic rhinitis (AR) during SLIT.
METHODS: Ten patients with AR undergoing pollen SLIT with a weekly dose of
200,000 SQ-U, 10 with 24,000 SQ-U of mixture of Betula verrucosa, Corylus
avellana and Alnus glutinosa and 10 with placebo were included. Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell were stimulated with birch extract prior to, after 1 and 2 years
of the treatment. The mRNA expression was assessed using kinetic real-time RT-PCR
(TaqMan); Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
RESULTS: The expression of IL-18 mRNA was increased in the high-dose group in
comparison to the placebo group after 1 year of therapy (P = 0.028) and had an
inverse correlation with the late phase skin reaction after the second study year
(r = -0.41, P = 0.041). SLAM mRNA expression increased in the high-dose group
from baseline to 1 year (P = 0.028) and correlated with IL-10 (r = 0.96, P <
0.0001) and transforming growth factor-beta (r = 0.80, P = 0.0037) mRNA
expression. No significant changes were seen in GATA-3 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: During SLIT, IL-18 and SLAM are upregulated, suggesting that the Th2
type inflammatory response is downregulated during SLIT by increased Th1 type
response.

PMID: 17620074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;67(13):6477-83.

Positive cross-regulatory loop ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression 
in breast cancer.

Eeckhoute J(1), Keeton EK, Lupien M, Krum SA, Carroll JS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is required for normal mammary gland development,
and its expression is highly correlated with estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha)
in human breast tumors. However, the functional role of GATA-3 in ER
alpha-positive breast cancers is yet to be established. Here, we show that GATA-3
is required for estradiol stimulation of cell cycle progression in breast cancer 
cells. The role of GATA-3 in estradiol signaling requires the direct positive
regulation of the expression of the ER alpha gene itself by GATA-3. GATA-3 binds 
to two cis-regulatory elements located within the ER alpha gene, and this is
required for RNA polymerase II recruitment to ER alpha promoters. Reciprocally,
ER alpha directly stimulates the transcription of the GATA-3 gene, indicating
that these two factors are involved in a positive cross-regulatory loop.
Moreover, GATA-3 and ER alpha regulate their own expression in breast cancer
cells. Hence, this transcriptional coregulatory mechanism accounts for the robust
coexpression of GATA-3 and ER alpha in human breast cancers. In addition, these
results highlight the crucial role of GATA-3 for the response of ER
alpha-positive breast cancers to estradiol. Moreover, they identify GATA-3 as a
critical component of the master cell-type-specific transcriptional network
including ER alpha and FoxA1 that dictates the phenotype of hormone-dependent
breast cancer.

PMID: 17616709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):845-55. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Mast cell lineage diversion of T lineage precursors by the essential T cell
transcription factor GATA-3.

Taghon T(1), Yui MA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):796-8.

GATA-3 is essential for T cell development from the earliest stages. However,
abundant GATA-3 can drive T lineage precursors to a non-T cell fate, depending on
Notch signaling and developmental stage. Here, overexpression of GATA-3 blocked
the survival of pro-T cells when Notch-Delta signals were present but enhanced
viability in their absence. In fetal thymocytes at the double-negative 1 (DN1)
stage and DN2 stage but not those at the DN3 stage, overexpression of GATA-3
rapidly induced respecification to the mast cell lineage with high frequency by
direct transcriptional 'reprogramming'. Normal DN2 thymocytes also showed mast
cell potential when interleukin 3 and stem cell factor were added in the absence 
of Notch signaling. Our results suggest a close relationship between the pro-T
cell and mast cell programs and a previously unknown function for Notch in T
lineage fidelity.

PMCID: PMC3140173
PMID: 17603486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):421-38.

Molecular dissection of prethymic progenitor entry into the T lymphocyte
developmental pathway.

Tydell CC(1), David-Fung ES, Moore JE, Rowen L, Taghon T, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Notch signaling activates T lineage differentiation from hemopoietic progenitors,
but relatively few regulators that initiate this program have been identified,
e.g., GATA3 and T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) (gene name Tcf7). To identify additional 
regulators of T cell specification, a cDNA library from mouse Pro-T cells was
screened for genes that are specifically up-regulated in intrathymic T cell
precursors as compared with myeloid progenitors. Over 90 genes of interest were
identified, and 35 of 44 tested were confirmed to be more highly expressed in T
lineage precursors relative to precursors of B and/or myeloid lineage. To a
remarkable extent, however, expression of these T lineage-enriched genes,
including zinc finger transcription factor, helicase, and signaling adaptor
genes, was also shared by stem cells (Lin(-)Sca-1(+)Kit(+)CD27(-)) and
multipotent progenitors (Lin(-)Sca-1(+)Kit(+)CD27(+)), although down-regulated in
other lineages. Thus, a major fraction of these early T lineage genes are a
regulatory legacy from stem cells. The few genes sharply up-regulated between
multipotent progenitors and Pro-T cell stages included those encoding
transcription factors Bcl11b, TCF-1 (Tcf7), and HEBalt, Notch target Deltex1,
Deltex3L, Fkbp5, Eva1, and Tmem131. Like GATA3 and Deltex1, Bcl11b, Fkbp5, and
Eva1 were dependent on Notch/Delta signaling for induction in fetal liver
precursors, but only Bcl11b and HEBalt were up-regulated between the first two
stages of intrathymic T cell development (double negative 1 and double negative
2) corresponding to T lineage specification. Bcl11b was uniquely T lineage
restricted and induced by Notch/Delta signaling specifically upon entry into the 
T lineage differentiation pathway.

PMID: 17579063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Exp Hematol. 2007 Aug;35(8):1272-8. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Tumor necrosis factor promotes T-cell at the expense of B-cell lymphoid
development from cultured human CD34+ cord blood cells.

Smits K(1), De Smedt M, Naessens E, De Smet G, Stove V, Taghon T, Plum J,
Verhasselt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: Human CD34+ cord blood (CB) cells are hematopoietic progenitors useful
for stem cell transplantation, even after ex vivo expansion. We investigated the 
effect of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) on lymphoid development from cultured CD34+
CB cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human CD34+ CB cells were cultured in cytokine mixes with 
or without TNF. Preculture during 60 hours was followed by in vitro
differentiation assays, including fetal thymus organ culture and coculture on
murine stromal MS-5 cells. In a next step, experiments were extended to
CD34+CD38- and CD34+CD38+ CB cells and prolonged preculture.
RESULTS: Preculture in the presence of TNF improved differentiation into T cells 
and diminished the ability to generate B cells, while NK potential and myeloid
development were unaffected. Sorted CD34+CD38- CB cells were more potent T-cell
precursors after preculture in TNF, compared to CD34+CD38+ CB cells. In
precultured CD34+CD38- CB cells, TNF increased GATA3 but decreased EBF1
expression, in line with the skewed lymphoid differentiation induced by TNF.
However, when preculture in the presence of TNF was extended to 1 week, T-cell
precursors were lost.
CONCLUSION: After short-term culture of CD34+ CB cells in the presence of TNF,
T-cell generation is stimulated at the expense of B-cell generation. T-cell
progenitors are enriched in the CD34+CD38- fraction. These results have
implications on the culture conditions to be used for CB CD34+ cells prior to
transplantation.

PMID: 17553612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2007 Apr-Jun;23(2-3):81-5.

Fox-P3-positive regulatory T cells are present in the skin of generalized atopic 
eczema patients and are not particularly affected by medium-dose UVA1 therapy.

Schnopp C(1), Rad R, Weidinger A, Weidinger S, Ring J, Eberlein B, Ollert M,
Mempel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Biederstein, Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Regulatory T cells (T-reg cells) have been described as an important 
cell population in the UV treatment of inflammatory skin diseases.
METHODS: We have treated five patients with generalized atopic eczema (AE) using 
medium-dose (15 cycles of 50 J/cm(2), total dose of 750 J/cm(2)) UVA1 therapy and
have analyzed the skin-infiltrating T-cellular subsets before and after therapy. 
Skin biopsies were split for immunohistochemistry and Real-time PCR and analyzed 
for CD4, Fox-P3, GATA-3, and IL-10 transcription as well as for CD3, CD4, CD152, 
Fox-P3, and GITR staining.
RESULTS: In all the investigated patients, we observed a good clinical response
to UVA1. As described previously, the number of epidermal T cells slightly
declined after irradiation. However, we did not observe a general decrease in T
cell numbers. Within the population of T cells, no specific difference in the
kinetics of Fox-P3-positive cells and Fox-P3-specific mRNA was noted as compared 
with GATA-3 positive T cells. These results were paralleled by RT-PCR for IL-10
and staining for CD152, a surface molecule that has been described for T-reg
cells.
CONCLUSION: In our hands, the clinical benefit of UVA1 treatment in AE patients
does not seem to be due to a preferential survival/proliferation of T-reg cells.

PMID: 17523929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jun;37(6):1621-33.

Highly restricted diversity of TCR delta chains of the amphibian Mexican axolotl 
(Ambystoma mexicanum) in peripheral tissues.

André S(1), Kerfourn F, Affaticati P, Guerci A, Ravassard P, Fellah JS.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7622, National Centre for Scientific Research, and Hôpital Pitié
Salpêtrière, Pierre and Marie Curie University, Paris, France.

Gammadelta T cells localize at mammalian epithelial surfaces to exert both
protective and regulatory roles in response to infections. We have previously
characterized the Mexican axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) T cell receptor delta
(TRD) chain. In this study, TRD repertoires in spleen, liver, intestine and skin 
from larvae, pre-adult and adult axolotls were examined and compared to the
thymic TRD repertoire. A TRDV transcript without N/D diversity, TRDV1S1-TRDJ1,
dominates the TRD repertoires until sexual maturation. In adult tissues, this
canonical transcript is replaced by another dominant TRDV1S1-TRDJ1 transcript. In
the thymus, these two transcripts are detected early in development. Our results 
suggest that gammadelta T cells that express the canonical TRDV1S1-TRDJ1
transcript emerge from the thymus and colonize the peripheral tissues, where they
are selectively expanded by recurrent ligands. This particular situation is
probably related to the neotenic state and the slow development of the axolotl.
In thymectomized axolotls, TRD repertoires appear different from those of normal 
axolotls, suggesting that extrathymic gammadelta T cell differentiation could
occur. Gene expression analysis showed the importance of the gut in T cell
development.

PMID: 17523213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6984-93.

Cytopiloyne, a polyacetylenic glucoside, prevents type 1 diabetes in nonobese
diabetic mice.

Chang CL(1), Chang SL, Lee YM, Chiang YM, Chuang DY, Kuo HK, Yang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

Some polyacetylenes from the plant Bidens pilosa have been reported to treat
diabetes. In this study, we report that the cytopiloyne from B. pilosa, which is 
structurally different from the above-mentioned polyacetylenes and inhibits
CD4(+) T cell proliferation, effectively prevents the development of diabetes in 
nonobese diabetic mice as evidenced by a normal level of blood glucose and
insulin and normal pancreatic islet architecture. Cytopiloyne also suppresses the
differentiation of type 1 Th cells but promotes that of type 2 Th cells, which is
consistent with it enhancing GATA-3 transcription. Also, long-term application of
cytopiloyne significantly decreases the level of CD4(+) T cells inside pancreatic
lymph nodes and spleens but does not compromise total Ab responses mediated by T 
cells. Coculture assays imply that this decrease in CD4(+) T cells involves the
Fas ligand/Fas pathway. Overall, our results suggest that cytopiloyne prevents
type 1 diabetes mainly via T cell regulation.

PMID: 17513748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 2007 Apr 10;96(4):707-12.

[Progress in diagnosis and therapy: Hypocalcemia due to idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H.

PMID: 17506308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Aug;82(2):354-60. Epub 2007 May 15.

Induction of a distinct CD8 Tnc17 subset by transforming growth factor-beta and
interleukin-6.

Liu SJ(1), Tsai JP, Shen CR, Sher YP, Hsieh CL, Yeh YC, Chou AH, Chang SR, Hsiao 
KN, Yu FW, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research and Development Center, National Health Research Institutes, 
Miaoli, Taiwan, China.

Cross-talk between TGF-beta and IL-6 has been shown to direct the differentiation
of CD4(+) cells into special IL-17-secreting cells, which are termed Th17 cells. 
In this study, we demonstrated that TGF-beta and IL-6 could stimulate CD8(+)
cells to differentiate into noncytotoxic, IL-17-producing cells in MLC. These
IL-17-producing CD8(+) cells exhibit a unique granzyme B(-)IFN-gamma(-)IL-10(-)
phenotype. The mRNA level of Th2/T cytotoxic 2 (Tc2) transcription factors GATA3 
and Th1/Tc1 transcription factors T-box expressed in T cell (T-bet) as well as
its target H2.O-like homeobox (Hlx) is decreased in CD8(+) cells from TGF-beta-
and IL-6-treated MLC. In addition, these CD8(+) cells display a marked
up-regulation of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-gammat, a key IL-17
transcription factor. These results demonstrate that the existence of an
IL-17-producing CD8(+) subset belongs to neither the Tc1 nor the Tc2 subset and
can be categorized as a T noncytotoxic 17 (Tnc17) subset.

PMID: 17505023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Mol Immunol. 2007 Jul;44(13):3305-16. Epub 2007 May 1.

FTY720 ameliorates oxazolone colitis in mice by directly affecting T helper type 
2 functions.

Daniel C(1), Sartory NA, Zahn N, Schmidt R, Geisslinger G, Radeke HH, Stein JM.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, JWG University of Frankfurt am Main,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The sphingosine-1-phosphate analogue FTY720 is known to alter migration and
homing of lymphocytes via sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors. However, several
studies indicate that its mode of action is more complex and that FTY720 may also
directly influence cytokine effector functions. Therefore, we studied the effect 
of FTY720 in T helper type (Th2)-mediated oxazolone-induced colitis in mice.
Following rectal oxazolone instillation, Th2 cells producing IL-13 induce a
progressive colitis resembling human ulcerative colitis. A rectal enema of
oxazolone [90 mg/kg body weight] was applied to BALB/c mice. FTY720 was
administered i.p. from day 0 to 3 or from day 3 to 5 following the instillation
of the haptenating agent. Assessment of severity of colitis was performed daily. 
FTY720 plasma levels were detected using LC-MS/MS-analysis. Colon tissue was
analyzed macroscopically and microscopically, myeloperoxidase activity as well as
cytokine levels of lamina propria CD4(+) T-cells and T1/ST2 expression were
determined. Treatment with FTY720 prominently reduced the clinical and
histopathologic severity of oxazolone-induced colitis, abrogating body weight
loss, diarrhea, and macroscopic and microscopic intestinal inflammation. The
therapeutic effects of FTY720 were associated with a prominent reduction of the
key effector Th2 cytokines IL-13, IL-4 and IL-5. Strikingly, FTY720 inhibited
GATA3 and T1/ST2 expression which represent highly relevant markers for Th2
differentiation and Th2 effector function, respectively. Our data provide the
first evidence that FTY720 exhibits beneficial prophylactic as well as
therapeutic effects in Th2-mediated experimental colitis by directly affecting
Th2 cytokine profiles probably by reducing T1/ST2, thus offering a new auspicious
therapeutic instrument for the treatment of human ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 17475330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Cancer. 2007 May 2;7:73.

Nectin-4 is a new histological and serological tumor associated marker for breast
cancer.

Fabre-Lafay S(1), Monville F, Garrido-Urbani S, Berruyer-Pouyet C, Ginestier C,
Reymond N, Finetti P, Sauvan R, Adélaïde J, Geneix J, Lecocq E, Popovici C,
Dubreuil P, Viens P, Gonçalves A, Charafe-Jauffret E, Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D,
Lopez M.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR599, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille,
France. stephanie.fabre.lafay@pierre-fabre.com
<stephanie.fabre.lafay@pierre-fabre.com>

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a complex and heterogeneous disease at the
molecular level. Evolution is difficult to predict according to classical
histoclinical prognostic factors. Different studies highlight the importance of
large-scale molecular expression analyses to improve taxonomy of breast cancer
and prognostic classification. Identification of new molecular markers that
refine this taxonomy and improve patient management is a priority in the field of
breast cancer research.Nectins are cell adhesion molecules involved in the
regulation of epithelial physiology. We present here Nectin-4/PVRL4 as a new
histological and serological tumor associated marker for breast carcinoma.
METHODS: Expression of Nectin-4 protein was measured on a panel of 78 primary
cells and cell lines from different origins and 57 breast tumors by FACS analysis
and immunohistochemistry (IHC), respectively. mRNA expression was measured by
quantitative PCR. Serum Nectin-4 was detected by ELISA and compared with CEA and 
CA15.3 markers, on panels of 45 sera from healthy donors, 53 sera from patients
with non-metastatic breast carcinoma (MBC) at diagnosis, and 182 sera from
patients with MBC. Distribution of histological/serological molecular markers and
histoclinical parameters were compared using the standard Chi-2 test.
RESULTS: Nectin-4 was not detected in normal breast epithelium. By contrast,
Nectin-4 was expressed in 61% of ductal breast carcinoma vs 6% in lobular type.
Expression of Nectin-4 strongly correlated with the basal-like markers EGFR, P53,
and P-cadherin, and negatively correlated with the luminal-like markers ER, PR
and GATA3. All but one ER/PR-negative tumors expressed Nectin-4. The detection of
Nectin-4 in serum improves the follow-up of patients with MBC: the association
CEA/CA15.3/Nectin-4 allowed to monitor 74% of these patients compared to 67% with
the association CEA/CA15.3. Serum Nectin-4 is a marker of disease progression,
and levels correlate with the number of metastases (P = 0.038). Serum Nectin-4 is
also a marker of therapeutic efficiency and correlates, in 90% of cases, with
clinical evolution.
CONCLUSION: Nectin-4 is a new tumor-associated antigen for breast carcinoma.
Nectin-4 is a new bio-marker whose use could help refine breast cancer taxonomy
and improve patients' follow-up. Nectin-4 emerges as a potential target for
breast cancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC1868744
PMID: 17474988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;85(4):300-5. Epub 2007 May 1.

Decision-making by the immune response.

Callard RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30
Guilford Street, London, UK. rcallard@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Decisions by uncommitted cells to differentiate down one lineage pathway or
another is fundamental to developmental biology. In the immune system, lymphocyte
precursors commit to T- or B-cell lineages and T-cell precursors to CD4 or CD8
independently of foreign antigen. T and B cells must also decide whether or not
to respond to antigen and when a response is initiated, what sort of response to 
make such as the type of antibody, CD4 or CD8, and CD4 Th1 or Th2. The two basic 
mechanisms for these decision-making processes are selection and instruction.
Selection depends on prior stochastic production of precommitted cells, which are
then selected to respond by an appropriate signal; for example, CD8 and CD4
responses selected by peptide presented in association with major
histocompatibility complex class I or II. In contrast, instruction occurs when an
uncommitted precursor embarks upon a differentiation pathway in response to a
particular set of signals; for example, Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment. In this
paper, the signals that determine Th1 and Th2 differentiation are examined with a
mathematical model and shown to act as a bistable switch permitting either Tbet
or Gata3 to be expressed in an individual cell but not both. The model is used to
show how the Tbet Gata3 network within an individual cell interacts with cytokine
signals between cells and suggests how Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment can become 
irreversible. These considerations provide an example of how mathematical models 
can be used to gain a better understanding of lymphocyte differentiation in an
immune response.

PMID: 17471303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Exp Mol Med. 2007 Apr 30;39(2):205-12.

Identification of novel substrates for human checkpoint kinase Chk1 and Chk2
through genome-wide screening using a consensus Chk phosphorylation motif.

Kim MA(1), Kim HJ, Brown AL, Lee MY, Bae YS, Park JI, Kwak JY, Chung JH, Yun J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Cancer Molecular Therapy, College of Medicine,
Dong-A University, Busan 602-714, Korea.

Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) and Chk2 are effector kinases in the cellular DNA
damage response and impairment of their function is closely related to
tumorigenesis. Previous studies revealed several substrate proteins of Chk1 and
Chk2, but identification of additional targets is still important in order to
understand their tumor suppressor functions. In this study, we screened novel
substrates for Chk1 and Chk2 using substrate target motifs determined previously 
by an oriented peptide library approach. The potential candidates were selected
by genome-wide peptide database searches and were examined by in vitro kinase
assays. ST5, HDAC5, PGC-1alpha, PP2A PR130, FANCG, GATA3, cyclin G, Rad51D and
MAD1a were newly identified as in vitro substrates for Chk1 and/or Chk2. Among
these, HDAC5 and PGC-1a were further analyzed to substantiate the screening
results. Immunoprecipitation kinase assay of full-length proteins and
site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the target motifs demonstrated that HDAC5
and PGC-1alpha were specific targets for Chk1 and/or Chk2 at least in vitro.

PMID: 17464182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 May;31(5):673-80.

Placental S100 (S100P) and GATA3: markers for transitional epithelium and
urothelial carcinoma discovered by complementary DNA microarray.

Higgins JP(1), Kaygusuz G, Wang L, Montgomery K, Mason V, Zhu SX, Marinelli RJ,
Presti JC Jr, van de Rijn M, Brooks JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. john.higgins@stanford.edu

The morphologic distinction between prostate and urothelial carcinoma can be
difficult. To identify novel diagnostic markers that may aid in the differential 
diagnosis of prostate versus urothelial carcinoma, we analyzed expression
patterns in prostate and bladder cancer tissues using complementary DNA
microarrays. Together with our prior studies on renal neoplasms and normal
kidney, these studies suggested that the gene for placental S100 (S100P) is
specifically expressed in benign and malignant urothelial cells. Using tissue
microarrays, a polyclonal antiserum against S100P protein stained 86% of 295
urothelial carcinomas while only 3% of 260 prostatic adenocarcinomas and 1% of
133 renal cell carcinomas stained. A commercially available monoclonal antibody
against S100P stained 78% of 300 urothelial carcinomas while only 2% of 256
prostatic adenocarcinomas and none of 137 renal cell carcinomas stained. A second
gene, GATA3, also showed high level expression in urothelial tumors by cDNA
array. A commercially available monoclonal antibody against GATA3 stained 67% of 
308 urothelial carcinomas, but none of the prostate or renal carcinomas. For
comparison, staining was also performed for p63 and cytokeratin 5/6. p63 stained 
87% of urothelial carcinomas whereas CK5/6 stained 54%. Importantly, when S100P
and p63 were combined 95% of urothelial carcinomas were labeled by one or both
markers. We conclude that the detection of S100P and GATA3 protein expression may
help distinguish urothelial carcinomas from other genitourinary neoplasms that
enter into the differential diagnosis.

PMID: 17460449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;30(2):116-20.

[Effect of rosiglitazone on the expression of T-bet/GATA-3 in T lymphocytes in
patients with acute asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang L(1), Xiang XD, Wang WJ, Deng JW, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 2nd Hospital of Xiangya, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of rosiglitazone on the expression of
T-bet/GATA-3 in peripheral blood T lymphocytes and cytokine derived from Th1/Th2 
in patients with acute asthma and to compare its mechanism with that of
dexamethasone (DXM).
METHODS: Peripheral blood T lymphocytes from 10 patients with acute asthma (A
group, A) and 10 healthy volunteers (B group, B) were isolated, purificated and
cultured, and were divided into 2 groups (3 h and 24 h) based on the treatment
time, and each group was further divided, on the basis of the treatment given,
into 3 sub-groups respectively: control group (A(1) and B(1)), rosiglitazone
treated group (A(2) and B(2)) and DXM treated group (A(3) and B(3)). The levels
of IFN-gamma and IL-4 in the culture supernatant were detected by Enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) and the expression levels of T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA
in T lymphocytes was detected by Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The levels of INF-gamma and INF-gamma/IL-4 in the culture supernatant of
T lymphocytes and T-bet mRNA and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the
A at 3 h and 24 h were 357 +/- 31, 783 +/- 47, 5.5 +/- 1.0, 8.4 +/- 1.5, 18.7 +/-
3.7, 11.9 +/- 2.9, 1.20 +/- 0.11, 0.290 +/- 0.020, and those from the B at 3 h
and 24 h were 659 +/- 41, 1394 +/- 120, 11.5 +/- 3.0, 17.4 +/- 4.0, 29.0 +/- 4.0,
18.9 +/- 4.0, 3.82 +/- 0.81, 0.870 +/- 0.090, the differences were significant
between these groups (t = 18.59, 5.95, 14.87, 6.25, 6.06, 4.63, 10.23, 18.67, all
P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of IL-4 in the culture supernatant of T
lymphocytes and GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the A at 3 h and 24 h were 65
+/- 6, 96 +/- 9, 16.4 +/- 4.2, 41 +/- 6, and those from the B at 3 h and 24 h
were 57 +/- 5, 83 +/- 7, 7.8 +/- 2.2, 23 +/- 4, the differences were significant 
between these groups (t = 3.19, 3.90, 5.77, 7.76, all P < 0.05, respectively).
The levels of IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 in the culture supernatant of T 
lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 357 +/- 31, 65 +/- 6, 5.5 +/- 1.0, 659
+/- 41, 57 +/- 5, 11.5 +/- 3.0, and those from the A and B at 24 h were 783 +/-
47, 96 +/- 9, 8.4 +/- 1.5, 1394 +/- 120, 83 +/- 7, 17.4 +/- 4.0, The differences 
were significant between these groups (t = 23.8, 9.48, 5.03, 18.21, 9.01, 3.53,
all P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of T-bet mRNA and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA 
in T lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 18.7 +/- 3.7, 1.20 +/- 0.11, 29.0
+/- 4.0, 3.82 +/- 0.81, and those from the A and B at 24 h were 11.9 +/- 2.9,
0.290 +/- 0.020, 18.9 +/- 4.0, 0.870 +/- 0.090, the differences were significant 
between these groups (t = 4.62, 5.66, 29.67, 11.5, all P < 0.05, respectively).
The levels of GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 16.4 +/- 
4.2, 7.8 +/- 2.2, it was lower than those from the A and B at 24 h (41 +/- 6, 23 
+/- 4, t = 10.70, 10.11, all P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of T-bet mRNA
from the A showed a positive correlation with the level of IFN-gamma (r = 0.581, 
P < 0.05), and a negative correlation with the level of IL-4 (r = -0.493, P <
0.05); The levels of GATA-3 mRNA from the A showed a negative correlation with
the level of IFN-gamma (r = -0.501, P < 0.05), and a positive correlation with
the level of IL-4 (r = 0.579, P < 0.05); The ratio of T-bet mRNA to GATA-3 mRNA
from the A showed a positive correlation with the ratio of IFN-gamma to IL-4 (r =
0.696, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Rosiglitazone could regulate the balance of IFN-gamma and IL-4
through effect on the expression of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA.

PMID: 17445473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;30(2):112-5.

[Expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA in asthmatic peripheral blood
mononuclear cells stimulated by Dermatophagoides farinae antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo YS(1), Xu YP, Xu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA in asthmatic
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) before and after stimulation by
Dermatophagoides farinae antigen (Df), and the relationship among the three
transcription factors.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients of asthma and 15 healthy controls were included.
The mRNA levels of T-bet, GATA-3, and FOXP3 in PBMC before and after Df
stimulation were detected by semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chair reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: There was no statistical difference (t = 0.78, 0.38 respectively, all P 
> 0.05) in the levels of T-bet and FOXP3 mRNA between the patients (0.3 +/- 0.4, 
0.42 +/- 0.24 respectively) and the healthy controls (0.4 +/- 0.3, 0.39 +/- 0.37 
respectively). However, GATA-3 mRNA was statistically different (t = 2.27, P <
0.05) between the patients (1.0 +/- 0.3) and the healthy controls (0.8 +/- 0.3). 
After the stimulation of PBMC by Df, the levels of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA
showed statistical difference (t = 2.30, 3.79, 2.08 respectively, P < 0.05, <
0.01, < 0.05 respectively) between the patients (0.33 +/- 0.39, 1.58 +/- 1.44,
0.11 +/- 0.32 respectively) and the healthy controls (0.03 +/- 0.40, 0.11 +/-
0.53, 0.43 +/- 0.66 respectively). The FOXP3 mRNA level in the asthmatics was
negatively correlated with T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA (r = -0.46, P < 0.05, r = -0.62,
P < 0.01 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: There are a predominant expression of GATA-3 and T-bet, but a
decreased expression of FOXP3 in Df-stimulated PBMCs from patients with asthma.

PMID: 17445472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;42(2):96-8.

[Study on the expression of transcription factor GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA in decidua
of women with unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu LH(1), Lin QD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Affiliated Renji Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of transcription factor GATA-3 and T-bet at
the fetal-maternal interface in the pathogenesis of unexplained recurrent
spontaneous abortion (URSA).
METHODS: The expression of GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA was examined by in situ
hybridization. Decidua was obtained from 20 women with URSA and 20 normal
pregnant (NP) women.
RESULTS: (1) The number of GATA-3 positive cells per high power field in women
with URSA (25 +/- 16) was significantly lower than those in NP women (38 +/- 16) 
(P < 0.05). (2) The number of T-bet positive cells per high power field in women 
with URSA (59 +/- 17) was significantly higher than those in NP women (46 +/- 18)
(P < 0.05). (3) Numbers of cells expressing GATA-3 mRNA correlated significantly 
with T-bet mRNA positive cell numbers in decidua (r = -0.55, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that upregulated expression of T-bet and
downregulated expression of GATA-3 are found in the decidua of women with URSA.
Imbalance of GATA-3/T-bet transcription factors might interfere with type 1
helper T cell (Th1)/type 2 helper T cell (Th2) differentiation at the
fetal-maternal interface and cause URSA.

PMID: 17442182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1523-38. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

DNA methylation profiling of transcription factor genes in normal lymphocyte
development and lymphomas.

Ivascu C(1), Wasserkort R, Lesche R, Dong J, Stein H, Thiel A, Eckhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Kleine Präsidentenstrasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role during hematopoiesis by orchestrating
lineage commitment and determining cellular fate. Although tight regulation of
transcription factor expression appears to be essential, little is known about
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in transcription factor gene regulation. We
have analyzed DNA methylation profiles of 13 key transcription factor genes in
primary cells of the hematopoietic cascade, lymphoma cell lines and lymph node
biopsies of diffuse large B-cell- and T-cell-non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
Several of the transcription factor genes (SPI1, GATA3, TCF-7, Etv5, c-maf and
TBX21) are differentially methylated in specific cell lineages and stages of the 
hematopoietic cascade. For some genes, such as SPI1, Etv5 and Eomes, we found an 
inverse correlation between the methylation of the 5' untranslated region and
expression of the associated gene suggesting that these genes are regulated by
DNA methylation. Differential methylation is not limited to cells of the healthy 
hematopoietic cascade, as we observed aberrant methylation of c-maf, TCF7, Eomes 
and SPI1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our results suggest that epigenetic
remodelling of transcription factor genes is a frequent mechanism during
hematopoietic development. Aberrant methylation of transcription factor genes is 
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and might have a functional
role during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 15;178(8):4885-90.

Type 1 sphingosine 1-phosphate G protein-coupled receptor (S1P1) mediation of
enhanced IL-4 generation by CD4 T cells from S1P1 transgenic mice.

Wang W(1), Huang MC, Goetzl EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a natural lipid mediator that regulates immune
cell traffic, Ab production, and T cell cytokine generation by mechanisms that
enhance Th2 activities. Responses to S1P are controlled principally by the
diverse expression patterns of its receptors in different cells. In T cells, the 
type 1 (S1P(1)) and type 4 (S1P(4)) G protein-coupled receptors are predominant. 
S1P(1) mainly transduces effects on T cell migration and trafficking, whereas
S1P(4) transduces immunosuppression via its effects on T cell proliferation and
cytokine production. Using T cell-specific S1P(1) transgenic (TG) mice, we
investigated the regulatory effects of the S1P-S1P(1) axis on T cell cytokine
production. The production of IL-4, but not IL-2 or IFN-gamma, was significantly 
up-regulated >10-fold in activated CD4 T cells from S1P(1) TG mice compared with 
those from wild-type mice. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that IL-4
up-regulation was initiated at the mRNA level as early as 4 h after T cell
activation. The up-regulation of IL-4 mRNA was mediated by c-Maf, Jun B, and
Gata3 as demonstrated by increases in their protein expression and DNA-binding
activities. In contrast, the expression and DNA-binding activities of T-bet,
FosB, C-Fos, Jun D, Fra-1, Fra-2, and c-Jun all were identical in wild-type and
TG CD4 T cells. Immunological assays showed that increased IL-4 levels induced
greater production of IgE. Thus, the S1P-S1P(1) axis specifically up-regulates
c-Maf, Jun B, and Gata3, which consequently enhance IL-4 production that may lead
to a Th2 phenotype.

PMID: 17404269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Arb Paul Ehrlich Inst Bundesamt Sera Impfstoffe Frankf A M. 2006;(95):211-4;
discussion 215-6.

Understanding the immunological basis of asthma; immunotherapy and regulatory T
cells.

Umetsu DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Karp Lab, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We believe that immunotherapy with HKL as an adjuvant induces Thl-like TReg cells
that can inhibit AHR and airway inflammation. These antigen-specific TReg cells
are induced with CD8alpha+ DCs producing IL-12 and IL-10, produce IFN-gamma and
IL-10, and also express T-bet and Foxp3. These Th1Reg cells are distinct from
antigen-specific TReg cells induced with respiratory tolerance, which can also
inhibit AHR and airway inflammation. These Th2-like TReg cells are induced with
CD8alpha- DCs producing IL-10, they express IL-10, GATA3 and Foxp3. So allergen
immunotherapy is effective in large part because it induces regulatory T cells.
With HKL you get Th1Reg cells, and with other forms of immunotherapy you may get 
Th2Reg cells. We believe that with further refinements, allergen immunotherapy
that rapidly induces allergen specific TReg cells will indeed be the magic
bullets for allergy and asthma.

PMID: 17393742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Oncol. 2007 May;30(5):1273-7.

Conserved POU/OCT- and GATA-binding sites in 5'-flanking promoter region of
mammalian WNT8B orthologs.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

WNT family members are secreted-type glycoproteins regulating cell fate, planar
cell polarity, cell adhesion, and cell movement. WNT signals are
context-dependently transduced to the canonical pathway for the transcriptional
up-regulation of MYC, CCND1, FGF20, JAG1, WISP1 and DKK1 genes, and also to the
non-canonical pathway for the activation of RHOA, JNK, PKC, NFAT and NLK
signaling cascades. We cloned and characterized the wild-type human WNT8B, while 
another group the aberrant human WNT8B with Gly230Ala and Arg284Leu amino-acid
substitutions. Although WNT8B is undetectable in normal adult tissues by using
Northern blot analyses, WNT8B is expressed in gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, 
colorectal cancer, breast cancer, and embryonal tumors. Here, comparative
integromics on WNT8B orthologs were investigated by using bioinformatics
(Techint) and human intelligence (Humint). Cow Wnt8b gene was identified within
NW_001494361.1 genome sequence. Predicted sequence XM_582222.3 was an artificial 
cow Wnt8b with aberrant prediction for the first exon. Cow Wnt8b complete coding 
sequence was found to encode a 350-amino-acid protein, which showed 96.9%
total-amino-acid identity with human WNT8B. Comparative proteomics revealed that 
N-terminal signal peptide, 22 Cys residues, two Asn-linked glycosylation sites,
Gly230, and Arg284 of human WNT8B were conserved among mammalian WNT8B orthologs.
Comparative genomics revealed that POU/OCT- and GATA-binding sites in the
5'-flanking promoter region were conserved among human, chimpanzee, cow, mouse,
and rat WNT8B orthologs. In silico expression analyses revealed that human WNT8B 
was expressed in embryoid body derived from embryonic stem (ES) cells, hepatocyte
progenitors derived from ES cells, fetal brain, diffuse-type gastric cancer,
colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, and ovarian fibrotheoma. Based on the
expression profiles of POU and GATA family transcription factors, it was revealed
that WNT8B expression in hepatocyte progenitors derived from human ES cells is
due to POU5F1 (OCT3/OCT4) and GATA3, and also that WNT8B expression in
diffuse-type gastric cancer is due to POU5F1 and GATA6.

PMID: 17390031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(2):302.

Gata-3 and mammary cell fate.

Naylor MJ(1), Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, NSW 2010 Australia.

Genomic regulatory networks specify how cellular gene expression responds to
external temporal and spatial stimuli, ensuring that correct cell fate decisions 
are made and the appropriate cell phenotypes are adopted. In mammary epithelial
cells, the hierarchy of stem and progenitor cells and the genetically specified
program of transcriptional activity are beginning to be elucidated and
integrated. A novel role for Gata-3 in specifying and maintaining mammary cell
fate has recently been identified. These reports offer an understanding of how
mammary cells assume and maintain a variety of cell behaviours and functions, and
how a mammary cell may potentially subvert these constraints during
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1868924
PMID: 17381824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Apr;37(4):1043-52.

GATA3 controls the expression of CD5 and the T cell receptor during CD4 T cell
lineage development.

Ling KW(1), van Hamburg JP, de Bruijn MJ, Kurek D, Dingjan GM, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transcription factor GATA3 is essential at multiple stages of T cell
development, including the earliest double-negative stages, beta-selection and
CD4 single-positive thymocytes. Here, we show that in CD2-GATA3 transgenic mice, 
with enforced GATA3 expression driven by the CD2 promoter, thymocytes have
reduced levels of CD5, which is a negative regulator of TCR signaling
participating in TCR repertoire fine-tuning. Reduction of CD5 expression was most
prominent in CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) cells and was associated with
increased levels of the transcription factor E2A. Conversely, GATA3-deficient DP 
thymocytes showed consistently higher CD5 levels and defective TCR up-regulation 
during their development towards the CD4(lo)CD8(lo) subpopulation. CD2-GATA3
transgenic mice carrying the MHC class II-restricted TCR DO11.10 also manifested 
decreased CD5 levels. As in these TCR-transgenic mice reduced CD5 expression
cannot result from an effect of GATA3 on repertoire selection, we conclude that
enforced GATA3 interferes with the developmentally regulated increase of CD5
levels. Enforced GATA3 expression in DO11.10 transgenic mice was also accompanied
by enhanced TCR expression during CD4 positive selection. Because GATA3 is
induced by TCR signaling in DP thymocytes, our findings indicate that GATA3
establishes a positive feedback loop that increases TCR surface expression in
developing CD4 lineage cells.

PMID: 17357106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Mol Immunol. 2007 Feb;4(1):15-29.

GATA-3 - not just for Th2 cells anymore.

Ho IC(1), Pai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
iho@partners.org

GATA-3 was first cloned as a T cell specific transcription factor in 1991 and its
importance in the transcriptional control of T helper type 2 cell (Th2)
differentiation was established in the mid to late 90's. A role for GATA-3 during
thymic development has long implied by its continuous and regulated expression
through out T lineage development, but the absolute requirement for GATA-3 during
early T lymphoid commitment/survival previously precluded definitive answers to
this question. Several technical breakthroughs have fueled fruitful investigation
in recent years and uncovered unexpected and critical roles for GATA-3 in CD4
thymocyte survival, invariant natural killer T cell generation and function, and 
also in beta selection. Not only does GATA-3 participate in nearly every stage of
T cell development from common lymphoid progenitor to Th2, conditional knockout
studies have indicated that the influence of GATA-3 also extends beyond the
immune system.

PMID: 17349208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;27(2):120-2.

[Effect of Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen on balance of Th1 /Th2 in children
with asthma in remission stage].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu B(1), Yu J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the molecular mechanism of Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen
on asthma by adjusting the imbalance of Th1/Th2.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) separated from anticoagulated 
venous blood of 20 children with asthma in remission stage (3 ml from each) were 
equally divided into three groups, the blank group and the Chuankezhi (CKZ)
groups cultured with media without or with CKZ of different concentrations
respectively, for 48 h in vitro. The mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, IFN-gamma
and IL-4 in the sediment collected from the cultures were measured by real-time
fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction technology.
RESULTS: As compared with those in the blank group, in the CKZ groups, T-bet mRNA
expression and IFN-gamma mRNA expression were significantly higher, especially in
CKZ II group (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05 resepectively); GATA-3 mRNA expression was
insignificantly different (P > 0.05); IL-4 mRNA expression was significantly
lower (P < 0.01). Moreover, the ratios of T-bet/GATA-3 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 were
higher in the CKZ groups than those in the blank group, respectively, though
showing insignificant difference in the former (P > 0.05), the difference in the 
latter was certainly significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen can adjust the imbalance of Th1/Th2 
in multiple layers by enhancing the function of Th1 cells and attenuating the
function of Th2 cells, which may be realized through various links as regulating 
the expression of transcription factors and cytokines.

PMID: 17342997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Blood. 2007 Jun 15;109(12):5481-90. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Dynamic regulation of Gata factor levels is more important than their identity.

Ferreira R(1), Wai A, Shimizu R, Gillemans N, Rottier R, von Lindern M, Ohneda K,
Grosveld F, Yamamoto M, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Three Gata transcription factors (Gata1, -2, and -3) are essential for
hematopoiesis. These factors are thought to play distinct roles because they do
not functionally replace each other. For instance, Gata2 messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression is highly elevated in Gata1-null erythroid cells, yet this does not
rescue the defect. Here, we test whether Gata2 and -3 transgenes rescue the
erythroid defect of Gata1-null mice, if expressed in the appropriate
spatiotemporal pattern. Gata1, -2, and -3 transgenes driven by beta-globin
regulatory elements, directing expression to late stages of differentiation, fail
to rescue erythropoiesis in Gata1-null mutants. In contrast, when controlled by
Gata1 regulatory elements, directing expression to the early stages of
differentiation, Gata1, -2, and -3 do rescue the Gata1-null phenotype. The
dramatic increase of endogenous Gata2 mRNA in Gata1-null progenitors is not
reflected in Gata2 protein levels, invoking translational regulation. Our data
show that the dynamic spatiotemporal regulation of Gata factor levels is more
important than their identity and provide a paradigm for developmental control
mechanisms that are hard-wired in cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 17327407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jul;66(7):886-92. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Intrarenal cytokine gene expression in lupus nephritis.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Lai KB, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Lupus nephritis is characterised by intrarenal inflammation and
lymphocyte activation.
AIM: To examine the profile of cytokine gene expression in glomerulus and
tubulointerstitium in patients with lupus nephritis.
METHODS: 36 consecutive patients with systemic lupus erythematosus having active 
renal disease were recruited, and they were required to undergo kidney biopsy.
Glomerular and tubulointestitial cytokine expression of interleukin (IL)2, 4, 10,
12, 18, interferon gamma (IFN)gamma, T-bet (the Th1 transcription factor), GATA-3
(the Th2 transcription factor), transforming growth factor beta and monocyte
chemoattractant protein (MCP)1 were studied by laser microdissection of the renal
biopsy specimen, followed by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: There were 13 patients with World Health Organization class III
nephritis, 14 patients with class IV nephritis and 9 patients with class V
nephritis. There was a significant correlation between serum C3, C4 and
anti-double strand DNA antibody level with glomerular expression of T-bet,
IFNgamma and IL2. There was a significant correlation between histological
activity index and glomerular expression of IL12, IL18, IL10 and MCP1. In
addition, the degree of glomerular leucocyte infiltration significantly
correlated with glomerular expression of IFNgamma, IL10, IL12 and IL18. By
contrast, histological chronicity index correlated with the tubulointerstitial
expression of IL2, MCP1 and GATA-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraglomerular expression of certain target genes correlate with
the severity of systemic as well as histological activity, whereas the
tubulointerstitial expression of other target genes correlate with the degree of 
chronic kidney scarring. This result may shed light on the immunopathogenesis of 
lupus nephritis.

PMCID: PMC1955122
PMID: 17324967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Immunology. 2007 May;121(1):62-70. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

CTLA-4 regulates allergen response by modulating GATA-3 protein level per cell.

Nasta F(1), Corinti S, Bonura A, Colombo P, Di Felice G, Pioli C.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, Unit of Biotechnology, Section of Toxicology and Biomedicine, Rome,
Italy.

T helper type 2 (Th2) cell differentiation requires the expression of GATA-3, a
transcription factor that allows transcriptional activation of Th2 cytokine genes
through chromatin remodelling. We investigated the role of the negative
costimulatory receptor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) in the
regulation of GATA-3 expression, Th2 differentiation and immunoglobulin
production during the immune response to allergens. BALB/c mice were immunized
with a recombinant major allergenic component of Parietaria judaica pollen, rPar 
j I, and treated with blocking anti-CTLA-4 or control antibodies. Results showed 
that in vivo CTLA-4 blockade enhanced the Par j I-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE)
serum level. In contrast, Par j I-specific IgG2a serum level was reduced,
suggesting that CTLA-4 blockade skewed immunoglobulin production towards
interleukin-4 (IL-4) -dependent immunoglobulin isotypes. Consistently, CTLA-4
blockade increased the frequency of Par j I-specific Th2 cells but not Th1 cells,
as well as IL-4 and IL-5 but not interferon-gamma production. Our data also
showed that CTLA-4 blockade enhanced the GATA-3 : T-bet messenger RNA ratio.
Interestingly, in vivo CTLA-4 blockade did not increase the frequency of GATA-3
protein-expressing cells. In contrast, it enhances GATA-3 protein level per cell.
Further, in vitro results show that the anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody, by
competing with CD80 for CTLA-4 binding, induced an enhancement in the frequency
of IL-4-producing cells that correlates with the increase in GATA-3 protein level
per cell. In conclusion, CTLA-4, by affecting the level of GATA-3 per cell,
contributes to keeping this factor under the threshold required to become a Th2
effector cell. Consequently, it affects IgE/IgG2a production and contributes to
the outcome of allergen-specific immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2265929
PMID: 17313444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 9;26(36):5204-13. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Fog2 excision in mice leads to premature mammary gland involution and reduced
Esr1 gene expression.

Manuylov NL(1), Smagulova FO, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

The critical role for GATA family proteins in maintaining the normal
(non-transformed) cell state is corroborated by the recent findings of mutations 
or methylation in GATA genes both in primary cancers and tumor lines including
breast. Previously, microarray profiling studies determined that the highest
expression of both GATA3 and ESR1 (estrogen receptor alpha) is seen in tumors
associated with the most favorable survival outcomes, whereas the lowest
expression of GATA3 is detected in tumor subtypes showing the worst outcomes. At 
this time, genes and pathways that are regulated by GATA3 in the mammary gland
are not well defined. We have previously established a requirement for FOG
(Friend Of GATA) cofactors during mouse development. Here we report that in the
murine mammary gland Fog2 gene expression is upregulated upon pregnancy and
lactation with prominent expression in the epithelial cells of the gland during
post-lactational regression. Mammary-specific deletion of Fog2 identified a role 
for this gene during gland involution; excision of the Fog2 gene leads to the
accelerated involution of the gland despite diminished levels of the remodeling
enzymes. Importantly, the levels of several genes linked to the control of
cancerous transformation in the breast (Esr1, Prg and Foxa1) are significantly
reduced upon Fog2 excision. This implicates FOG2 in the maintenance of epithelial
cell differentiation in the mammary gland and in performing a protective role in 
breast cancer.

PMID: 17310981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 1;143A(7):757-62.

Novel mutation in the gene encoding the GATA3 transcription factor in a Spanish
familial case of hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome
with female genital tract malformations.

Hernández AM(1), Villamar M, Roselló L, Moreno-Pelayo MA, Moreno F, Del Castillo 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2329-30.

PMID: 17309062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(5):955-65. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

Zinc improves the development of human CD34+ cell progenitors towards Natural
Killer cells and induces the expression of GATA-3 transcription factor.

Muzzioli M(1), Stecconi R, Donnini A, Re F, Provinciali M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Center, INRCA Gerontol Res. Dept., Via Birarelli 8, I-60121 Ancona,
Italy.

The Natural Killer cell maturation from CD34(+) hematopoietic cell precursors is 
a complex process that requires the synergistic effect of different cytokines and
growth factors. Although there have been a number of important advances in our
understanding of the Natural Killer differentiation, the developmental step
leading to mature Natural Killer cells is still poorly defined. We evaluated the 
effect of two zinc concentrations (10 and 20microM) on the kinetic of development
of CD34(+) cell progenitors towards Natural Killer cells. CD34(+) cells were
purified from peripheral blood and cultured in medium supplemented with
interleukin-15, interleukin-7, Flt 3 ligand, and stem cell factor. CD34(+) cells 
underwent proliferation and progressively lost CD34 antigen and acquired a
CD56(+) phenotype. These CD56(+) cells exerted cytotoxic activity and expressed
the CD94 inhibitory receptor. The supplementation with zinc greatly increased
both the number of cells in culture and the absolute number of CD56(+) cells.
Zinc induced higher levels of cytotoxic activity and a higher number of
perforin-producing and of CD94-bearing CD56(+) cells in comparison with zinc
unsupplemented cultures in early stages of Natural Killer cell development. The
zinc-induced changes in CD34-derived CD56(+) cells were associated with an
increased expression of GATA-3, a zinc-finger transcription factor providing for 
maturation and activity of T and Natural Killer cells. The increase was related
to a higher CD56(+) cell number (10microM zinc), or to an increased GATA-3 mRNA
transcription in CD56(+) cells (20microM zinc). Our data demonstrate that zinc
influences the proliferation and differentiation of CD34(+) progenitors.

PMID: 17306601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):807-17.

Expression of IL-10 in Th memory lymphocytes is conditional on IL-12 or IL-4,
unless the IL-10 gene is imprinted by GATA-3.

Chang HD(1), Helbig C, Tykocinski L, Kreher S, Koeck J, Niesner U, Radbruch A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheumaforschungszentrum Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

In Th1 and Th2 memory lymphocytes, the genes for the cytokines interleukin (IL)-4
and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) are imprinted for expression upon restimulation.
This cytokine memory is based on expression of the transcription factors T-bet
for IFN-gamma, and GATA-3 for IL-4, and epigenetic modification of the cytokine
genes. In Th2 cells, expression of the cytokine IL-10 is also induced by GATA-3. 
Here, we show that this induction is initially not accompanied by epigenetic
modification of the IL-10 gene. Only after repeated restimulation of a memory Th2
cell in the presence of IL-4, extensive histone acetylation of the IL-10 gene is 
detectable. This epigenetic imprinting correlates with the development of a
memory for IL-10 in repeatedly restimulated Th2 cells. In Th1 cells, IL-10
expression is induced by IL-12, but the IL-10 gene lacks detectable histone
acetylation. Accordingly, IL-10 expression in restimulated memory Th1 cells
remains conditional on the presence of IL-12. This finding defines a potential
anti-inflammatory role for IL-12 in Th1 recall responses. While in primary Th1
responses IL-12 is required to induce expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine
IFN-gamma, in secondary Th1 responses IFN-gamma re-expression is independent of
IL-12, which still is able to induce expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10.

PMID: 17304625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 7;26(5):1292-302. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Chromatin remodeling by the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex and STAT4 activation
synergistically induce IL-12Rbeta2 expression during human Th1 cell
differentiation.

Letimier FA(1), Passini N, Gasparian S, Bianchi E, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunoregulation Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a key cytokine for the development of T helper type 1
(Th1) responses; however, naïve CD4(+) T cells do not express IL-12Rbeta2, and
are therefore unresponsive to IL-12. We have examined the mechanisms that control
Th1-specific expression of the human IL-12Rbeta2 gene at early time points after 
T-cell stimulation. We have identified a Th1-specific enhancer element that binds
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) in vivo in developing 
Th1 but not Th2 cells. T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling induced histone
hyperacetylation and recruitment of BRG1, the ATPase subunit of the SWI/SNF-like 
BAF chromatin remodeling complex, to the IL-12Rbeta2 regulatory regions and was
associated with low-level gene transcription at the IL-12Rbeta2 locus. However,
high-level IL-12Rbeta2 expression required TCR triggering in the presence of
IL-12. Our results indicate a synergistic role of TCR-induced chromatin
remodeling and cytokine-induced STAT4 activation to direct IL-12Rbeta2 expression
during Th1 cell development.

PMCID: PMC1817634
PMID: 17304212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nature. 2007 Feb 15;445(7129):724-6.

Developmental biology: cell fate in the mammary gland.

Tong Q, Hotamisligil GS.

PMID: 17301782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 15;178(4):2491-8.

Regulation of Th2 cytokine genes by p38 MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of GATA-3.

Maneechotesuwan K(1), Xin Y, Ito K, Jazrawi E, Lee KY, Usmani OS, Barnes PJ,
Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, United Kingdom.

GATA-3 plays a critical role in allergic diseases by regulating the release of
cytokines from Th2 lymphocytes. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in the
regulation of GATA-3 in human T lymphocytes are not yet understood. Using small
interfering RNA to knock down GATA-3, we have demonstrated its critical role in
regulating IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 release from a human T cell line. Specific
stimulation of T lymphocytes by costimulation of CD3 and CD28 to mimic activation
by APCs induces translocation of GATA-3 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, with
binding to the promoter region of Th2 cytokine genes, as determined by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation. GATA-3 nuclear translocation is dependent on its
phosphorylation on serine residues by p38 MAPK, which facilitates interaction
with the nuclear transporter protein importin-alpha. This provides a means
whereby allergen exposure leads to the expression of Th2 cytokines, and this
novel mechanism may provide new approaches to treating allergic diseases.

PMID: 17277157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4406-14. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Growth factor independent 1B (Gfi1b) is an E2A target gene that modulates Gata3
in T-cell lymphomas.

Xu W(1), Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Cancer Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The E2A transcription factors are required for normal T lymphopoiesis and to
prevent T-lymphocyte progenitor transformation. Ectopic expression of E2A
proteins in E2A-deficient lymphomas results in growth arrest and apoptosis,
indicating that these cells remain responsive to the targets of E2A. Here we
identify the transcriptional repressor growth factor independent 1B (Gfi1b) as a 
target of E2A that promotes growth arrest and apoptosis in lymphomas. Gfi1b
expression in primary T-lymphocyte progenitors is dependent on E2A and excess
Gfi1b prevents the outgrowth of T lymphocyte progenitors in vitro. Gfi1b
represses expression of Gata3, a transcription factor whose appropriate
regulation is required for survival of lymphomas and T-lymphocyte progenitors. We
also show that ectopic expression of Gata3 in lymphomas promotes expression of
Gfi1b, indicating that these proteins may function in an autoregulatory loop that
maintains appropriate levels of Gata3. Therefore, we propose that E2A proteins
prevent lymphoma cell expansion, at least in part through regulation of Gfi1b and
modulation of Gata3 expression.

PMID: 17272506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Immunol Lett. 2007 Feb 15;108(2):143-50. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

HDAC inhibitors TSA and sodium butyrate enhanced the human IL-5 expression by
altering histone acetylation status at its promoter region.

Han S(1), Lu J, Zhang Y, Cheng C, Li L, Han L, Huang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun
130022, China.

The expression of IL-5 correlated tightly with the maturation and differentiation
of eosinophils, and is considered as a cytokine responsible for allergic
inflammation. We report here that inhibition of HDAC activity by Trichostatin A
(TSA) and sodium butyrate (NaBu), the two specific HDAC inhibitors, resulted in
the elevation of both endogenous and exogenous activity of IL-5 promoter. We
demonstrated that both the mRNA expression and protein production of IL-5 were
stimulated by TSA and NaBu treatments. ChIP assays showed that treatments of TSA 
and NaBu caused hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 on IL-5 promoter in Jurkat
cells, which consequently promoted the exogenous luciferase activity driven by
this promoter. Moreover, site-directed mutagenesis studies showed that the
binding sites for transcription factors NFAT, GATA3 and YY1 on IL-5 promoter were
critical for the effects of TSA and NaBu, suggesting that the transcriptional
activation of IL-5 gene by these inhibitors was achieved by affecting HDAC
function on IL-5 promoter via transcription factors. These data will contribute
to elucidating the unique mechanism of IL-5 transcriptional control and to the
therapy of allergic disorders related to IL-5.

PMID: 17270283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;9(2):135-6.

Luminal cells GATA have it.

Tlsty TD.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;9(2):201-9.

PMID: 17268476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int Immunol. 2007 Mar;19(3):305-10. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

The initial response of CD4+ IL-4-producing cells.

Xin J(1), Ohmori K, Nishida J, Zhu Y, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Loyola University Chicago School of Medicine,
Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Naive CD4(+) T cells were reported to produce small amounts of IL-4 in vitro,
which are implicated to be sufficient to initiate T(h)2 response in vivo.
However, IL-4-producing naive CD4(+) T cells are difficult to study in vivo
because they are present in low numbers shortly after the first antigen exposure.
Here, we used IL-4/green fluorescence protein (GFP) reporter mice (G4 mice) to
track the initial response of CD4(+) IL-4-producing cells. We first established a
flow cytometry method to estimate the number of GFP(+) cells. We demonstrated the
effectiveness of this method by showing that the responding CD4(+)GFP(+) cells
exhibited an activated phenotype, possessed the capacity to express IL-5 and
IL-13, but not IFN-gamma mRNA, and showed enhanced levels of GATA3 and c-maf mRNA
expression. More importantly, we showed that the cell lines derived from
FACS-sorted CD4(+)GFP(+) cells were antigen specific. By using this newly
established method, we showed that the majority of responding GFP(+) cells were
CD4(+) T cells. Our study provides direct ex vivo evidence to show that a small
percent of CD4(+) T cells that have no previous experience of antigenic
stimulation might produce IL-4 to initiate T(h)2 response.

PMID: 17267416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Immunology. 2007 Jun;121(2):189-96. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Reduced CCR4, interleukin-13 and GATA-3 up-regulation in response to type 2
cytokines of cord blood T lymphocytes in infants at genetic risk of type 1
diabetes.

Luopajärvi K(1), Skarsvik S, Ilonen J, Akerblom HK, Vaarala O.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. kristiina.luopajarvi@hus.fi

Aberrancies in T-cell polarization including expression of chemokine receptors
have been reported in human leucocyte antigen (HLA) class II associated
autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes (T1D) and rheumatoid arthritis. We
asked whether these aberrancies are present at birth in newborn infants carrying 
the HLA risk haplotypes for T1D. Sixty-seven cord blood (CB) samples from infants
were screened for T1D-associated HLA risk genotypes (HLA-DR4-DQ8 and/or DR3-DQ2
without protective alleles). CB lymphocytes were stimulated with
phytohaemagglutinin in type 1 (interleukin (IL)-12, anti-IL4) or type 2 (IL-4,
anti-IL12) cytokine environment for 6 days. The expression of chemokine and
cytokine receptors on T cells was determined by flow cytometry, secretion of
cytokines was analysed with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and transcription 
factors were analysed using real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. After culture of CB lymphocytes in type 2 cytokine environment newborn 
infants carrying DR4-DQ8 haplotype (n=18) showed reduced percentage of CD4 T
cells expressing CCR4 (P=0 x 009) and the level of CCR4 mRNA was decreased (P=0 x
008). In addition, lower secretion of IL-13 and expression of GATA-3 in CB
lymphocytes cultured in type 2 cytokine environment were found in the infants
with DR4-DQ8 haplotype (P=0 x 020 and P=0 x 004, respectively) in comparison to
newborn infants without DR4-DQ8 and DR3-DQ2 haplotypes (n=37). Poor in vitro
induction of type 2 immune responses in newborn infants with DR4-DQ8 haplotype
suggests that the HLA genotype associated with risk of autoimmunity may affect
the T cell polarization already at birth, which in turn may contribute to the
risk for autoimmunity later in life.

PMCID: PMC2265934
PMID: 17244154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 1;178(3):1635-44.

Suppression of early IL-4 production underlies the failure of CD4 T cells
activated by TLR-stimulated dendritic cells to differentiate into Th2 cells.

Sun J(1), Pearce EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) activated through TLRs provide a potent negative signal for
Th2 cell development that is independent of positive signals for Th1 cell
development such as IL-12 and IFN-gamma. In this study we demonstrate that the
ability of TLR-activated DCs to suppress Th2 cell development is Ag
dose-independent and unique to DCs that have been activated through TLRs vs by
cytokines. We show that TLR-activated DCs inhibit early IL-4 production by CD4 T 
cells and thus inhibit their ability to subsequently increase GATA-3 expression
and commit to the Th2 lineage. This occurs independently of expression of the
GATA-3 antagonist T-bet. Although CD4 T cells activated by TLR-activated DCs make
IL-2, they are not capable of phosphorylating STAT5 in response to this cytokine.
This inhibition of responsiveness to IL-2 appears to underlie the failure to make
early IL-4. Our findings suggest that DCs provide instructional signals for T
cell differentiation before cytokine-mediated Th cell selection and outgrowth.

PMID: 17237413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4343-50. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

GATA3 up-regulation associated with surface expression of CD294/CRTH2: a unique
feature of human Th cells.

De Fanis U(1), Mori F, Kurnat RJ, Lee WK, Bova M, Adkinson NF, Casolaro V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

GATA-3 and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) play central roles in Th-cell
development and function. Consistently, studies in mice document their selective 
expression in Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. In contrast, it is not clear
whether these genes are regulated in human Th cells. Here we show that T-bet
expression is polarized to a comparable degree in human and mouse Th-cell
cultures, while only mouse GATA3 is subject to substantial regulation. This did
not reflect differential skewing efficiency in human versus mouse cultures, as
these contained similar frequencies of IFN-gamma- and IL-4-producing cells.
However, GATA-3 was expressed at significantly higher levels in human
IL-4-producing cells enriched via capture with monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
against the PGD(2) receptor, CRTH2, the best selective Th2-cell surface marker to
date. Along with increased IL-4 and GATA-3, CRTH2(+) Th cells isolated from
Th2-skewed cultures or the circulating memory pool exhibited markedly decreased
IFN-gamma and T-bet expression. Thus, the human GATA-3 gene is not regulated in
response to polarizing signals that are sufficient to direct Th2-specific
expression in mouse cells. This postulates the involvement of an additional level
of complexity in the regulation of human GATA-3 expression and stresses the
existence of nontrivial differences in the regulation of human versus mouse
T-cell function.

PMCID: PMC1885489
PMID: 17234745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):265-75. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Functional characterization of GATA3 mutations causing the
hypoparathyroidism-deafness-renal (HDR) dysplasia syndrome: insight into
mechanisms of DNA binding by the GATA3 transcription factor.

Ali A(1), Christie PT, Grigorieva IV, Harding B, Van Esch H, Ahmed SF,
Bitner-Glindzicz M, Blind E, Bloch C, Christin P, Clayton P, Gecz J,
Gilbert-Dussardier B, Guillen-Navarro E, Hackett A, Halac I, Hendy GN, Lalloo F, 
Mache CJ, Mughal Z, Ong AC, Rinat C, Shaw N, Smithson SF, Tolmie J, Weill J,
Nesbit MA, Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

The hypoparathyroidism-deafness-renal (HDR) dysplasia syndrome is an autosomal
dominant disorder caused by mutations of the dual zinc finger transcription
factor, GATA3. We investigated 21 HDR probands and 14 patients with isolated
hypoparathyroidism for GATA3 abnormalities. Thirteen different heterozygous
germline mutations were identified in patients with HDR. These consisted of three
nonsense mutations, six frameshifting deletions, two frameshifting insertions,
one missense (Leu348Arg) mutation and one acceptor splice site mutation. The
splice site mutation was demonstrated to cause a pre-mRNA processing abnormality 
leading to the use of an alternative acceptor site 8 bp downstream of the normal 
site, resulting in a frameshift and prematurely terminated protein.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) revealed three classes of GATA3
mutations: those that lead to a loss of DNA binding which represent over 90% of
all mutations, and involved a loss of the carboxy-terminal zinc finger; those
that resulted in a reduced DNA-binding affinity; and those (e.g. Leu348Arg) that 
did not alter DNA binding or the affinity but likely altered the conformational
change that occurs during binding in the DNA major groove as predicted by a
three-dimensional modeling. These results elucidate further the molecular
mechanisms underlying the altered functions of mutants of this zinc finger
transcription factor and their role in causing this developmental anomaly. No
mutations were identified in patients with isolated hypoparathyroidism, thereby
indicating that GATA3 abnormalities are more likely to result in two or more of
the phenotypic features of the HDR syndrome and not in one, such as isolated
hypoparathyroidism.

PMID: 17210674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;9(2):201-9. Epub 2006 Dec 24.

Gata-3 is an essential regulator of mammary-gland morphogenesis and luminal-cell 
differentiation.

Asselin-Labat ML(1), Sutherland KD, Barker H, Thomas R, Shackleton M, Forrest NC,
Hartley L, Robb L, Grosveld FG, van der Wees J, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE.

Author information: 
(1)VBCRC Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;9(2):135-6.

The transcription factor Gata-3 is a defining marker of the 'luminal' subtypes of
breast cancer. To gain insight into the role of Gata-3 in breast epithelial
development and oncogenesis, we have explored its normal function within the
mammary gland by conditionally deleting Gata-3 at different stages of
development. We report that Gata-3 has essential roles in the morphogenesis of
the mammary gland in both the embryo and adult. Through the discovery of a novel 
marker (beta3-integrin) of luminal progenitor cells and their purification, we
demonstrate that Gata-3 deficiency leads to an expansion of luminal progenitors
and a concomitant block in differentiation. Remarkably, introduction of Gata-3
into a stem cell-enriched population induced maturation along the alveolar
luminal lineage. These studies provide evidence for the existence of an
epithelial hierarchy within the mammary gland and establish Gata-3 as a critical 
regulator of luminal differentiation.

PMID: 17187062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2006 Dec 20;1:e50.

Human natural killer T cells are heterogeneous in their capacity to reprogram
their effector functions.

Eger KA(1), Sundrud MS, Motsinger AA, Tseng M, Van Kaer L, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a subset of T cells that help
potentiate and regulate immune responses. Although human NKT cell subsets with
distinct effector functions have been identified, it is unclear whether the
effector functions of these subsets are imprinted during development or can be
selectively reprogrammed in the periphery.
RESULTS: We found that neonatal NKT cells are predominantly CD4+ and express
higher levels of CCR7 and CD62L and lower levels of CD94 and CD161 than adult
CD4+ or CD4- NKT cell subsets. Accordingly, neonatal NKT cells were more flexible
than adult CD4+ NKT cells in their capacity to acquire Th1- or Th2-like functions
upon either cytokine-mediated polarization or ectopic expression of the Th1 or
Th2 transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. Consistent with their
more differentiated phenotype, CD4- NKT cells were predominantly resistant to
functional reprogramming and displayed higher cytotoxic function. In contrast to 
conventional T cells, neither the expression of CXCR3 nor the cytotoxic capacity 
of neonatal NKT cells could be reprogrammed.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these results suggest that neonatal CD4+,
adult CD4+, and adult CD4- NKT may represent unique states of maturation and that
some functions of human NKT cells may be developmentally imprinted, while others 
are acquired similar to conventional T cell subsets during peripheral maturation 
and differentiation. Given the potent immuno-regulatory functions of NKT cells,
these findings have important implications for the development of novel NKT
cell-based therapeutics and vaccines.

PMCID: PMC1762372
PMID: 17183680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jan 9;581(1):57-64. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

D-pinitol regulates Th1/Th2 balance via suppressing Th2 immune response in
ovalbumin-induced asthma.

Lee JS(1), Lee CM, Jeong YI, Jung ID, Kim BH, Seong EY, Kim JI, Choi IW, Chung
HY, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pusan National University College of Pharmacy,
Busan, Republic of Korea.

D-pinitol has been demonstrated to exert insulin-like and anti-inflammatory
activities. However, its anti-allergic effect in the Th1/Th2 immune response is
poorly understood. Recently, it was shown that T-bet and GATA-3 are master Th1
and Th2 regulatory transcription factors. In this study, we have attempted to
determine whether D-pinitol regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine production, T-bet and
GATA-3 gene expression in OVA-induced asthma model mice. We also examined to
ascertain whether D-pinitol could influence eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) activity.
After being sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) showed typical
asthmatic reactions. These reactions included an increase in the number of
eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, an increase in inflammatory
cell infiltration into the lung tissue around blood vessels and airways, airway
luminal narrowing, and the development of airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR). The 
administration of D-pinitol before the last airway OVA challenge resulted in a
significant inhibition of all asthmatic reactions. Accordingly, this study may
provide evidence that D-pinitol plays a critical role in the amelioration of the 
pathogenetic process of asthma in mice. These findings provide new insight into
the immunopharmacological role of D-pinitol in terms of its effects in a murine
model of asthma, and also broaden current perspectives in our understanding of
the immunopharmacological functions of D-pinitol.

PMID: 17174308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(9):2249-56. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Chromatin remodeling at the Th2 cytokine gene loci in human type 2 helper T
cells.

Kaneko T(1), Hosokawa H, Yamashita M, Wang CR, Hasegawa A, Kimura MY, Kitajiama
M, Kimura F, Miyazaki M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The differentiation of mouse naïve CD4 T cells into type 2 helper (Th2) cells is 
accompanied by chromatin remodeling at the nucleosomes associated with the IL-4, 
IL-13 and IL-5 genes. However, little is known about how chromatin remodeling of 
these Th2 cytokine gene loci occurs in human Th2 cells. We herein established an 
in vitro culture system in which both Th1 and Th2 cells are efficiently
differentiated from human peripheral blood naïve CD4 T cells. This system allowed
us to investigate the chromatin status at the Th2 cytokine gene loci and the
IFNgamma locus in human Th2 and Th1 cells, respectively. In typical individuals, 
the chromatin remodeling indicated by the induction of hyper-acetylation of
histone H3 lysine 9 and hyper-methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 was induced at
the whole Th2 cytokine gene loci in developing Th2 cells. We more precisely
assessed the methylation status of histone H3 lysine 4 at the Th2 cytokine gene
loci (IL-5 exon 3, IL-5 promoter, IL-5/RAD50 intergenic region, RAD50 promoter,
CGRE, CNS1, IL-13 promoter, IL-4 promoter, and VA enhancer regions) and the
IFNgamma locus in developing Th1 and Th2 cells prepared from 20 healthy
volunteers. Th2-cell specific chromatin remodeling was induced at most of the Th2
cytokine gene loci. In parallel with the induction of chromatin remodeling, GATA3
mRNA was preferentially expressed in developing Th2 cells, whereas T-bet, HLX and
ROG mRNA was selectively expressed in developing Th1 cells.

PMID: 17166591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Dec;13(4):1109-20.

Identification of novel genes that co-cluster with estrogen receptor alpha in
breast tumor biopsy specimens, using a large-scale real-time reverse
transcription-PCR approach.

Tozlu S(1), Girault I, Vacher S, Vendrell J, Andrieu C, Spyratos F, Cohen P,
Lidereau R, Bieche I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre René Huguenin, FNCLCC, St-Cloud F-92210, France.

The estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
and clinical behavior of breast cancer. To obtain further insights into the
molecular basis of estrogen-dependent forms of this malignancy, we used real-time
quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR to compare the mRNA expression of 560
selected genes in ERalpha-positive and ERalpha-negative breast tumors. Fifty-one 
(9.1%) of the 560 genes were significantly upregulated in ERalpha-positive breast
tumors compared with ERalpha-negative breast tumors. In addition to well-known
ERalpha-induced genes (PGR, TFF1/PS2, BCL2, ERBB4, CCND1, etc.) and genes
recently identified by cDNA microarray-based approaches (GATA3, TFF3, MYB, STC2, 
HPN/HEPSIN, FOXA1, XBP1, SLC39A6/LIV-1, etc.), an appreciable number of novel
genes were identified, many of, which were weakly expressed. This validates the
use of large-scale real-time RT-PCR as a method complementary to cDNA microarrays
for molecular tumor profiling. Most of the new genes identified here encoded
secreted proteins (SEMA3B and CLU), growth factors (BDNF, FGF2 and EGF), growth
factor receptors (IL6ST, PTPRT, RET, VEGFR1 and FGFR2) or metabolic enzymes
(CYP2B6, CA12, ACADSB, NAT1, LRBA, SLC7A2 and SULT2B1). Importantly, we also
identified a large number of genes encoding proteins with either pro-apoptotic
(PUMA, NOXA and TATP73) or anti-apoptotic properties (BCL2, DNTP73 and TRAILR3). 
Surprisingly, only a small proportion of the 51 genes identified in breast tumor 
biopsy specimens were confirmed to be ERalpha-regulated and/or E2-regulated in
vitro (cultured cell lines). Therefore, this study identified a limited number of
genes and signaling pathways, which better delineate the role of ERalpha in
breast cancer. Some of the genes identified here could be useful for diagnosis or
for predicting endocrine responsiveness, and could form the basis for novel
therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 17158757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Oct;60(10):1092-7. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Hodgkin's lymphoma associated T-cells exhibit a transcription factor profile
consistent with distinct lymphoid compartments.

Atayar C(1), van den Berg A, Blokzijl T, Boot M, Gascoyne RD, Visser L, Poppema
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Groningen and
University Medical Centre Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) is characterised by an ineffective immune
response that is predominantly mediated by CD4+ T-cells.
AIMS: To analyse the expression of the key regulatory T-cell transcription
factors (TFs) in the T-cells of HL involved tissues in order to assess the nature
of the T(H) immune response in HL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By immunohistochemistry, GATA3 was strongly and T-bet
exclusively expressed in a subset of interfollicular lymphocytes in the reactive 
lymphoid tissues. In classical HL (CHL), which is generally located in the
interfollicular zones, a predominance of T-bet+ T-cells and lesser amounts of
GATA3+ and c-Maf+ T-cells was found, concordant with the pattern of the normal
interfollicular compartment. In reactive lymphoid tissues, c-Maf was observed
mostly in T-lymphocytes within the germinal centres (GCs). Nodular lymphocyte
predominance type of Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL) and progressively transformed
germinal centres cases, showed a majority of c-Maf+ T-cells, consistent with the 
pattern in normal GCs. NLPHL cases uniformly showed c-Maf+/CD57+ T-cell rosettes 
around the neoplastic cells; these rosettes were absent in "paragranuloma-type"
T-cell/histiocyte rich B-cell lymphoma.
CONCLUSIONS: T-cell TF expression profiles of the reactive T-cells in both
subtypes of HL are in accordance with the expression profile observed in the
distinct lymphoid compartments.

PMCID: PMC2014845
PMID: 17158640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Feb 1;500(4):646-57.

Expression of GATA3 and tenascin in the avian vestibular maculae: normative
patterns and changes during sensory regeneration.

Warchol ME(1), Speck JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. warcholm@ent.wustl.edu

Sensory receptors in the vestibular organs of birds can regenerate after ototoxic
injury. Notably, this regenerative process leads to the restoration of the
correct patterning of hair cell phenotype and afferent innervation within the
repaired sensory epithelium. The molecular signals that specify cell phenotype
and regulate neuronal guidance during sensory regeneration are not known, but
they are likely to be similar to the signals that direct these processes during
embryonic development. The present study examined the recovery of hair cell
phenotype during regeneration in the avian utricle, a vestibular organ that
detects linear acceleration and head orientation. First, we show that Type I hair
cells in the avian vestibular maculae are immunoreactive for the extracellular
matrix molecule tenascin and that treatment with the ototoxic antibiotic
streptomycin results in a nearly complete elimination of tenascin
immunoreactivity. Cells that express tenascin begin to recover after about 2
weeks and are then contacted by calyx terminals of vestibular neurons. In
addition, our previous work had shown that the zinc finger transcription factor
GATA3 is uniquely expressed within the striolar reversal zone of the utricle
(Hawkins et al. [2003] Hum Mol Genet 12:1261-1272), and we show here that this
regionalized expression of GATA3 is maintained after severe hair cell lesions and
after transplantation of the sensory epithelium onto a chemically defined
substrate. In contrast, the expression of three other supporting cell
markers--alpha- and beta-tectorin and SCA--is reduced following ototoxic injury. 
These observations suggest that GATA3 expression may maintain positional
information in the maculae during sensory regeneration.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17154269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):261-72. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Transcriptome and phenotypic analysis reveals Gata3-dependent signalling pathways
in murine hair follicles.

Kurek D(1), Garinis GA, van Doorninck JH, van der Wees J, Grosveld FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transcription factor Gata3 is crucially involved in epidermis and hair
follicle differentiation. Yet, little is known about how Gata3 co-ordinates stem 
cell lineage determination in skin, what pathways are involved and how Gata3
differentially regulates distinct cell populations within the hair follicle.
Here, we describe a conditional Gata3-/- mouse (K14-Gata3-/-) in which Gata3 is
specifically deleted in epidermis and hair follicles. K14-Gata3-/- mice show
aberrant postnatal growth and development, delayed hair growth and maintenance,
abnormal hair follicle organization and irregular pigmentation. After the first
hair cycle, the germinative layer surrounding the dermal papilla was not
restored; instead, proliferation was pronounced in basal epidermal cells.
Transcriptome analysis of laser-dissected K14-Gata3-/- hair follicles revealed
mitosis, epithelial differentiation and the Notch, Wnt and BMP signaling pathways
to be significantly overrepresented. Elucidation of these pathways at the RNA and
protein levels and physiologic endpoints suggests that Gata3 integrates diverse
signaling networks to regulate the balance between hair follicle and epidermal
cell fates.

PMID: 17151017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cell Rev. 2006;2(1):5-10.

Specification and differentiation of serotonergic neurons.

Alenina N(1), Bashammakh S, Bader M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter with multiple functions in the whole
central nervous system. Its synthesis, however, is restricted to a very limited
number of cells in the brainstem raphe nuclei with a vast axonal network. These
cells express markers of the serotonin lineage such as the rate-limiting enzyme
in serotonin synthesis, tryptophan hydroxylase 2, the serotonin transporter, and 
the transcription factor Pet1. Pet1 together with Lmx1b, Nkx2.2, Mash1, Gata2,
Gata3, and Phox2b form a transcriptional network, which specifies the
differentiation of serotonergic neurons around embryonic day 11 in the mouse.
These cells are generated in rhombomeres r1-r3 and r5-r7 caudal to the midbrain- 
hindbrain organizer under the control of the fibroblast growth factors 4 and 8
and sonic hedgehog (SHH) from precursors, which have produced motoneurons before.
Because serotonin is a relevant pathophysiological factor in several neurological
diseases such as bipolar disorder and depression tools to generate or maintain
serotonergic neurons might be of therapeutic value. Such tools can be assessed in
embryonic stem cells, which can be differentiated in vitro to produce
serotonergic neurons. Culture systems for these cells including embryoid bodies
based and monolayer differentiation have been established, which allows the
generation of up to 50% serotonergic neurons in all neurons developed.

PMID: 17142880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Feb;27(2):373-9. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Ccr5 but not Ccr1 deficiency reduces development of diet-induced atherosclerosis 
in mice.

Braunersreuther V(1), Zernecke A, Arnaud C, Liehn EA, Steffens S, Shagdarsuren E,
Bidzhekov K, Burger F, Pelli G, Luckow B, Mach F, Weber C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Foundation for Medical Research, Faculty of Medicine, 
Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Chemokines and their receptors are crucially involved in the
development of atherosclerotic lesions by directing monocyte and T cell
recruitment. The CC-chemokine receptors 1 (CCR1) and 5 (CCR5) expressed on these 
cells bind chemokines implicated in atherosclerosis, namely CCL5/RANTES. Although
general blockade of CCL5 receptors reduces atherosclerosis, specific roles of
CCR1 and CCR5 have not been unequivocally determined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We provide two independent lines of investigation to dissect
the effects of Ccr1 and Ccr5 deletion in apolipoprotein E-deficient (ApoE-/-)
mice in a collaboration between Aachen/Germany and Geneva/Switzerland. Different 
strains of ApoE-/- Ccr5-/- mice, ApoE-/- Ccr1-/- mice or respective littermates, 
were fed a high-fat diet for 10 to 12 weeks. Plaque areas were quantified in the 
aortic roots and thoracoabdominal aortas. Concordantly, both laboratories found
that lesion formation was reduced in ApoE-/- Ccr5-/- mice. Plaque quality and
immune cells were assessed by immunohistochemistry or mRNA analysis. Whereas
lesional macrophage content, aortic CD4, and Th1-related Tim3 expression were
reduced, smooth muscle cell (SMC) content and expression of interleukin-10 in
plaques, lesional SMCs, and splenocytes were elevated. Protection against lesion 
formation by Ccr5 deficiency was sustained over 22 weeks of high-fat diet or over
26 weeks of chow diet. Conversely, plaque area, T cell, and interferon-gamma
content were increased in ApoE-/- Ccr1-/- mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic deletion of Ccr5 but not Ccr1 in ApoE-/- mice protects from 
diet-induced atherosclerosis, associated with a more stable plaque phenotype,
reduced mononuclear cell infiltration, Th1-type immune responses, and increased
interleukin-10 expression. This corroborates CCR5 as a promising therapeutic
target.

PMID: 17138939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cell. 2006 Dec 1;127(5):1041-55.

GATA-3 maintains the differentiation of the luminal cell fate in the mammary
gland.

Kouros-Mehr H(1), Slorach EM, Sternlicht MD, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and The Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors plays fundamental roles in cell-fate
specification. However, it is unclear if these genes are necessary for the
maintenance of cellular differentiation after development. We identified GATA-3
as the most highly enriched transcription factor in the mammary epithelium of
pubertal mice. GATA-3 was found in the luminal cells of mammary ducts and the
body cells of terminal end buds (TEBs). Upon conditional deletion of GATA-3, mice
exhibited severe defects in mammary development due to failure in TEB formation
during puberty. After acute GATA-3 loss, adult mice exhibited undifferentiated
luminal cell expansion with basement-membrane detachment, which led to
caspase-mediated cell death in the long term. Further, FOXA1 was identified as a 
downstream target of GATA-3 in the mammary gland. This suggests that GATA-3
actively maintains luminal epithelial differentiation in the adult mammary gland,
which raises important implications for the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2646406
PMID: 17129787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Rheumatol. 2007 Jan;34(1):89-96. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Elevated gene expression of Th1/Th2 associated transcription factors is
correlated with disease activity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Lit LC(1), Wong CK, Li EK, Tam LS, Lam CW, Lo YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong. lcwlit@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3)
are transcriptional factors that play a crucial role in Th1 and Th2 development. 
We investigated the immunomodulatory roles of T-bet and GATA-3 and Th1/Th2
related cytokines in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
their association with disease activity.
METHODS: Gene expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and
interleukin 4 (IL-4) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and plasma
concentrations of the Th1/Th2 cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-18, and IL-4, were assayed 
in 80 patients with SLE and 40 sex and age matched healthy subjects by real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction and ELISA.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of T-bet and IFN-gamma and the relative expression
levels of T-bet/GATA-3 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 were significantly higher, in contrast 
to the lower expressions of GATA-3 and IL-4, in SLE patients than controls (all p
< 0.05). In all SLE patients, there were significant correlations in mRNA
expression of T-bet with IFN-gamma (r = 0.590, p < 0.0001), and of GATA-3 with
IL-4 (r = 0.245, p = 0.029). The relative expressions of T-bet/GATA-3 and
IFN-gamma/IL-4 correlated with lupus disease activity (r = 0.229, p = 0.042; r = 
0.231, p = 0.040, respectively). Plasma IL-18 concentration was increased
significantly in all SLE patients (p < 0.05). The elevated plasma Th1/Th2
cytokine ratio IL-18/IL-4 correlated positively with disease activity in all SLE 
patients (r = 0.250, p = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: There is an association between expression of Th1/Th2 transcription
factors and cytokines in SLE. The elevated gene expressions of Th1/Th2
transcription factors and cytokines should provide a useful tool for assessing
the functional status of T-helper lymphocytes in SLE disease development.

PMID: 17117487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Biol. 2006 Nov 20;175(4):661-70.

Lipid defect underlies selective skin barrier impairment of an epidermal-specific
deletion of Gata-3.

de Guzman Strong C(1), Wertz PW, Wang C, Yang F, Meltzer PS, Andl T, Millar SE,
Ho IC, Pai SY, Segre JA.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute and 2National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Skin lies at the interface between the complex physiology of the body and the
external environment. This essential epidermal barrier, composed of cornified
proteins encased in lipids, prevents both water loss and entry of infectious or
toxic substances. We uncover that the transcription factor GATA-3 is required to 
establish the epidermal barrier and survive in the ex utero environment. Analysis
of Gata-3 mutant transcriptional profiles at three critical developmental stages 
identifies a specific defect in lipid biosynthesis and a delay in
differentiation. Genomic analysis identifies highly conserved GATA-3 binding
sites bound in vivo by GATA-3 in the first intron of the lipid acyltransferase
gene AGPAT5. Skin from both Gata-3-/- and previously characterized
barrier-deficient Kruppel-like factor 4-/- newborns up-regulate antimicrobial
peptides, effectors of innate immunity. Comparison of these animal models
illustrates how impairment of the skin barrier by two genetically distinct
mechanisms leads to innate immune responses, as observed in the common human skin
disorders psoriasis and atopic dermatitis.

PMCID: PMC2064601
PMID: 17116754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Endocrinol Invest. 2006 Oct;29(9):851-3.

A novel heterozygous deletion frameshift mutation of GATA3 in a Japanese kindred 
with the hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal dysplasia syndrome.

Kobayashi H, Kasahara M, Hino M, Yoshimura H, Takahara S, Ikeda K, Son C, Iwakura
T, Yoshimoto A, Ishihara T, Ogawa Y.

PMID: 17114920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7656-64.

Regulation of Th2 cell development by Polycomb group gene bmi-1 through the
stabilization of GATA3.

Hosokawa H(1), Kimura MY, Shinnakasu R, Suzuki A, Miki T, Koseki H, van Lohuizen 
M, Yamashita M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The Polycomb group (PcG) gene products regulate the maintenance of the homeobox
gene expression in Drosophila and vertebrates and also the cell cycle progression
in thymocytes and Th2 cell differentiation in mature T cells. We herein studied
the role of PcG gene bmi-1 product in Th1/Th2 cell differentiation and found that
Bmi-1 facilitates Th2 cell differentiation in a Ring finger-dependent manner.
Biochemical studies indicate that Bmi-1 interacts with GATA3 in T cells, which is
dependent on the Ring finger of Bmi-1. The overexpression of Bmi-1 resulted in a 
decreased ubiquitination and an increased protein stability of GATA3. In
bmi-1-deficient Th cells, the levels of Th2 cell differentiation decreased as the
degradation and ubiquitination on GATA3 increased. Therefore, Bmi-1 plays a
crucial role in the control of Th2 cell differentiation in a Ring
finger-dependent manner by regulating GATA3 protein stability.

PMID: 17114435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Dec;36(12):3305-14.

Involvement of GATA3 in protein kinase C theta-induced Th2 cytokine expression.

Stevens L(1), Htut TM, White D, Li X, Hanidu A, Stearns C, Labadia ME, Li J,
Brown M, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals, Ridgefield, CT 06877, USA.

Protein kinase C theta (PKCtheta) is essential for T cell activation, as it is
required for the activation of NF-kappaB and expression of IL-2. PKCtheta has
also been shown to affect NFAT activation and Th2 differentiation. To better
understand the role of PKCtheta in the regulation of T helper cells, we used
PKCtheta-deficient DO11.10 transgenic T cells to study its role in vitro. DO11.10
Th1 cells deficient in PKCtheta produced significantly less TNF-alpha and IL-2.
The expression of Th2 cytokines, including IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13 and IL-24 was
significantly reduced in PKCtheta-deficient T cells. Moreover, the expression of 
the Th2 transcription factor, GATA3, was significantly reduced in
PKCtheta-deficient T cells. Overexpression of GATA3 by retroviral infection in
PKCtheta-deficient T cells resulted in increased expansion of IL-4-producing T
cells and higher IL-4 production than that of wild type Th2 cells. IL-5, IL-10,
IL-13 and IL-24 expressions were also rescued by GATA3 overexpression. Our
observations suggest that PKCtheta regulates Th2 cytokine expression via GATA3.

PMID: 17111354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jan;236(1):306-13.

Comparative analysis of Gata3 and Gata2 expression during chicken inner ear
development.

Lilleväli K(1), Haugas M, Pituello F, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The inner ear is a complex sensory organ with hearing and balance functions.
Gata3 and Gata2 are expressed in the inner ear, and to gain more insight into
their roles in otic development, we made a detailed expression analysis in
chicken embryos. At early stages, their expression was highly overlapping. At
later stages, Gata2 expression became prominent in vestibular and cochlear
nonsensory epithelia. In contrast to Gata2, Gata3 was mainly expressed in the
developing sensory epithelia, reflecting the importance of this factor in the
sensory-neural development of the inner ear. While the later expression patterns 
of both Gata3 and Gata2 were highly conserved between chicken and mouse,
important differences were observed especially with Gata3 during early otic
development, providing indications of divergent molecular control during placode 
invagination in mice and chickens. We also found indications that the regulatory 
hierarchy observed in mouse, where Gata3 is upstream of Gata2 and Fgf10, could be
conserved in chicken.

PMID: 17103399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Cell Sci. 2006 Nov 15;119(Pt 22):4617-22.

p63 is upstream of IKK alpha in epidermal development.

Candi E(1), Terrinoni A, Rufini A, Chikh A, Lena AM, Suzuki Y, Sayan BS, Knight
RA, Melino G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, IDI-IRCCS, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133
Rome, Italy. candi@uniroma2.it

The epidermis, the outer layer of the skin composed of keratinocytes, develops
following the action of the transcription factor p63. The mouse Trp63 gene
contains two promoters, driving the production of distinct proteins, one with an 
N-terminal trans-activation domain (TAp63) and one without (DeltaNp63), although 
their relative contribution to epidermal development is not clearly established. 
To identify the relative role of p63 isoforms in relation to IKKalpha, also known
to be essential for epithelial development, we performed both molecular and in
vivo analyses using genetic complementation in mice. We found that the action of 
TAp63 is mediated at the molecular level by direct and indirect transactivation
of IKKalpha and Ets-1, respectively. We also found that DeltaNp63 upregulates
IKKalpha indirectly, through GATA-3. Our data are consistent with a role for p63 
directly upstream of IKKalpha in epithelial development.

PMID: 17093266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;12(21):6459-68.

Classification of breast cancer using genetic algorithms and tissue microarrays.

Dolled-Filhart M(1), Rydén L, Cregger M, Jirström K, Harigopal M, Camp RL, Rimm
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

PURPOSE: A multitude of breast cancer mRNA profiling studies has stratified
breast cancer and defined gene sets that correlate with outcome. However, the
number of genes used to predict patient outcome or define tumor subtypes by RNA
expression studies is variable, nonoverlapping, and generally requires
specialized technologies that are beyond those used in the routine pathology
laboratory. It would be ideal if the familiarity and streamlined nature of
immunohistochemistry could be combined with the rigorously quantitative and
highly specific properties of nucleic acid-based analysis to predict patient
outcome.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have used AQUA-based objective quantitative analysis of
tissue microarrays toward the goal of discovery of a minimal number of markers
with maximal prognostic or predictive value that can be applied to the
conventional formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue section.
RESULTS: The minimal discovered multiplexed set of tissue biomarkers was GATA3,
NAT1, and estrogen receptor. Genetic algorithms were then applied after division 
of our cohort into a training set of 223 breast cancer patients to discover a
prospectively applicable solution that can define a subset of patients with
5-year survival of 96%. This algorithm was then validated on an internal
validation set (n=223, 5-year survival=95.8%) and further validated on an
independent cohort from Sweden, which showed 5-year survival of 92.7% (n=149).
CONCLUSIONS: With further validation, this test has both the familiarity and
specificity for widespread use in management of breast cancer. More generally,
this work illustrates the potential for multiplexed biomarker discovery on the
tissue microarray platform.

PMID: 17085660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Exp Allergy. 2006 Nov;36(11):1408-16.

Association of neuropeptides with Th1/Th2 balance and allergic sensitization in
children.

Herberth G(1), Daegelmann C, Weber A, Röder S, Giese T, Krämer U, Schins RP,
Behrendt H, Borte M, Lehmann I; LISAplus Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Immunology, UFZ Centre for Environmental Research 
Leipzig-Halle, Leipzig, Germany. gunda.herberth@ufz.de

BACKGROUND: Among neurogenic factors, the neuropeptides have an important
regulatory influence on immune system activity and may lead to allergic
sensitization.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to investigate the relationship of the
neuropeptides vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), somatostatin (SOM) and
substance P (SP) on modulation of Th1/Th2 balance and allergic sensitization in
children.
METHODS: Within the LISAplus (Life style-Immune system-Allergy) study, blood
samples of 321 six-year-old children were analysed for concentration of
neuropeptides, Th1 and Th2 cytokines, transcription factors for T cell regulation
and suppressors of cytokine signalling. In addition, samples were screened for
specific IgE against inhalant and food allergens.
RESULTS: Children with high SOM values showed a Th2 polarization and a reduced
expression of FOXP3, the marker for regulatory T cells. High (VIP) levels
correlated inversely with the expression of T cell transcription factors (Tbet
and SOCS3). In contrast, elevated levels of SP were associated with reduced GATA3
and SOCS3 expression and with increased IFN-gamma concentrations. Allergic
sensitization was more prevalent in children with higher SOM and VIP
concentrations but not associated with SP levels.
CONCLUSION: Our data reveal an association between neuropeptides and modulatory
effects on immune cells in vivo, especially on Th1/Th2 balance with a correlation
to allergic sensitization in children. We suggest that elevated SOM and VIP
concentrations and the inducing factors should be considered as allergy risk
factors.

PMID: 17083351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):6650-9.

GATA-3 regulates the development and function of invariant NKT cells.

Kim PJ(1), Pai SY, Brigl M, Besra GS, Gumperz J, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Although invariant NKT (iNKT) cells participate in many aspects of immune
responses, the molecular mechanisms regulating their development, maturation, and
activation are still poorly understood. GATA-3 is a T cell-specific transcription
factor that is also expressed in iNKT cells. The critical role of GATA-3 in
conventional alphabeta T cells has been well documented, but whether GATA-3 also 
regulates the development and function of iNKT cells is unknown. In the present
study, we report that deficiency of GATA-3 results in cell-intrinsic defects in
the thymic development and peripheral maturation of murine iNKT cells. In
addition, GATA-3 is also required for survival, activation, and effector
functions of this unique population of T cells. Our data also reveal a previously
unidentified peripheral maturation step that is GATA-3 dependent.

PMID: 17082577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(6):R64.

GATA3 protein as a MUC1 transcriptional regulator in breast cancer cells.

Abba MC(1), Nunez MI, Colussi AG, Croce MV, Segal-Eiras A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
mabba777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that members of the GATA-binding
protein (GATA) family (GATA4 and GATA5) might have pivotal roles in the
transcriptional upregulation of mucin genes (MUC2, MUC3 and MUC4) in
gastrointestinal epithelium. The zinc-finger GATA3 transcription factor has been 
reported to be involved in the growth control and differentiation of breast
epithelial cells. In SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) studies we
observed an intriguing significant correlation between GATA3 and MUC1 mRNA
expression in breast carcinomas. We therefore designed the present study to
elucidate whether MUC1 expression is regulated by GATA3 in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Promoter sequence analysis of the MUC1 gene identified six GATA cis
consensus elements in the 5' flanking region (GATA1, GATA3 and four GATA-like
sequences). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays were employed to study the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site.
GATA3 and MUC1 expression was analyzed in vitro with a GATA3 knockdown assay.
Furthermore, expression of GATA3 and MUC1 genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR 
and immunohistochemistry on breast cancer-specific tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: We confirmed the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site on the MUC1
promoter region in the MCF7 cell line. We determined that GATA3 knockdown assays 
led to a decrease in MUC1 protein expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. In addition,
we detected a statistically significant correlation in expression between GATA3
and MUC1 genes at the mRNA and protein levels both in normal breast epithelium
and in breast carcinomas (p = 0.01). GATA3 expression was also highly associated 
with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status (p = 0.0001) and tumor
grade (p = 0.004) in breast carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence indicating that GATA3 is probably a
mediator for the transcriptional upregulation of MUC1 expression in some breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC1797033
PMID: 17078870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16894-9. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Interaction of GATA-3/T-bet transcription factors regulates expression of sialyl 
Lewis X homing receptors on Th1/Th2 lymphocytes.

Chen GY(1), Osada H, Santamaria-Babi LF, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, 1-1 Kanokoden,
Chikusaku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Selectin-dependent cell adhesion mediates inflammatory extravasation and routine 
homing of lymphocytes. Most resting peripheral T lymphocytes lack expression of
sialyl Lewis X, the carbohydrate ligand for selectins, and are induced to
strongly express it upon activation. T helper 1 (Th1) cells are known to more
preferentially express sialyl Lewis X as compared with T helper 2 (Th2) cells
upon activation. The molecular basis for this preferential expression, however,
has not been elucidated to date. Here we show that the gene for
fucosyltransferase VII (FUT7), the rate-limiting enzyme for sialyl Lewis X
synthesis, is a unique example of the human genes with binding sites for both
GATA-3 and T-bet, two opposing factors for Th1 and Th2 development, and is
regulated transcriptionally by a balance of the two interacting transcription
factors. T-bet promotes and GATA-3 represses FUT7 transcription. Our results
indicated that T-bet interferes with the binding of GATA-3 to its target DNA, and
also that GATA-3 significantly interferes with the binding of T-bet to the FUT7
promoter. T-bet has a binding ability to GATA-3, CBP/P300, and Sp1 to form a
transcription factor complex, and GATA-3 regulates FUT7 transcription by
phosphorylation-dependently recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC)-3/HDAC-5 and by
competing with CBP/P300 in binding to the N terminus of T-bet. Suppression of
GATA-3 activity by dominant-negative GATA-3 or repressor of GATA (ROG) was
necessary to attain a maximum expression of FUT7 and sialyl Lewis X in human T
lymphoid cells. These results indicate that the GATA-3/T-bet transcription factor
complex regulates the cell-lineage-specific expression of the lymphocyte homing
receptors.

PMCID: PMC1629005
PMID: 17075044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;41(8):494-7.

[Expression of T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in
recurrent aphthous ulcerations].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu JX(1), Shan LY, Li LH, Huang ZH, Liu AG, Yao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Wuxi No. 4 Hospital Affiliated to Suzhou
University, Wuxi Jiangsu 214062, China. dentzhu@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the T cell-specific transcription
factors T-bet/GATA-3 in recurrent aphthous ulcerations (RAU).
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by density
gradient centrifugation from RAU patients and healthy controls. Expressions of
T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA and protein in the PBMCs were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot respectively.
The concentrations of gamma-interferon (gamma-IFN) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) in
the serum were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: The expressions of T-bet mRNA were 0.73 +/- 0.14 in the control group
and 0.12 +/- 0.04 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations group, the levels of
T-bet protein expressions were 0.73 +/- 0.18 in the control group and 0.24 +/-
0.09 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations group, there was a significant
difference between the two groups (P < 0.01). The levels of GATA-3 mRNA
expressions were 0.89 +/- 0.11 in the control group and 1.30 +/- 0.13 in the
recurrent aphthous ulcerations group; GATA-3 protein expressions were 1.09 +/-
0.16 in the control group and 1.80 +/- 0.16 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations
group, there was a significant difference between the two groups (P < 0.01). In
the control group, the concentration of gamma-interferon in the serum was (22.15 
+/- 1.52) ng/L, which was significantly elevated compared with that in the
recurrent aphthous ulcerations group (16.32 +/- 0.22) ng/L (P < 0.01), in the
control group, the concentration of IL-4 in the serum was (25.58 +/- 2.59) ng/L, 
which was significantly lower than that of the recurrent aphthous ulcerations
group (43.60 +/- 3.15) ng/L (P < 0.01). The ratio of gamma-IFN and IL-4 was
positively correlated with the ratio of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA and protein
expression (r = 0.96, 0.94, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Imbalance of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 may be one of
the key factors in immune dysregulation of recurrent aphthous ulcerations.

PMID: 17074191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1278-88. Epub 2006 Oct 22.

SATB1 packages densely looped, transcriptionally active chromatin for coordinated
expression of cytokine genes.

Cai S(1), Lee CC, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, California
94720, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1229-30.

SATB1 (special AT-rich sequence binding protein 1) organizes cell type-specific
nuclear architecture by anchoring specialized DNA sequences and recruiting
chromatin remodeling factors to control gene transcription. We studied the role
of SATB1 in regulating the coordinated expression of Il5, Il4 and Il13, located
in the 200-kb T-helper 2 (T(H)2) cytokine locus on mouse chromosome 11. We show
that on T(H)2 cell activation, SATB1 expression is rapidly induced to form a
unique transcriptionally active chromatin structure at the cytokine locus. In
this structure, chromatin is folded into numerous small loops, all anchored to
SATB1 at their base. In addition, histone H3 is acetylated at Lys9 and Lys14, and
the T(H)2-specific factors GATA3, STAT6 and c-Maf, the chromatin-remodeling
enzyme Brg1 and RNA polymerase II are all bound across the 200-kb region. Before 
activation, the T(H)2 cytokine locus is already associated with GATA3 and STAT6, 
showing some looping, but these are insufficient to induce cytokine gene
expression. Using RNA interference, we show that on cell activation, SATB1 is
required not only for compacting chromatin into dense loops at the 200-kb
cytokine locus but also for inducing Il4, Il5, Il13 and c-Maf expression. Thus,
SATB1 is a necessary determinant for the hitherto unidentified higher-order,
transcriptionally active chromatin structure that forms on T(H)2 cell activation.

PMID: 17057718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):5801-10.

Critical YxKxHxxxRP motif in the C-terminal region of GATA3 for its DNA binding
and function.

Shinnakasu R(1), Yamashita M, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Ikemizu 
S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

A zinc finger transcription factor, GATA3, plays an essential role in the
development of T cells and the functional differentiation into type 2 Th cells.
Two transactivation domains and two zinc finger regions are known to be important
for the GATA3 function, whereas the role for other regions remains unclear. In
this study we demonstrated that a conserved YxKxHxxxRP motif (aa 345-354)
adjacent to the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA3 plays a critical in its
DNA binding and functions, including transcriptional activity, the ability to
induce chromatin remodeling of the Th2 cytokine gene loci, and Th2 cell
differentiation. A single point mutation of the key amino acid (Y, K, H, R, and
P) in the motif abrogated GATA3 functions. A computer simulation analysis based
on the solution structure of the chicken GATA1/DNA complex supported the
importance of this motif in GATA3 DNA binding. Thus, we identified a novel
conserved YxKxHxxxRP motif adjacent to the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA3
that is indispensable for GATA3 DNA binding and functions.

PMID: 17056504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 15;301(2):568-77. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Dosage-dependent rescue of definitive nephrogenesis by a distant Gata3 enhancer.

Hasegawa SL(1), Moriguchi T, Rao A, Kuroha T, Engel JD, Lim KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0616, USA.

Human GATA3 haploinsufficiency leads to HDR (hypoparathyroidism, deafness and
renal dysplasia) syndrome, demonstrating that the development of a specific
subset of organs in which this transcription factor is expressed is exquisitely
sensitive to gene dosage. We previously showed that murine GATA-3 is essential
for definitive kidney development, and that a large YAC transgene faithfully
recapitulated GATA-3 expression in the urogenital system. Here we describe the
localization and activity of a kidney enhancer (KE) located 113 kbp 5' to the
Gata3 structural gene. When the KE was employed to direct renal system-specific
GATA-3 transcription, the extent of cell autonomous kidney rescue in
Gata3-deficient mice correlated with graded allelic expression of transgenic
GATA-3. These data demonstrate that a single distant, tissue-specific enhancer
can direct GATA-3 gene expression to confer all embryonic patterning information 
that is required for successful execution of metanephrogenesis, and that the
dosage of GATA-3 required has a threshold between 50% and 70% of diploid
activity.

PMCID: PMC1858647
PMID: 17046739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jan;81(1):336-43. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Transcriptional regulation of the cannabinoid receptor type 1 gene in T cells by 
cannabinoids.

Börner C(1), Höllt V, Sebald W, Kraus J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Magdeburg,
Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany.

Effects of cannabinoids (CBs) are mediated by two types of receptors, CB1 and
CB2. In this report, we investigated whether CBs regulate gene expression of
their cognate receptors in T cells and studied underlying mechanisms in CD4+
Jurkat T cells. Transcription of the CB1 gene was strongly induced in response to
Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), whereas the CB2 gene was not regulated. The
induction of CB1 gene expression is mediated by CB2 receptors only, as
demonstrated by using the CB1 and CB2 agonists R(+)-methanandamide and JWH 015,
respectively, and combinations of THC plus CB1- and CB2-specific antagonists.
After activation of CB2 receptors, the transcription factor STAT5 is
phosphorylated. STAT5 then transactivates IL-4. Induction of IL-4 mRNA as well as
IL-4 protein release from the cells are necessary for the following induction of 
the CB1 gene. This was demonstrated by using decoy oligonucleotides against
STAT5, which blocked IL-4 and CB1 mRNA induction, and by using the IL-4 receptor 
antagonist IL-4 [R121D,Y124D], which blocked the up-regulation of CB1 gene
transcription. Transactivation of the CB1 gene in response to IL-4 is then
mediated by the transcription factor STAT6, as shown by using decoy
oligonucleotides against STAT6. An increase in CB1-mediated phosphorylation of
MAPK in cells prestimulated with CB2-specific agonists suggests up-regulation of 
functional CB1 receptor proteins. In summary, up-regulation of CB1 in T
lymphocytes in response to CBs themselves may facilitate or enhance the various
immunomodulatory effects related to CBs.

PMID: 17041005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006 Sep;14(9):1543-52.

Decreased expression of adipogenic genes in obese subjects with type 2 diabetes.

Dubois SG(1), Heilbronn LK, Smith SR, Albu JB, Kelley DE, Ravussin E; Look AHEAD 
Adipose Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Health and Performance Enhancement Division, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to delineate the potential role of adipogenesis in
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Obesity is characterized by an increase
in adipose tissue mass resulting from enlargement of existing fat cells
(hypertrophy) and/or from increased number of adipocytes (hyperplasia). The
inability of the adipose tissue to recruit new fat cells may cause ectopic fat
deposition and insulin resistance.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: We examined the expression of candidate genes
involved in adipocyte proliferation and/or differentiation
[CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, C/EBPdelta, GATA domain-binding
protein 3 (GATA3), C/EBPbeta, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
gamma2, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A), Wnt-10b,
tumor necrosis factor alpha, sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c
(SREBP1c), 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, PPARG angiopoietin-related
protein (PGAR), insulin-like growth factor 1, PPARgamma coactivator 1alpha,
PPARgamma coactivator 1beta, and PPARdelta] in subcutaneous adipose tissue from
42 obese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 25 non-diabetic subjects matched
for age and obesity.
RESULTS: Insulin sensitivity was measured by a 3-hour 80 mU/m2 per minute
hyperinsulinemic glucose clamp (100 mg/dL). As expected, subjects with type 2
diabetes had lower glucose disposal (4.9 +/- 1.9 vs. 7.5 +/- 2.8 mg/min per
kilogram fat-free mass; p < 0.001) and larger fat cells (0.90 +/- 0.26 vs. 0.78
+/- 0.17 microm; p = 0.04) as compared with obese control subjects. Three genes
(SREBP1c, p < 0.01; STAT5A, p = 0.02; and PPARgamma2, p = 0.02) had significantly
lower expression in obese type 2 diabetics, whereas C/EBPbeta only tended to be
lower (p = 0.07).
DISCUSSION: This cross-sectional study supports the hypothesis that impaired
expression of adipogenic genes may result in impaired adipogenesis, potentially
leading to larger fat cells in subcutaneous adipose tissue and insulin
resistance.

PMCID: PMC2677804
PMID: 17030965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Cancer. 2006 Dec 15;119(12):2974-9.

Identification and meta-analysis of a small gene expression signature for the
diagnosis of estrogen receptor status in invasive ductal breast cancer.

Schneider J(1), Ruschhaupt M, Buness A, Asslaber M, Regitnig P, Zatloukal K,
Schippinger W, Ploner F, Poustka A, Sültmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

In breast cancer, the determination of estrogen receptor (ER) expression is
crucial for the decision on therapeutic strategies. Current ER expression
analysis is based on immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of ER on formalin fixed
tissue sections. However, low levels of ER expression frequently escape detection
because of varying sensitivities of routine histopathological laboratories.
Moreover, in estimating ER by IHC the receptor protein only is tested instead of 
the complex underlying ER pathway, which reflects its biological activity. To
overcome this limitation, we have used the microarray technology to study 56
samples of invasive ductal carcinoma. We infer a robust and reliable signature of
10 genes, which is associated with ER expression and presumably therapeutically
relevant biological processes. In a meta-analysis, the signature was tested on 3 
further independent microarray gene expression data sets, covering different
laboratories, array platforms, and clinics. The classification based on the
signature showed a very low misclassification rate. In summary, the expression of
few genes is sufficient to determine ER status. Future decisions on antiestrogen 
based therapy in breast cancer could be based on this signature rather than on
immunostaining alone.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17019712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 15;177(8):5659-67.

Differential expression of CD11c by peripheral blood NK cells reflects temporal
activity of multiple sclerosis.

Aranami T(1), Miyake S, Yamamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease, showing a great degree of
variance in temporal disease activity. We have recently demonstrated that
peripheral blood NK cells biased for secreting IL-5 (NK2 bias) are associated
with the remission state of MS. In this study, we report that MS patients in
remission differentially express CD11c on NK cell surface (operationally defined 
as CD11chigh or CD11clow). When we compared CD11chigh or CD11clow patients, the
expression of IL-5 and GATA-3 in NK cells supposed to endow a disease-protective 
NK2 phenotype was observed in CD11clow but not in CD11chigh patients. In
contrast, the CD11chigh group showed a higher expression of HLA-DR on NK cells.
In vitro studies demonstrated that NK cell stimulatory cytokines such as IL-15
would up-regulate CD11c expression on NK cells. Given previous evidence showing
an association between an increased level of proinflammatory cytokines and
temporal disease activity in MS, we postulate that inflammatory signals may play 
a role in inducing the CD11chigh NK cell phenotype. Follow-up of a new cohort of 
patients showed that 6 of 10 CD11chigh MS patients developed a clinical relapse
within 120 days after evaluation, whereas only 2 of 13 CD11clow developed
exacerbated disease (p = 0.003). As such, a higher expression of CD11c on NK
cells may reflect the temporal activity of MS as well as a loss of regulatory NK2
phenotype, which may allow us to use it as a potential biomarker to monitor the
immunological status of MS patients.

PMID: 17015755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nat Immunol. 2006 Nov;7(11):1217-24. Epub 2006 Oct 1.

A thymic pathway of mouse natural killer cell development characterized by
expression of GATA-3 and CD127.

Vosshenrich CA(1), García-Ojeda ME, Samson-Villéger SI, Pasqualetto V, Enault L, 
Richard-Le Goff O, Corcuff E, Guy-Grand D, Rocha B, Cumano A, Rogge L, Ezine S,
Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Cytokines et Développement Lymphoide, Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale U668, Institut Pasteur, Paris F-75724, France.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Dec;7(12):1343.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Nov;7(11):1134-6.

Natural killer (NK) cell development is thought to occur in the bone marrow. Here
we identify the transcription factor GATA-3 and CD127 (IL-7R alpha) as molecular 
markers of a pathway of mouse NK cell development that originates in the thymus. 
Thymus-derived CD127+ NK cells repopulated peripheral lymphoid organs, and their 
homeostasis was strictly dependent on GATA-3 and interleukin 7. The CD127+ NK
cells had a distinct phenotype (CD11b(lo) CD16- CD69(hi) Ly49(lo)) and unusual
functional attributes, including reduced cytotoxicity but considerable cytokine
production. Those characteristics are reminiscent of human CD56(hi) CD16- NK
cells, which we found expressed CD127 and had more GATA-3 expression than human
CD56+ CD16+ NK cells. We propose that bone marrow and thymic NK cell pathways
generate distinct mouse NK cells with properties similar to those of the two
human CD56 NK cell subsets.

PMID: 17013389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4015-24.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic
differentiation of sympathetic neurons.

Lucas ME(1), Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology Program, Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 105
Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2, together with Ascl1,
Phox2a, Phox2b and Gata2/Gata3, is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins in
neural crest-derived precursor cells during sympathetic neuron generation. Hand2 
overexpression experiments and the analysis of its function at the Dbh promotor
implicated Hand2 in the control of noradrenergic gene expression. Using the
zebrafish hand2 deletion mutant hands off, we have now investigated the
physiological role of hand2 in the development of sympathetic ganglia. In hands
off mutant embryos, sympathetic precursor cells aggregate to form normal
sympathetic ganglion primordia characterized by the expression of phox2b, phox2a 
and the achaete-scute family member zash1a/ascl1. The expression of the
noradrenergic marker genes th and dbh is strongly reduced, as well as the
transcription factors gata2 and tfap2a (Ap-2alpha). By contrast, generic neuronal
differentiation seems to be unaffected, as the expression of elavl3 (HuC) is not 
reduced in hands off sympathetic ganglia. These results demonstrate in vivo an
essential and selective function of hand2 for the noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons, and implicates tfap2a and gata2 as downstream effectors.

PMID: 17008447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cas Lek Cesk. 2006;145(8):619-24.

[EVI1 and its role in myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloid leukemia and other
malignant diseases].

[Article in Czech]

Fuchs O(1).

Author information: 
(1)UHKT, Praha. ota.fuchs@uhkt.cz

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) gene was identified as a common
locus of retroviral integration in myeloid tumors found in mice. EVI1 gene is
highly conserved through evolution and human gene EVI1 on chromosome 3q26 encodes
zinc fingers-containing transcription factor. EVI1 is expressed in
nonhematopoietic tissues but not in normal blood or bone marrow. EVI1 was
detected in hematopoietic cells in retrovirus-induced myeloid leukemias in mice
and several reports documented EVI1 expression in human myelodysplastic syndromes
and other hematologic malignancies without 3q26 translocations. EVI1 is
abnormally expressed in human myeloid leukemias that are associated with the
t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22), inv(3)(q21q26) and other chromosomal
rearrangements. EVI1 is overexpressed in some ovarian cancers and human colon
cancer cell lines and may play a role in the initiation and/or progression of
solid tumors, as well as hematopoietic malignancies. EVI1 is a transcriptional
repressor which inhibits transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) family
signalling by binding signal transducers (Smad proteins) and recruiting
transcriptional corepressors. TGFbeta is an important regulator of proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and migration of cells. EVI1 inhibits TGFbeta-mediated
apoptosis. Knockdown of EVI1 function by small interference RNA increases the
sensitivity of malignant cells to TGFbeta-mediated or other inducer-mediated
apoptosis. Overexpressed EVI-1 blocks granulocyte and erythroid differentiation
and possess the ability of growth promotion in some types of cells. EVI1
functions in some cases as a transcriptional activator which stimulates for
example GATA2 and GATA3 promoters. The study of EVI1 target genes will help to
clear the mechanism by which EVI1 upregulates cell proliferation, impairs cell
differentiation, and induces cell transformation.

PMID: 16995417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Audiol Neurootol. 2006;11(6):373-9. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Characteristics of hearing loss in HDR (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
deafness, renal dysplasia) syndrome.

van Looij MA(1), Meijers-Heijboer H, Beetz R, Thakker RV, Christie PT, Feenstra
LW, van Zanten BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
m.vanlooij@erasmusmc.nl

Haploinsufficiency of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA3 causes the triad
of hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal dysplasia, known by its acronym HDR
syndrome. The purpose of the current study was to describe in detail the auditory
phenotype in human HDR patients and compare these to audiometrical and
histological data previously described in a mouse model of this disease. Pure
tone audiometry, speech audiometry, speech in noise, auditory brainstem responses
and transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions were measured in 2 patients affected
by HDR syndrome. Both patients were affected by a moderate-to-severe
sensorineural hearing loss. Speech reception thresholds were shifted and speech
recognition in noise was disturbed. No otoacoustic emissions could be generated
in either patient. Auditory brainstem response interpeak intervals were normal.
The human and murine audiological phenotypes seem to correspond well. Hearing
loss in HDR syndrome is moderate to severe, seems to be slightly worse at the
higher end of the frequency spectrum and may be progressive with age. The absence
of otoacoustic emissions and the loss of frequency selectivity suggest an
important role for outer hair cells in causing the hearing loss.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16988501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Immunogenet. 2006 Oct;33(5):333-7.

Investigating Gata3 as a positional candidate gene for allergic asthma in a
murine model.

Li X(1), Wills-Karp M, Ewart S.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Graduate Program, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Gata3 is a positional candidate gene for allergic asthma. We determined
allergen-induced GATA-3 mRNA and protein expression in asthma susceptible and
resistant mice and generated Gata3 sequence data. Our data indicate that the
Gata3 gene in isolation is not a causative agent of asthma susceptibility in our 
model.

PMID: 16984276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Sep;118(3):725-33. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Hyperresponsive TH2 cells with enhanced nuclear factor-kappa B activation induce 
atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions in Nishiki-nezumi Cinnamon/Nagoya mice.

Tenda Y(1), Yamashita M, Kimura MY, Hasegawa A, Shimizu C, Kitajima M, Onodera A,
Suzuki A, Seki N, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Nishiki-nezumi Cinnamon/Nagoya (NC/Nga) mice raised in
nonair-controlled conventional circumstances spontaneously develop atopic
dermatitis-like skin lesions; however, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We wanted to identify the critical intracellular signaling molecules
in T cells that induce atopic dermatitis-like skin legions in NC/Nga mice.
METHODS: We examined the levels of signal transduction and cytokine production in
T cells, particularly those in atopic dermatitis-like lesions induced by the
topical injection of mite antigens in NC/Nga mice under specific pathogen-free
conditions.
RESULTS: In NC/Nga mice maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions, the
capability of T(H)1/T(H)2 and T cytotoxic 1/T cytotoxic 2 (Tc1/Tc2) cell
differentiation increased significantly. T-cell antigen receptor-mediated
activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein
kinase cascade and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) signaling were enhanced in
NC/Nga T cells. The expression of T(H)2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5) and
that of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3), avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma
(c-Maf), NF-kappaB, and activator protein 1 (AP1) selectively increased in
draining lymph node T cells of NC/Nga mice. Moreover, the cell transfer of
inhibitory NF-kappaB mutant-infected T(H)2 cells reduced ear thickness in the
mite antigen-induced skin lesion of NC/Nga mice.
CONCLUSION: Hyperresponsive T(H)2 cells with an enhanced activity of NF-kappaB
and AP1 play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis-like skin
lesions in NC/Nga mice.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: These results indicate potential therapeutic usefulness of
developing selective inhibitors for NF-kappaB in the treatment of human atopic
dermatitis.

PMID: 16950294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2006 Oct;133(19):3871-81. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Gata3 participates in a complex transcriptional feedback network to regulate
sympathoadrenal differentiation.

Moriguchi T(1), Takako N, Hamada M, Maeda A, Fujioka Y, Kuroha T, Huber RE,
Hasegawa SL, Rao A, Yamamoto M, Takahashi S, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0616, USA.

Gata3 mutant mice expire of noradrenergic deficiency by embryonic day (E) 11 and 
can be rescued pharmacologically or, as shown here, by restoring Gata3 function
specifically in sympathoadrenal (SA) lineages using the human DBH promoter to
direct Gata3 transgenic expression. In Gata3-null embryos, there was significant 
impairment of SA differentiation and increased apoptosis in adrenal chromaffin
cells and sympathetic neurons. Additionally, mRNA analyses of purified chromaffin
cells from Gata3 mutants show that levels of Mash1, Hand2 and Phox2b (postulated 
upstream regulators of Gata3) as well as terminally differentiated SA lineage
products (tyrosine hydroxylase, Th, and dopamine beta-hydroxylase, Dbh) are
markedly altered. However, SA lineage-specific restoration of Gata3 function in
the Gata3 mutant background rescues the expression phenotypes of the downstream, 
as well as the putative upstream genes. These data not only underscore the
hypothesis that Gata3 is essential for the differentiation and survival of SA
cells, but also suggest that their differentiation is controlled by mutually
reinforcing feedback transcriptional interactions between Gata3, Mash1, Hand2 and
Phox2b in the SA lineage.

PMID: 16943277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Aug 20;119(16):1396-9.

T-bet/GATA-3 ratio is a surrogate measure of Th1/Th2 cytokine profiles and may be
novel targets for CpG ODN treatment in asthma patients.

Dong L(1), Chen M, Zhang Q, Li LZ, Xu XQ, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Disease, Qilu Hospital, School of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan 250012, China. dl5506@yahoo.com.cn

PMID: 16934187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 15;400(3):439-48.

Recruitment of histone deacetylase 4 by transcription factors represses
interleukin-5 transcription.

Han S(1), Lu J, Zhang Y, Cheng C, Han L, Wang X, Li L, Liu C, Huang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun
130024, China.

The critical role of IL-5 (interleukin-5) in eosinophilic inflammation implicates
it as a therapeutic target for allergic diseases. The aim of the present study
was to elucidate the molecular basis for the involvement of reversible histone
acetylation in IL-5 transcriptional regulation. We provide evidence that HDAC4
(histone deacetylase 4) and p300, a known HAT (histone acetyltransferase),
reversibly controlled the activity of the IL-5 promoter in vivo and in vitro,
with a concurrent alteration of histone H3 acetylation status at the promoter
regions. The nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of HDAC4 was shown to play an important
role in the suppressive function of HDAC4 in IL-5 gene expression. Point mutation
and reporter ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) studies determined that the
four transcription factors binding on the IL-5 promoter, i.e. C/EBPbeta
(CAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta), GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3), NFAT
(nuclear factor of activated T cells) and YY1 (Yin and Yang 1), were essential
for the recruitment of HDAC4. Consistent with these observations, HDAC4 was found
to form protein complexes with GATA3 and YY1, and to co-exist in the nuclei with 
GATA3. We propose that the unique regulatory mechanism of IL-5 gene transcription
involves the reversible histone modification catalysed by HDAC4 and p300, which
are recruited by the transcription factors. The dynamic balance in IL-5
transcriptional regulation is achieved through interactions among HATs/HDACs,
histones and transcription factors. These data contribute to understanding the
molecular mechanisms of IL-5 regulation, which is crucial to the development of
new therapeutic strategies for IL-5-related allergic diseases.

PMCID: PMC1698606
PMID: 16922677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;91(11):4587-92. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Identification of three novel mutations in the GATA3 gene responsible for
familial hypoparathyroidism and deafness in the Chinese population.

Chiu WY(1), Chen HW, Chao HW, Yann LT, Tsai KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei 100, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Familial hypoparathyroidism may be caused by mutations of several
genes. The CaSR and GATA3 genes are the two candidates most commonly responsible 
for this condition.
OBJECTIVES: We collected five unrelated families with familial hypoparathyroidism
and examined their CaSR and GATA3 genes.
METHODS: Blood samples from these five families and 50 ethnically matched
unrelated controls were acquired. Biochemistry screening and formal audiogram
were performed to evaluate the affected individuals. All the exons and
exon-intron boundaries of the GATA3 and CaSR genes were sequenced.
RESULTS: We identified three novel mutations in the GATA3 gene responsible for
familial hypoparathyroidism and deafness: 1) a frameshift deletion occurring in
codon 160 (478delG) was hypothesized to disrupt dual zinc fingers as well as one 
transactivating domain; 2) a donor splice site mutation at exon 4/intron 4
boundary (IVS4 + 2 T to GCTTACTTCCC) was predicted to lead to truncated GATA3
proteins that lack both N- and C-terminal zinc-containing fingers; and 3) a
missense mutation R353S was predicted to disrupt the helical turn and thus
changed the angle between the C-terminal zinc finger and the adjacent C-terminal 
tail. Except for a previously described polymorphism, G990R, we did not find any 
genetic variants in the CaSR gene.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first article presenting mutations of the GATA3 gene
responsible for familial hypoparathyroidism and deafness in the Chinese
population. Our results expand the spectrum of mutations and report the first
splice donor site mutation of the GATA3 gene. In contrast, we do not find causal 
sequence variants of the CaSR gene from our collection of familial
hypoparathyroidism.

PMID: 16912130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Dyn. 2006 Oct;235(10):2845-60.

The molecular setup of the avian head mesoderm and its implication for
craniofacial myogenesis.

Bothe I(1), Dietrich S.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Craniofacial Development, Guy's Hospital,
London, United Kingdom.

The head mesoderm is the mesodermal tissue on either side of the brain, from
forebrain to hindbrain levels, and gives rise to the genuine head muscles. Its
relatedness to the more posterior paraxial mesoderm, the somites, which generate 
the muscles of the trunk, is conversely debated. To gain insight into the
molecular setup of the head mesoderm, its similarity or dissimilarity to the
somitic mesoderm, and the implications of its setup for the progress of muscle
formation, we investigated the expression of markers (1) for mesoderm
segmentation and boundary formation, (2) for regional specification and
somitogenesis and (3) for the positive and negative control of myogenic
differentiation. We show that the head mesoderm is molecularly distinct from
somites. It is not segmented; even the boundary to the first somite is
ill-defined. Importantly, the head mesoderm lacks the transcription factors
driving muscle differentiation while genes suppressing differentiation and
promoting cell proliferation are expressed. These factors show anteroposteriorly 
and dorsoventrally regionalised but overlapping expression. Notably, expression
extends into the areas that actively contribute to the heart, overlapping with
the expression of cardiac markers.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16894604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurochem. 2006 Aug;98(3):773-81.

GATA-3 regulates the transcriptional activity of tyrosine hydroxylase by
interacting with CREB.

Hong SJ(1), Huh Y, Chae H, Hong S, Lardaro T, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Belmont, Massachusetts 02478, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-3 is a master regulator of type 2
T-helper cell development. Interestingly, in GATA-3-/- mice, noradrenaline (NA)
deficiency is a proximal cause of embryonic lethality. However, neither the role 
of GATA-3 nor its target gene(s) in the nervous system were known. Here, we
report that forced expression of GATA-3 resulted in an increased number of
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expressing neurons in primary neural crest stem cell
(NCSC) culture. We also found that GATA-3 transactivates the promoter function of
TH via specific upstream sequences, a domain of the TH promoter residing at -61
to -39 bp. Surprisingly, this domain does not contain GATA-3 binding sites but
possesses a binding motif, a cAMP response element (CRE), for the transcription
factor, CREB. In addition, we found that site-directed mutation of this CRE
almost completely abolished transactivation of the TH promoter by GATA-3.
Furthermore, protein-protein interaction assays showed that GATA-3 is able to
physically interact with CREB in vitro as well as in vivo. Based on these
results, we propose that GATA-3 may regulate TH gene transcription via a novel
and distinct protein-protein interaction, and directly contributes to NA
phenotype specification.

PMID: 16893419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2006 Dec 1;108(12):3736-8. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Acetylation of GATA-1 is required for chromatin occupancy.

Lamonica JM(1), Vakoc CR, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

All 3 hematopoietic GATA transcription factors, GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3, are
acetylated, although the in vivo role of this modification remains unclear. We
examined the functions of an acetylation-defective mutant of GATA-1 in maturing
erythroid cells. We found that removal of the acetylation sites in GATA-1 does
not impair its nuclear localization, steady-state protein levels, or its ability 
to bind naked GATA elements in vitro. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments revealed that mutant GATA-1 was dramatically impaired in
binding to all examined cellular target sites in vivo, including genes that are
normally activated and repressed by GATA-1. Together, these results suggest that 
acetylation regulates chromatin occupancy of GATA-1. These findings point to a
novel function for transcription factor acetylation, perhaps by facilitating
protein interactions required for stable association with chromatin templates in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC1895476
PMID: 16888089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. EMBO J. 2006 Aug 9;25(15):3524-33. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

The signaling adapter p62 is an important mediator of T helper 2 cell function
and allergic airway inflammation.

Martin P(1), Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

Naïve T helper (Th) cells differentiate in response to antigen stimulation into
either Th1 or Th2 effector cells, which are characterized by the secretion of
different set of cytokines. Th2 differentiation, which is critical for allergic
airway disease, is triggered by signals of the T-cell receptor (TCR) and the
cytokines generated during polarization, particularly IL-4. We determine here the
potential role of the signaling adapter p62 in T-cell polarization. We report
using p62-/- mice and cells that p62 acts downstream TCR activation, and is
important for Th2 polarization and asthma, playing a significant role in the
control of the sustained activation of NF-kappaB and late synthesis of GATA3 and 
IL-4 by participating in the activation of the IKK complex.

PMCID: PMC1538553
PMID: 16874300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jul 21;12(27):4310-7.

Mechanism of T cell hyporesponsiveness to HBcAg is associated with regulatory T
cells in chronic hepatitis B.

Kondo Y(1), Kobayashi K, Ueno Y, Shiina M, Niitsuma H, Kanno N, Kobayashi T,
Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku,
Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

AIM: To study the mechanisms of hyporesponsiveness of HBV-specific CD4+ T cells
by testing TH1 and TH2 commitment and regulatory T cells.
METHODS: Nine patients with chronic hepatitis B were enrolled. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells were stimulated with HBcAg or HBsAg to evaluate their potential
to commit to TH1 and TH2 differentiation. HBcAg-specific activity of regulatory T
cells was evaluated by staining with antibodies to CD4, CD25, CTLA-4 and
interleukin-10. The role of regulatory T cells was further assessed by treatment 
with anti-interleukin-10 antibody and depletion of CD4+CD25+ cells.
RESULTS: Level of mRNAs for T-bet, IL-12R beta2 and IL-4 was significantly lower 
in the patients than in healthy subjects with HBcAg stimulation. Although
populations of CD4+CD25highCTLA-4+ T cells were not different between the
patients and healthy subjects, IL-10 secreting cells were found in CD4+ cells and
CD4+CD25+ cells in the patients in response to HBcAg, and they were not found in 
cells which were stimulated with HBsAg. Addition of anti-IL-10 antibody recovered
the amount of HBcAg-specific TH1 antibody compared with control antibody (P <
0.01, 0.34% +/- 0.12% vs 0.15% +/- 0.04%). Deletion of CD4+CD25+ T cells
increased the amount of HBcAg-specific TH1 antibody when compared with
lymphocytes reconstituted using regulatory T cells (P < 0.01, 0.03% +/- 0.02% vs 
0.18% +/- 0.05%).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the mechanism of T cell hyporesponsiveness 
to HBcAg includes activation of HBcAg-induced regulatory T cells in contrast to
an increase in TH2-committed cells in response to HBsAg.

PMCID: PMC4087740
PMID: 16865771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;44(6):415-9.

[Bifidobacterium DNA upregulates Th1 type response of umbilical cord blood
mononuclear cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Wang XC, Wang JY, Yu YH, Wang CQ, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of bifidobacterium genomic DNA on umbilical cord
blood mononuclear cell (CBMC), and investigate the immunoregulation of
bifidobacterium DNA and explore possible mechanisms by which bifidobacterium acts
against allergic reaction.
METHODS: Bifidobacterium genomic DNA (bDNA) and human DNA (hDNA) were extracted
with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol and stored at -20 degrees C for later use.
Parts of bDNA were completely digested with DNaseI (d-bDNA) at 37 degrees C.
CBMCs were isolated with Ficoll from umbilical cord blood and incubated at 37
degrees C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. These cells were divided into four
groups, control group: without any stimulant; bDNA group: stimulated with 25
microg/ml bDNA; d-bDNA group: stimulated with 25 microg/ml d-bDNA; hDNA group:
stimulated with 25 microg/ml hDNA. The cells were stimulated with different
stimulants in vitro, at the end of incubation culture supernatant and cells were 
collected. IL-12 and IL-10 levels in the culture supernatant were measured by
enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA); cells secreting IL-4 and IFN-gamma
were counted by enzyme linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay; and total RNA was
isolated from the cells to assay T-bet and GATA3 mRNA expression levels by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Six hours after stimulation there was no significant difference in IL-12
level in supernatant among the four groups; 12 hours after stimulation, IL-12
level in supernatant of bDNA treated group was significantly higher than that of 
each of the other groups, so were the results obtained at 24 hours and 48 hours
after stimulation (P < 0.05). No significant difference could be detected in
IL-12 level in supernatant among the other 3 groups. On the other hand, 6 hours
after stimulation there was no significant difference in IL-10 level in
supernatant among the four groups. But 12 and 24 hours after stimulation IL-10
level in supernatant of bDNA treated group was lower than that of each of the
other groups, but the difference was not statistically significant. The count of 
IFN-gamma secreting cells of bDNA treated group was higher than that of the other
groups, while IL-4 secteting cells of bDNA treated group were lower than that of 
the other groups. After bDNA stimulation, nuclear factor T-box expressed in T
cells (T-bet) mRNA expression was conspicuously enhanced as compared to the other
three groups (P < 0.05). GATA3 mRNA transcription in CBMC had no significant
change after bDNA stimulation.
CONCLUSION: bDNA could promote secretion of Th1 type cytokine IL-12, while Th2
type cytokine IL-10 level of cell supernatant was decreased. bDNA could stimulate
secretion of IFN-gamma by CBMC and inhibit secretion of IL-4. T-bet mRNA
expression was highly enhanced after bDNA stimulation. bDNA could upregulate Th1 
type response, which may be one of important mechanisms by which bifidobacterium 
inhibit allergic response.

PMID: 16836847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2006 Oct;132(10):653-63. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

The nicotinic receptor antagonists abolish pathobiologic effects of
tobacco-derived nitrosamines on BEP2D cells.

Arredondo J(1), Chernyavsky AI, Grando SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Davis, 3301 C Street,
Suite #1400, Sacramento, CA 95816, USA.

Identification of the mechanisms leading to malignant transformation of
respiratory cells may prove useful in the prevention and treatment of
tobacco-related lung cancer. Nitrosamines
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and N'-nitrosonornicotine
(NNN) can induce tumors both locally and systemically. In addition to the
genotoxic effect, they have been shown to affect lung cells due to ligating the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) expressed on the plasma membrane. In
this study, we sought to establish the role for nAChRs in malignant
transformation caused by NNK and NNN. We used the BEP2D cells that represent a
suitable model for studying the various stages of human bronchial carcinogenesis.
We found that these cells express alpha1, alpha3, alpha5, alpha7, alpha9,
alpha10, beta1, beta2, and beta4 nAChR subunits that can form high-affinity
binding sites for NNK and NNN. Exposure of BEP2D cells to either NNK or NNN in
both cases increased their proliferative potential which could be abolished in
the presence of nAChR antagonists alpha-bungarotoxin, which worked most
effectively against NNK, or mecamylamine, which was most efficient against NNN.
The BEP2D cells stimulated with the nitrosamines showed multifold increases of
the transcription of the PCNA and Bcl-2 genes by both real-time polymerase chain 
reaction and in-cell western assays. To gain a mechanistic insight into NNK- and 
NNN-initiated signaling, we investigated the expression of genes encoding the
signal transduction effectors GATA-3, nuclear factor-kappaB, and STAT-1.
Experimental results indicated that stimulation of nAChRs with NNK led to
activation of all three signal transduction effectors under consideration,
whereas NNN predominantly activated GATA-3 and STAT-1. The GATA-3 protein-binding
activity induced by NNK and NNN correlated with elevated gene expression. The
obtained results support the novel concept of receptor-mediated action of NNK and
NNN placing cellular nAChRs in the center of the pathophysiologic loop, and
suggest that an nAChR antagonist may serve as a chemopreventive agent.

PMID: 16835749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Infect Dis. 2006 Aug 1;194(3):294-301. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Leishmania donovani infection of human myeloid dendritic cells leads to a Th1
response in CD4+ T cells from healthy donors and patients with kala-azar.

Ghosh M(1), Mandal L, Maitra S, Rakshit S, Paul K, Bagchi J, Ganguly D, Pal C,
Bandyopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata,
India.

The role played by dendritic cells (DCs) in Leishmania donovani infection is
poorly understood. Here, we report that L. donovani amastigotes efficiently
infect human peripheral-blood monocyte-derived DCs. Opsonization with normal
human serum enhanced the infectivity of amastigotes and promastigotes only
marginally. Surface attachment versus internalization was distinguished by
incubation of DCs with live, fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled parasites,
followed by quenching with crystal violet. Infection with amastigotes was
accompanied by DC maturation, as was evident from the up-regulation of
maturation-associated cell-surface markers, the nuclear translocation of RelB,
and the release of cytokines. Amastigote-primed DCs produced inflammatory
cytokines in response to subsequent treatment with interferon- gamma or anti-CD40
monoclonal antibody. When cocultured, amastigote-infected DCs induced T helper
cell type 1 (Th1) responses both in naive allogeneic CD4(+) T cells and in
autologous CD4(+) T cells from patients with kala-azar and up-regulated the
expression of T-bet. Our data reveal that infection with L. donovani amastigotes 
induces a Th1 cytokine milieu in both DCs and T cells.

PMID: 16826476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 15;177(2):814-21.

Inhibition of Th2-mediated allergic airway inflammatory disease by CD137
costimulation.

Sun Y(1), Blink SE, Liu W, Lee Y, Chen B, Solway J, Weinstock J, Chen L, Fu YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. ysun1@bsd.uchicago.edu

The engagement of CD137 (4-1BB), an inducible T cell costimulatory receptor and
member of the TNF receptor superfamily, by agonistic Abs can promote strong tumor
and viral immunity mediated by CD8(+) T cells and stimulate IFN-gamma production.
However, its role in Th2-mediated immune responses has not been well defined. To 
address this issue, we studied the function of CD137 engagement using an allergic
airway disease model in which the mice were sensitized with inactivated
Schistosoma mansoni eggs followed by S. mansoni egg Ag challenge directly in the 
airways and Th1/2 cytokine production was monitored. Interestingly, treatment of 
C57BL/6 mice with agonistic anti-CD137 (2A) during sensitization completely
prevents allergic airway inflammation, as shown by a clear inhibition of T cell
and eosinophil infiltration into the lung tissue and airways, accompanied by
diminished Th2 cytokine production and reduced serum IgE levels, as well as a
reduction of airway hyperresponsiveness. At various time points after
immunization, restimulated splenocytes from 2A-treated mice displayed reduced
proliferation and Th2 cytokine production. In accordance with this, agonistic Ab 
to CD137 can directly coinhibit Th2 responses in vitro although it costimulates
Th1 responses. CD137-mediated suppression of Th2 response is independent of
IFN-gamma and T regulatory cells. Our study has identified a novel pathway to
inhibit Th2 responses in a CD137-dependent fashion.

PMID: 16818735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:74-6.

[HDR syndrome (GATA3 haploinsufficiency syndrome)].

[Article in Japanese]

Mochizuki T(1), Fujita K, Yamada H, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child Health and Medical Center, Osaka City General 
Hospital.

PMID: 16817354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:37-42.

[Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition, School of Medical Sciences, Niigata
University of Health and Welfare.

PMID: 16817345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Pathol. 2006 Jul;169(1):96-104.

Overexpression of the transcription factor GATA-3 enhances the development of
pulmonary fibrosis.

Kimura T(1), Ishii Y, Yoh K, Morishima Y, Iizuka T, Kiwamoto T, Matsuno Y, Homma 
S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Takahashi S, Sekizawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that Th2 cytokines, such as interleukin-4 and
interleukin-13, enhance fibrotic processes by activating fibroblast proliferation
and collagen production, whereas interferon-gamma, a Th1 cytokine, inhibits these
processes. Th1 and Th2 cells both differentiate from common T precursor cells,
with transcription factor GATA-3 a key regulator of Th2 differentiation. In the
present study, therefore, we examined the effects of GATA-3 overexpression on the
development of pulmonary fibrosis in a mouse model. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice and
GATA-3-overexpressing (GATA-3-tg) mice of the same background were
intratracheally treated with bleomycin. The survival rate after bleomycin was
significantly decreased in GATA-3-tg mice compared with wild-type mice. The
degree of pulmonary fibrosis was much greater in GATA-3-tg mice than in wild-type
mice 28 days after bleomycin treatment. Lung interferon-gamma concentration was
significantly decreased in GATA-3-tg mice compared with wild-type mice by 7 days 
after either saline or bleomycin treatment. The concentration of transforming
growth factor-beta, a fibrogenic cytokine, was significantly higher in GATA-3-tg 
mice than in wild-type mice. Exogenous administration of interferon-gamma to
GATA-3-tg mice improved the degree of pulmonary fibrosis and thus increased
survival. These results indicate that overexpression of GATA-3 enhances the
development of pulmonary fibrosis, possibly by reducing interferon-gamma levels
in the lung.

PMCID: PMC1698754
PMID: 16816364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mech Dev. 2006 Jun;123(6):415-29. Epub 2006 May 11.

Gata3 is required for early morphogenesis and Fgf10 expression during otic
development.

Lilleväli K(1), Haugas M, Matilainen T, Pussinen C, Karis A, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 9, 00710
Helsinki, Finland.

Inner ear develops from an induced surface ectoderm placode that invaginates and 
closes to form the otic vesicle, which then undergoes a complex morphogenetic
process to form the membranous labyrinth. Inner ear morphogenesis is severely
affected in Gata3 deficient mouse embryos, but the onset and basis of the
phenotype has not been known. We show here that Gata3 deficiency leads to severe 
and unique abnormalities during otic placode invagination. The invagination
problems are accompanied often by the formation of a morphological boundary
between the dorsal and ventral otic cup and by the precocious appearance of
dorsal endolymphatic characteristics. In addition, the endolymphatic domain often
detaches from the rest of the otic epithelium during epithelial closure. The
expression of several cell adhesion mediating genes is altered in Gata3 deficient
ears suggesting that Gata3 controls adhesion and morphogenetic movements in early
otic epithelium. Inactivation of Gata3 leads also to a loss of Fgf10 expression
in otic epithelium and auditory ganglion demonstrating that Gata3 is an important
regulator of Fgf-signalling during otic development.

PMID: 16806848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Retrovirology. 2006 Jun 26;3:37.

Distinct expression profiles of TGF-beta1 signaling mediators in pathogenic
SIVmac and non-pathogenic SIVagm infections.

Ploquin MJ(1), Desoutter JF, Santos PR, Pandrea I, Diop OM, Hosmalin A, Butor C, 
Barre-Sinoussi F, Müller-Trutwin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Régulation des Infections Rétrovirales, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France. mploquin@pasteur.fr

BACKGROUND: The generalized T-cell activation characterizing HIV-1 and SIVmac
infections in humans and macaques (MACs) is not found in the non-pathogenic
SIVagm infection in African green monkeys (AGMs). We have previously shown that
TGF-beta1, Foxp3 and IL-10 are induced very early after SIVagm infection. In
SIVmac-infected MACs, plasma TGF-beta1 induction persists during primary
infection 1. We raised the hypothesis that MACs are unable to respond to
TGF-beta1 and thus cannot resorb virus-driven inflammation. We therefore compared
the very early expression dynamics of pro- and anti-inflammatory markers as well 
as of factors involved in the TGF-beta1 signaling pathway in SIV-infected AGMs
and MACs.
METHODS: Levels of transcripts encoding for pro- and anti-inflammatory markers
(tnf-alpha, ifn-gamma, il-10, t-bet, gata-3) as well as for TGF-beta1 signaling
mediators (smad3, smad4, smad7) were followed by real time PCR in a prospective
study enrolling 6 AGMs and 6 MACs.
RESULTS: During primary SIVmac infection, up-regulations of tnf-alpha, ifn-gamma 
and t-bet responses (days 1-16 p.i.) were stronger whereas il-10 response was
delayed (4th week p.i.) compared to SIVagm infection. Up-regulation of smad7
(days 3-8 p.i.), a cellular mediator inhibiting the TGF-beta1 signaling cascade, 
characterized SIV-infected MACs. In AGMs, we found increases of gata-3 but not
t-bet, a longer lasting up-regulation of smad4 (days 1-21 p.i), a mediator
enhancing TGF-beta1 signaling, and no smad7 up-regulations.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the inability to resorb virus-driven
inflammation and activation during the pathogenic HIV-1/SIVmac infections is
associated with an unresponsiveness to TGF-beta1.

PMCID: PMC1533859
PMID: 16800882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hepatology. 2006 Jul;44(1):216-27.

Favored T helper 1 response in a mouse model of hepatosteatosis is associated
with enhanced T cell-mediated hepatitis.

Kremer M(1), Hines IN, Milton RJ, Wheeler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
NC 27599, USA. mkremer@med.unc.edu

Steatohepatitis enhances the severity of liver injury caused by acute
inflammation. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that fatty
liver due to chronic choline-deficient diet exacerbates concanavalin A
(ConA)-induced liver hepatitis, which is predominantly facilitated by T cells.
Male C57BL/6 mice were fed either control choline-sufficient diet (CSD) or
choline-deficient diet (CDD) for 6 weeks before ConA administration. Mice were
sacrificed 3, 9, and 24 hours after ConA injection. Liver injury measured by
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), pathology, and 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining
was minimal in mice fed either diet before ConA exposure. However, ConA-induced
liver injury was significantly greater in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed 
mice. Liver cytokines were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The expression of T helper (Th) 1 cytokines tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 12 (IL-12), and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) were 
dramatically elevated after ConA in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed mice. 
CDD also enhanced ConA-induced STAT4 activation, but not STAT6. Notably,
regulators of T-cell differentiation were strongly shifted toward a predominant
Th1 profile. T-bet, regulator of the Th1 response, was up-regulated in CDD-fed
mice, whereas Th2 regulator GATA-3 was significantly suppressed in CDD-fed mice
after ConA. Moreover, the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS)-1, SOCS-3, and repressor of GATA-3 (ROG) favored a predominant Th1
cytokine response in CDD-fed mice. In conclusion, these data support the
hypothesis that hepatosteatosis caused by CDD is associated with more severe
ConA-induced hepatitis due to a predominant shift toward Th1 response.

PMID: 16799967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 May;44(5):377-8.

[The function of Th1/Th2 cells in children with acute Kawasaki disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Chang J, Lu JR, Liang D.

PMID: 16780718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 2006 Sep 15;108(6):2095-105. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Leukosialin (CD43) defines hematopoietic progenitors in human embryonic stem cell
differentiation cultures.

Vodyanik MA(1), Thomson JA, Slukvin II.

Author information: 
(1)National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin Graduate School,
Madison, WI 53715, USA.

During hematopoietic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), early
hematopoietic progenitors arise along with endothelial cells within the CD34(+)
population. Although hESC-derived hematopoietic progenitors have been previously 
identified by functional assays, their phenotype has not been defined. Here,
using hESC differentiation in coculture with OP9 stromal cells, we demonstrate
that early progenitors committed to hematopoietic development could be identified
by surface expression of leukosialin (CD43). CD43 was detected on all types of
emerging clonogenic progenitors before expression of CD45, persisted on
differentiating hematopoietic cells, and reliably separated the hematopoietic
CD34(+) population from CD34(+)CD43(-)CD31(+)KDR(+) endothelial and
CD34(+)CD43(-)CD31(-)KDR(-) mesenchymal cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that 
the first-appearing CD34(+)CD43(+)CD235a(+)CD41a(+/-)CD45(-) cells represent
precommitted erythro-megakaryocytic progenitors. Multipotent lymphohematopoietic 
progenitors were generated later as CD34(+)CD43(+)CD41a(-)CD235a(-)CD45(-) cells.
These cells were negative for lineage-specific markers (Lin(-)), expressed KDR,
VE-cadherin, and CD105 endothelial proteins, and expressed GATA-2, GATA-3, RUNX1,
C-MYB transcription factors that typify initial stages of definitive
hematopoiesis originating from endothelial-like precursors. Acquisition of CD45
expression by CD34(+)CD43(+)CD45(-)Lin(-) cells was associated with progressive
myeloid commitment and a decrease of B-lymphoid potential.
CD34(+)CD43(+)CD45(+)Lin(-) cells were largely devoid of VE-cadherin and KDR
expression and had a distinct
FLT3(high)GATA3(low)RUNX1(low)PU1(high)MPO(high)IL7RA(high) gene expression
profile.

PMCID: PMC1895535
PMID: 16757688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2006 Sep 15;113(1-2):11-20. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

DNA binding activity of transcription factors in bronchial cells of horses with
recurrent airway obstruction.

Couëtil LL(1), Art T, de Moffarts B, Becker M, Mélotte D, Jaspar F, Bureau F,
Lekeux P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège,
Bat B42, Liège B-4000, Belgium. couetill@purdue.edu

Horses with recurrent airway obstruction (RAO) present many similarities with
human asthmatics including airway inflammation, hyperresponsiveness, reversible
obstruction, and increased NF-kappaB expression. Studies in experimental asthma
models have shown that transcriptions factors such as activator protein-1 (AP-1),
GATA-3, cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) and CAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP) may also play an important role in airway inflammation.
The purpose of this study was to measure DNA binding activity of these
transcription factors in the airways of horses with RAO and to compare it to
pulmonary function and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cytology. Seven horses
with RAO and six control animals were studied during a moldy hay challenge and
after 2 months at pasture. Pulmonary function, BALF cytology and transcription
factors' activities in bronchial brushings were measured during hay and pasture
exposures. During moldy hay challenge, RAO-affected horses developed severe
airway obstruction and inflammation and a significantly higher airway AP-1
binding activity than in controls. After 2 months on pasture, pulmonary function 
and airway AP-1 binding activity were not different between RAO and control
horses. The DNA binding activity of CREB in airways of RAO-affected horses
increased significantly after 2 months at pasture and became higher than in
controls. A significant positive correlation was detected between AP-1 binding
activity and indicators of airway obstruction and inflammation. Airway GATA-3,
CEBP and CREB binding activities were negatively correlated with indices of
airway obstruction. However, contrarily to CREB binding activity, GATA-3 and CEBP
binding activities were not different between RAO and control horses and were
unaffected by changes in environment. These data support the view that AP-1 and
CREB play a role in modulating airway inflammation in horses with RAO.

PMID: 16753225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Jun;13(2):617-28.

Effects of oestrogen on gene expression in epithelium and stroma of normal human 
breast tissue.

Wilson CL(1), Sims AH, Howell A, Miller CJ, Clarke RB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Bioinformatics Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, Wilmslow Road, Withington, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

Oestrogen (E) is essential for normal and cancer development in the breast, while
anti-oestrogens have been shown to reduce the risk of the disease. However,
little is known about the effect of E on gene expression in the normal human
breast, particularly when the epithelium and stroma are intact. Previous
expression profiles of the response to E have been performed on tumour cell
lines, in the absence of stroma. We investigated gene expression in normal human 
breast tissue transplanted into 9-10-week-old female athymic nude (Balb/c nu/nu) 
mice. After 2 weeks, when epithelial proliferation is minimal, one-third of the
mice were treated with 17beta-oestradiol (E2) to give human luteal-phase levels
in the mouse, which we have previously shown to induce maximal epithelial cell
proliferation. RNA was isolated from treated and untreated mice, labelled and
hybridized to Affymetrix HG-U133A (human) GeneChips. Gene expression levels were 
generated using BioConductor implementations of the RMA and MAS5 algorithms. E2
treatment was found to represent the largest source of variation in gene
expression and cross-species hybridization of mouse RNA from xenograft samples
was demonstrated to be negligible. Known E2-responsive genes (such as TFF1 and
AREG), and genes thought to be involved in breast cancer metastasis (including
mammoglobin, KRT19 and AGR2), were upregulated in response to E treatment. Genes 
known to be co-expressed with E receptor alpha in breast cancer cell lines and
tumours were both upregulated (XBP-1 and GREB1) and downregulated (RARRES1 and
GATA3). In addition, genes that are normally expressed in the myoepithelium and
extracellular matrix that maintain the tissue microenvironment were also
differentially expressed. This suggests that the response to oestrogen in normal 
breast is highly dependent upon epithelial-stromal/myoepithelial interactions
which maintain the tissue microenvironment during epithelial cell proliferation.

PMID: 16728587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Curr Drug Targets. 2006 May;7(5):589-95.

Transcription factors in asthma: are transcription factors a new target for
asthma therapy?

Roth M(1), Black JL.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology, Pulmonary Cell Research, University Hospital Basel, Petersgraben
4, CH-4031 Basel Switzerland.

The essential features of persistent severe asthma include structural changes in 
the airway wall (remodelling). It is not known whether these are the sequelae of 
chronic inflammation or indeed its initiators. Several transcription factors have
been implicated in the inflammatory process in asthma, including the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), NFkappaB, Activator Protein-1 (AP-1), Nuclear
Factor of Activated T-cells (NF-AT), cyclic AMP Response Element Binding Protein 
and more recently, the CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein (C/EBP), Peroxisome
Proliferator-activated Receptor (PPAR) and the bZIP transcription factor, Nrf2.
Could a pathological de-regulation of one of these transcription factors explain 
the broad spectrum of asthma pathology and can their modulation lead to better
symptom control? Although some of the transcription factors seem to be valid
targets (NFkappaB, Nrf2 or STAT6) or tools (PPARgamma, -alpha and C/EBP-alpha)
for new therapeutic approaches, since many transcription factors play a central
role in tissue and organ homeostasis, a longterm general suppression or
overexpression, would cause severe side effects in other organs. Cell type
specific application of decoy or antisense oligonucleotides for NFkappaB, Nrf2 or
STAT6, or specific agonists for PPARgamma and -alpha may help to control the
inflammatory response in lung epithelial cells and infiltrated immune cells, but 
additional, unwanted, effects on other resident cells of the lung cannot be
excluded and a beneficial effect over known anti-asthma drugs has first to be
proven. In order to progress with such novel therapeutic strategies, the only
option seems to be to link transcription factor inhibitors/activators to a cell
type specific delivery system.

PMID: 16719769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Immunity. 2006 May;24(5):611-22.

Crucial role of MLL for the maintenance of memory T helper type 2 cell responses.

Yamashita M(1), Hirahara K, Shinnakasu R, Hosokawa H, Norikane S, Kimura MY,
Hasegawa A, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The Mixed-Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene, a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila
trithorax, is implicated in regulating the maintenance of Hox gene expression and
hematopoiesis. The physiological functions of MLL in the immune system remain
largely unknown. Although MLL(+/-) CD4 T cells differentiate normally into
antigen-specific effector Th1/Th2 cells in vitro, the ability of memory Th2 cells
to produce Th2 cytokines was selectively reduced. Furthermore, histone
modifications at the Th2 cytokine gene loci were not properly maintained in
MLL(+/-) memory Th2 cells. The reduced expression of MLL in memory Th2 cells
resulted in decreased GATA3 expression accompanied with impaired GATA3 locus
histone modifications. The direct association of MLL with the GATA3 locus and the
Th2 cytokine gene loci was demonstrated. Memory Th2 cell-dependent allergic
airway inflammation was decreased in MLL(+/-) Th2 cell-transferred mice. Thus, a 
crucial role for MLL in the maintenance of memory Th2 cell function is indicated.

PMID: 16713978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 16;103(20):7777-82. Epub 2006 May 8.

Simvastatin promotes Th2-type responses through the induction of the chitinase
family member Ym1 in dendritic cells.

Arora M(1), Chen L, Paglia M, Gallagher I, Allen JE, Vyas YM, Ray A, Ray P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Statins, best known for their lipid-lowering actions, also possess
immunomodulatory properties. Recent studies have shown a Th2-biasing effect of
statins, although the underlying mechanism has not been identified. In this
study, we investigated whether simvastatin can exercise a Th2-promoting effect
through modulation of function of dendritic cells (DCs) without direct
interaction with CD4+ T cells. Exposure of DCs to simvastatin induced the
differentiation of a distinct subset of DCs characterized by a high expression of
B220. These simvastatin-conditioned DCs up-regulated GATA-3 expression and
down-regulated T-bet expression in cocultured CD4+ T cells in the absence of
additional simvastatin added to the coculture. The Th2-biased transcription
factor profile induced by simvastatin-treated DCs also was accompanied by
increased Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) and decreased Th1 (IFN-gamma) cytokine
secretion from the T cells. The Th2-promoting effect of simvastatin was found to 
depend on the chitinase family member Ym1, known to be a lectin. Anti-Ym1
antibody abolished the Th2-promoting effect of simvastatin-treated DCs. Also,
simvastatin was unable to augment Ym1 expression in DCs developed from STAT6-/-
or IL-4R alpha-/- mice. Thus, modulation of Ym1 production by DCs identifies a
previously undescribed mechanism of Th2 polarization by statin.

PMCID: PMC1472521
PMID: 16682645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Mar 14;86(10):669-73.

[Profiles of type 1 and type 2 T cells in chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang TT(1), Zhao H, Ren H, Guo JH, Xu MQ, Yang RC, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Tianjin 300020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the profiles of type 1 and type 2 T cells in chronic
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) patients.
METHODS: Samples of peripheral blood were collected from 30 chronic ITP patients,
8 males and 22 females, aged 34, 20 being in the active stage, and 10 in the
remission stage, and 20 healthy persons, 7 males and 13 females, aged 31.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated, cultured, and activated
with PMA/ionomycin. Flow cytometry was used to measure the intracellular
cytokines interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin (IL)-4 in the PBMCs so as to
identify the Th1 cells (IFN-gamma(+) IL-4(+) CD4(+) cells), Th2 cells
(IFN-gamma(-) IL-4(+) CD4(+) cells), Tc1 cells (IFN-gamma+ IL-4(-) CD8(+) cells),
and Tc2 cells (IFN-gamma(-) IL-4(+) CD8(+) cells). The ratios of Th2/Tc2,
Th1/Th2, and Tc1/Tc2 were calculated. Samples of spleen tissue were collected
from 8 patients with chronic ITP, 3 males and 5 females, aged 30, and 6 patients 
with hereditary spherocytosis (HS), 3 males and 3 females, aged 35, who underwent
splenectomy. Splenocytes were isolated, cultured, and activated with
PMA/ionomycin. Real-time PCR was used to detect the mRNA expression of T-bet and 
GATA-3 in the PBMCs and splenocytes.
RESULTS: The Th1/Th2 ratio of the patients in active stage was 25.62,
significantly higher than those of the patients in remission stage (9.86) and the
control (8.29, both P < 0.01), and the Tc1/Tc2 ratio of the patients in active
stage was 30.23, significantly higher than those of the patients in remission
stage (10.10) and the controls (12.58, both P < 0.01). The Th1/Th2 ratio of the
splenocytes of the patients in active stage was 41.46, significantly higher than 
that of the controls (16.30, P < 0.01), and the Tc1/Tc2 ratio of the splenocytes 
of the active ITP patients was 35.80, not significantly higher than that of the
controls (16.30, P = 0.082). The GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the PBMCs of the
active ITP patients was one-fifth of that of the controls (P < 0.05) and the
GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the splenocytes of the ITP patients was 0.34 of
that of the HS patients (P < 0.05), however, there was no difference in the T-bet
expression among the 3 groups. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of the PBMCs of the active 
ITP patients was 5.85 times that of the controls and the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of
the splenocytes of the active ITP patients was 2.68 times that of the controls
(both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: ITP is a T1 cells (Th1 and Tc1) predominant disease. The T-bet/GATA-3
ratio may provide a surrogate marker of T1/T2 cytokine balance. Shifting the
cytokine patterns from T1 to T2 may be a potential immunotherapy for ITP.

PMID: 16681922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2006 Mar;29(3):176-80.

[Imbalanced T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 and
relationship to airway inflammation in asthmatic rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Bian T(1), Yin KS, Jin SX, Meng ZL, Zhou JY, Ma XQ, Hu JJ, De W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the change of the mRNA and protein expression of T-bet and
GATA-3 in lung tissues, and to investigate the association between the imbalanced
T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 and the airway inflammation in
asthmatic rats.
METHODS: Twenty-four male SD rats were randomly divided into a control group and 
an asthmatic group. Airway responsiveness was measured and the change of airway
histology was observed. The concentrations of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were measured
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The mRNA and protein expressions of
IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma, T-bet and GATA-3 in the lungs were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot respectively.
RESULTS: The expiration resistance after injection of acetylcholine chloride (20,
40, 80, 160 microg/ml) in the asthmatic group was (6.26 +/- 0.85), (11.55 +/-
3.09), (28.74 +/- 5.94), (3,710.83 +/- 197.49) cm H2O.ml(-1).s(-1) respectively; 
and that in the control group was (1.51 +/- 0.18), (2.15 +/- 0.36), (6.08 +/-
1.06), (37.17 +/- 6.12) cm H2O.ml(-1).s(-1) respectively; the difference being
significant between the two groups (all P < 0.01). In the asthmatic group, the
numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes, the thicknesses of WA/Pi and ASM/Pi were 
(26.0 +/- 1.6)/mm(2), (45.2 +/- 3.2)/mm(2), 12.0 +/- 1.4, 6.7 +/- 0.6,
respectively; and those of the control group were (2.9 +/- 1.2)/mm(2), (8.8 +/-
1.8)/mm(2), 6.4 +/- 0.8, 2.7 +/- 0.5, respectively; all were significantly
different between the two groups (all P < 0.01). In the asthmatic group, the
concentrations of IL-4, IL-5, and IFN-gamma in BALF were (23.4 +/- 0.7) pg/ml,
(24.8 +/- 0.5) pg/ml, (21.7 +/- 1.1) pg/ml, respectively, and those of the
control group were (9.3 +/- 0.3) pg/ml, (12.5 +/- 0.3) pg/ml, (65.8 +/- 2.1)
pg/ml, respectively; all were significantly different between the two groups (all
P < 0.01). In the control group, the mRNA ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 (0.73 +/-
0.32) was significantly increased compared with the asthmatic group (0.06 +/-
0.09, P < 0.01). There was also a significant difference in the ratio of protein 
expression of T-bet to GATA-3 between the control group (0.75 +/- 0.25) and the
asthmatic group (0.09 +/- 0.04, P < 0.01). The ratio of protein expression of
T-bet and GATA-3 was correlated negatively with expiration resistance (r =
-0.959, -0.919, -0.949, all P < 0.01), the numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes
in lung tissues (r = -0.832, -0.831, all P < 0.01), the thicknesses of WA/Pi and 
ASM/Pi (r = -0.837, -0.863, all P < 0.01) and the concentrations of IL-4, IL-5 in
BALF (r = 0.921, 0.920, all P < 0.01), the mRNA of IL-4, IL-5 in lung tissues (r 
= -0.964, -0.931, all P < 0.01), but positively with the concentrations of
IFN-gamma in BALF and the mRNA of IFN-gamma in lung tissues (r = -0.934, 0.983,
all P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Imbalance of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, a reflection of 
the immune imbalance in asthma, may play a key role in the formation of airway
inflammation in the disease.

PMID: 16677481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Immunol. 2007 Feb;44(5):926-33. Epub 2006 May 2.

p38 MAP kinase drives the expression of mast cell-derived IL-9 via activation of 
the transcription factor GATA-1.

Stassen M(1), Klein M, Becker M, Bopp T, Neudörfl C, Richter C, Heib V,
Klein-Hessling S, Serfling E, Schild H, Schmitt E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
stassenm@uni-mainz.de

Mast cells are able to produce a huge panel of mediators including the Th2-type
cytokine IL-9, which is considered to be a key mediator for the pathogenesis of
allergic asthma, but detailed information on the regulation of IL-9 transcription
in mast cells has been scarce. Herein we provide evidence that the
erythroid/myeloid transcription factor GATA-1, which is not expressed in Th2
cells, is a potent activator of IL-9 expression in murine bone marrow-derived
mast cells (BMMC). Furthermore, in mast cells, but not in Th2 cells, production
of IL-9 is sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase. As transactivation mediated
by GATA-1 is also sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase, and GATA-1 is a
target for p38 MAP kinase-mediated phosphorylation in vitro, we conclude that
both signaling molecules represent a part of a mast cell-specific signaling
network that regulates the expression of IL-9.

PMID: 16650898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Apr 20;119(8):640-8.

Treatment of allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by imiquimod
modulating transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.

Bian T(1), Yin KS, Jin SX, Zhang XL, Zhou JY, Ma XQ, Hu JJ, De W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Imiquimod is an imidazoquinoline, which class of compounds are known 
to have antiviral and antitumoural properties. In recent studies, it was shown
that imiquimod modulates the T helper cell type Th1/Th2 response by inducing the 
production of Th1 cytokines like IFN-gamma, and by inhibiting the Th2 cytokines
like interleukin (IL)-4. Several investigators have shown that T-bet and GATA-3
are master Th1 and Th2 regulatory transcription factors. This study investigated 
whether imiquimod treatment inhibited airway inflammation by modulating
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.
METHODS: Thirty-six male SD rats were randomly divided into a control group, an
asthmatic group, and an imiquimod group, which was exposed to an aerosol of 0.15%
imiquimod. Twenty-four hours after the last ovalbumin (OVA) challenge, airway
responsiveness was measured and changes in airway histology were observed. The
concentrations of IL-4, IL-5 and IFN-gamma in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
and serum were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The mRNA
expressions of IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma, T-bet and GATA-3 in lung and in CD4(+) T
cells were determined by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The protein expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 were measured by Western
blot.
RESULTS: It was demonstrated that imiquimod 1) attenuated OVA induced airway
inflammation; 2) diminished the degree of airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR); 3)
decreased the Th2 type cytokines and increased Th1 type cytokines mRNA and
protein levels; 4) modulated the Th1/Th2 reaction by inhibiting GATA-3 production
and increasing T-bet production.
CONCLUSION: Imiquimod treatment inhibits OVA induced airway inflammation by
modulating key master switches GATA-3 and T-bet that result in committing T
helper cells to a Th1 phenotype.

PMID: 16635408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2006 May;27(5):561-7.

Antisense oligonucleotides-induced local blockade of T-bet expression leads to
airway inflammation in rats.

Wang G(1), Liu CT, Wang ZL, Jiang LL, Yan CL, Luo FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

AIM: To explore whether local blockade of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
expression in the lungs could lead to airway inflammation.
METHODS: Twenty-four rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: saline group,
ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized group, nonsense group, and the antisense group. The
OVA-sensitized rats were sensitized and challenged with OVA, and the rats in the 
nonsense and antisense groups were subjected to an aerosol delivery of the
nonsense and antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ODN) of T-bet (0.1%, w/v). The levels
of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4), and IL-5 in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were detected by ELISA, and the mRNA and the 
protein expression of T-bet and GATA-3 genes were examined by in situ
hybridization and Western blot analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of T-bet mRNA and protein in the lungs of the rats in the
antisense group were inhibited effectively. The lungs of the rats in the
antisense and OVA-sensitized groups showed eosinophil and lymphocyte inflammatory
infiltration, and eosinophilia located predominantly around the airways. The
number of GATA-3 mRNA-positive cells and the level of GATA-3 protein in the lungs
of the rats in the antisense and the OVA-sensitized groups significantly
increased. The level of IL-4 and IL-5 in the BALF in the antisense and
OVA-sensitized groups were elevated, but the level of IFN-gamma decreased
markedly.
CONCLUSION: Antisense ODN-induced local blockade of T-bet expression leads to
airway inflammation with a selective alteration in patterns of cytokine
expression and recruitment of eosinophil cells similar to that in the
OVA-sensitized animals.

PMID: 16626511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Scand J Immunol. 2006 Apr;63(4):304-10.

High-altitude climate therapy reduces local airway inflammation and modulates
lymphocyte activation.

Karagiannidis C(1), Hense G, Rueckert B, Mantel PY, Ichters B, Blaser K, Menz G, 
Schmidt-Weber CB.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, SIAF, Davos Platz,
Switzerland.

High-altitude climate therapy is a well-established therapeutic option, which
improves clinical symptoms in asthma. However, little is known about the
underlying immunological mechanisms. The study investigates the influence of
high-altitude climate therapy on airway inflammation and cellular components of
specific and unspecific immune response. Exhaled NO significantly decreased
within 3 weeks of therapy in patients with allergic and intrinsic, moderate and
severe asthma. Interleukin-10 (IL-10)-secreting peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) increased within 3 weeks of therapy in six of 11 patients, whereas
transforming growth factor-beta(1)-secreting PBMC remained stable. Furthermore,
monocyte activation, assessed by CD80 expression significantly decreased during
therapy. The frequency of CRTH2-expressing T cells decreased, while regulatory T 
cells (T(reg)) remained stable. FOXP3 and GATA-3 mRNA expression in CD4(+) T
cells did not change, while interferon-gamma and IL-13 mRNA expression decreased 
in eight of 10 patients. The current data demonstrate that high-altitude climate 
therapy reduces local airway inflammation. Furthermore, monocytes switch towards 
a tolerogenic phenotype under high-altitude climate therapy. The T(reg)/Th2 ratio
increases; however, because of the absence of antigens/allergens, no de novo
differentiation of Th2 nor T(reg) cells is observed. The high-altitude climate
therapy therefore may form the immunological basis for the endogenous control of 
allergen-driven diseases.

PMID: 16623931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Infect Immun. 2006 May;74(5):2787-802.

Influence of Slc11a1 on the outcome of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis
infection in mice is associated with Th polarization.

Caron J(1), Larivière L, Nacache M, Tam M, Stevenson MM, McKerly C, Gros P, Malo 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H3G 1A4.

Genetic analyses identified Ses1 as a significant quantitative trait locus
influencing the carrier state of 129S6 mice following a sublethal challenge with 
Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. Previous studies have determined that
Slc11a1 was an excellent candidate gene for Ses1. Kinetics of infection in 129S6 
mice and Slc11a1-deficient (129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)) mice demonstrated that the
wild-type allele of Slc11a1 contributed to the S. enterica serovar Enteritidis
carrier state as early as 7 days postinfection. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that 129S6 mice had a significant up-regulation of proinflammatory
genes associated with macrophage activation at day 10 postinfection, followed by 
a gradual increase in immunoglobulin transcripts, whereas 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)
mice had higher levels of immunoglobulins earlier in the infection. Quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR revealed an increase in Th1 cytokine (Ifng and Il12)
and Th1-specific transcription factor Tbx21 expression during infection in both
the 129S6 and 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) strains. However, the expression of Gata3, a 
transcription factor involved in Th2 polarization, Cd28, and Il4 was markedly
increased in Slc11a1-deficient mice during infection, suggesting a predominant
Th2 phenotype in 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) animals following S. enterica serovar
Enteritidis infection. A strong immunoglobulin G2a response, reflecting Th1
activity, was observed only in 129S6 mice. All together, these results are
consistent with an impact of Slc11a1 on Th cell differentiation during chronic S.
enterica serovar Enteritidis infection. The presence of a Th2 bias in
Slc11a1-deficient mice is associated with improved bacterial clearance.

PMCID: PMC1459719
PMID: 16622216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jul 15;174(2):142-51. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 regulate development of airway remodeling.

Kiwamoto T(1), Ishii Y, Morishima Y, Yoh K, Maeda A, Ishizaki K, Iizuka T, Hegab 
AE, Matsuno Y, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Takahashi S, Sekizawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan.

RATIONALE: Airway remodeling is an important feature of chronic asthma that
causes irreversible airflow obstruction. Although asthma is considered to be a
Th2 disease, the role of T-bet and GATA-3, the key transcription factors for
differentiation toward Th1 and Th2 cells, in the pathogenesis of airway
remodeling is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: We therefore examined the effects of GATA-3 or T-bet induction of
Th1/Th2 bias on the development of airway remodeling in mice.
METHODS: The development of airway remodeling after repeated allergen challenges 
was analyzed using transgenic mice overexpressing either GATA-3 or T-bet.
MAIN RESULTS: The degrees of subepithelial fibrosis and airway smooth muscle
hyperplasia after repeated allergen exposure were significantly enhanced in mice 
overexpressing GATA-3, compared with wild-type mice. Allergen-induced goblet cell
hyperplasia and mucus hypersecretion were significantly lower in mice
overexpressing T-bet than in wild-type mice. Eosinophilic airway inflammation
increased in mice overexpressing GATA-3, but decreased in mice overexpressing
T-bet after repeated allergen exposure. Cytokine analysis revealed that the
Th1/Th2 cytokine balance shifted to Th2 in lung homogenates and lung T cells of
mice overexpressing GATA-3, whereas this balance shifted to Th1 in those of mice 
overexpressing T-bet after allergen exposure. Lung transforming growth
factor-beta and eotaxin levels were associated with the degree of subepithelial
fibrosis and eosinophilic airway inflammation, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the results indicate that development of airway remodeling 
is regulated by the lung Th1/Th2 bias induced by GATA-3 and T-bet.

PMID: 16614350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 May;5(5):511-7. Epub 2006 May 13.

Nicotinic receptors mediate tumorigenic action of tobacco-derived nitrosamines on
immortalized oral epithelial cells.

Arredondo J(1), Chernyavsky AI, Grando SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California at Davis, Davis,
California, USA.

Frequent users of smokeless tobacco (ST) have an increased risk for developing
oral cancer. Nicotine and its derivatives may contribute to tumorigenesis through
stimulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in target cells.
Emerging evidence indicates that nAChRs can be stimulated by the nicotine-derived
nitrosamines 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and
N'-nitrosonornicotine (NNN) that can induce oral cavity tumors in laboratory
animals. This study was designed to elucidate the receptor-mediated mechanisms of
the initiation and progression of NNK-, and NNN-induced oral cancers. We used
Het-1A cells that were found to express alpha3, alpha5, alpha7, alpha9, beta2 and
beta4 nAChR subunits. Both NNK and NNN competed with nicotinic radioligands for
binding to Het-1A cells. NNK showed a higher than NNN affinity to the
[3H]nicotine-labeled binding sites, and NNN-to the [3H]epibatidine-sensitive
nAChRs. NNK and NNN increased proliferative potential of Het-1A cells and
produced an anti-apoptotic effect, which was alleviated by antagonists.
alpha-Bungarotoxin was most effective against NNK and mecamylamine against NNN.
Treatment of Het-1A cells with either NNK or NNN led to acquisition of capability
of anchorage independent growth and ability to produce tumors in nude mice, both 
of which can be by inhibited by antagonists. To elucidate the signaling
mechanisms, we studied transcription of the genes encoding the cell cycle,
apoptosis and signal transduction regulators at both the mRNA and protein levels.
The Het-1A cells stimulated with nitrosamines showed multifold increases of the
mRNA transcripts encoding PCNA and Bcl-2, and upregulated expression of the
transcription factors GATA3, nuclear factor-kappaB, and STAT-1. The STAT-1
protein-binding activity induced by NNK and NNN correlated with elevated gene
expression. The obtained results establish the role of specific nAChR subtypes in
tobacco-related carcinogenesis and open a novel avenue for oral cancer
chemoprevention.

PMID: 16582591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):301-8. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Primary unexplained infertility is associated with reduced expression of the
T-regulatory cell transcription factor Foxp3 in endometrial tissue.

Jasper MJ(1), Tremellen KP, Robertson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

A receptive endometrial environment requires adequate immunological tolerance to 
protect the implanting embryo from maternal immune rejection. Studies in mice
implicate CD4+CD25+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells as essential mediators of immune
tolerance in pregnancy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the link between
Treg cells and fertility in women. Expression of Foxp3, a master regulator of
Treg cell differentiation, was quantified in endometrial tissue from women
experiencing primary unexplained infertility and normal fertile women.
Endometrial biopsies were collected during the mid-secretory phase of the
menstrual cycle from women meeting rigorously defined criteria for unexplained
infertility after experiencing repeated failed cycles of IVF treatment
(infertile, n = 10), or women classified as proven fertile (control, n = 12).
Expression of Foxp3 mRNA was reduced approximately two-fold in the tissue of
infertile women. In contrast, mRNAs encoding T cell transcription factors T-bet
and GATA3, associated with differentiation of Th1 and Th2 CD4+ T cells
respectively, were unchanged. Treg cell differentiation is controlled by TGFbeta,
but the relative abundance in endometrial tissue of TGFbeta1, TGFbeta2, TGFbeta3 
mRNAs was not changed in infertile women. Cytokines influencing Th1 and Th2 cell 
differentiation, including IFNgamma, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-12p40, as
well as dendritic cell-regulating cytokines IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, LIF,
GM-CSF and TNFalpha were also expressed similarly regardless of fertility status.
The finding of reduced endometrial Foxp3 implicates impaired differentiation of
uterine T cells into the Treg phenotype as a key determinant of fertility in
women. The factors underpinning this aberration in the immune response remain to 
be identified.

PMID: 16574699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Eur J Immunol. 2006 May;36(5):1241-53.

The key regulators of adult T helper cell responses, STAT6 and T-bet, are
established in early life in mice.

Rose S(1), Guevara P, Farach S, Adkins B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine at the
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Murine neonatal immunity is typically Th2 biased. This is characterized by
high-level IL-4 production at all phases of the immune response and poor
IFN-gamma memory responses. The differential expression of Th1/Th2 cytokines by
neonates and adults could arise if the critical regulators of Th differentiation 
and function, STAT6 and T-bet, operate differently during the neonatal period. To
test this idea, the Th cell responses of wild-type, T-bet-deficient, or
STAT6-deficient mice were compared in vitro and in vivo. The absence of these
factors had similar qualitative effects on the development of effector function
in neonates and adults, i.e., if a Th lineage was inhibited or enhanced in adult 
animals, a similar phenomenon was observed in neonates. However, there was a
striking difference observed in the in vivo Th1 memory responses of
STAT6-deficient mice initially immunized as neonates. Antigen-specific IFN-gamma 
production was increased 50-100-fold in STAT6-deficient neonates, achieving
levels similar to those of STAT6-deficient adults. These findings demonstrate
that STAT6 and T-bet signals are central in shaping Th responses in wild-type
neonates, as in adult mice, and that the master regulators of Th cell development
and function are already firmly established in early life.

PMCID: PMC2112774
PMID: 16568497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2006 Apr 1;176(7):3895-9.

Cutting edge: Itk-dependent signals required for CD4+ T cells to exert, but not
gain, Th2 effector function.

Au-Yeung BB(1), Katzman SD, Fowell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The TCR signals for the release of CD4 effector function are poorly understood.
Itk plays an essential role in Th2, but not Th1, responses. However, when Itk is 
required during Th2 development is unclear. We followed the fate of Itk-deficient
T cells during Th2 development in vitro and in vivo using an IL-4/GFP reporter.
Surprisingly, a similar frequency of itk(-/-) CD4(+) cells differentiated and
committed to the Th2 lineage as wild-type cells. However, Itk-deficient Th2 cells
failed to exert effector function upon TCR triggering. Loss of function was
marked by defective transcriptional enhancement of Th2 cytokines and GATA3. IL-4 
production in itk(-/-) Th2s could be rescued by the expression of kinase-active
Itk. Thus, Itk is necessary for the release, but not gain, of Th2 function. We
suggest that the liberation of effector function is tightly controlled through
qualitative changes in TCR signals, facilitating postdifferentiation regulation
of cytokine responses.

PMID: 16547221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;20(6):1366-77. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Pituitary-specific Gata2 knockout: effects on gonadotrope and thyrotrope
function.

Charles MA(1), Saunders TL, Wood WM, Owens K, Parlow AF, Camper SA, Ridgway EC,
Gordon DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0618, USA.

GATA2 is expressed in the pituitary during development and in adult gonadotropes 
and thyrotropes. It is proposed to be important for gonadotrope and thyrotrope
cell fate choice and for TSH production. To test this idea, we produced a
pituitary-specific knockout of Gata2, designed so that the DNA-binding
zinc-finger region is deleted in the presence of a pituitary-specific recombinase
transgene. These mice have reduced secretion of gonadotropins basally and in
response to castration challenge, although the mice are fertile. GATA2 deficiency
also compromises thyrotrope function. Mutants have fewer thyrotrope cells at
birth, male Gata2-deficient mice exhibit growth delay from 3-9 wk of age, and
adult mutants produce less TSH in response to severe hypothyroidism after
radiothyroidectomy. Therefore, Gata2 appears to be dispensable for gonadotrope
and thyrotrope cell fate and maintenance, but important for optimal gonadotrope
and thyrotrope function. Gata2-deficient mice exhibit elevated levels of Gata3
transcripts in the pituitary gland, suggesting that GATA3 can compensate for
GATA2.

PMID: 16543408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):755-66. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather
than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription.

Usui T(1), Preiss JC, Kanno Y, Yao ZJ, Bream JH, O'Shea JJ, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2006 Apr 17;203(4):1129.

T helper type 1 (Th1) development is facilitated by interrelated changes in key
intracellular factors, particularly signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)4, T-bet, and GATA-3. Here we show that CD4+ cells from
T-bet-/- mice are skewed toward Th2 differentiation by high endogenous GATA-3
levels but exhibit virtually normal Th1 differentiation provided that GATA-3
levels are regulated at an early stage by anti-interleukin (IL)-4 blockade of
IL-4 receptor (R) signaling. In addition, under these conditions, Th1 cells from 
T-bet-/- mice manifest IFNG promotor accessibility as detected by histone
acetylation and deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity. In related studies, we show
that the negative effect of GATA-3 on Th1 differentiation in T-bet-/- cells
arises from its ability to suppress STAT4 levels, because if this is prevented by
a STAT4-expressing retrovirus, normal Th1 differentiation is observed. Finally,
we show that retroviral T-bet expression in developing and established Th2 cells 
leads to down-regulation of GATA-3 levels. These findings lead to a model of T
cell differentiation that holds that naive T cells tend toward Th2
differentiation through induction of GATA-3 and subsequent down-regulation of
STAT4/IL-12Rbeta2 chain unless GATA-3 levels or function is regulated by T-bet.
Thus, the principal function of T-bet in developing Th1 cells is to negatively
regulate GATA-3 rather than to positively regulate the IFNG gene.

PMCID: PMC2118252
PMID: 16520391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3470-9.

GATA-3 directly remodels the IL-10 locus independently of IL-4 in CD4+ T cells.

Shoemaker J(1), Saraiva M, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

IL-10 is a major regulator in inflammatory responses. Although various
transcription factors were defined to enhance IL-10, the molecular mechanism for 
the initiation of Il-10 transcription, remains unknown. mRNA profiling of six
distinct primary CD4+ T cell populations showed differential expression of the
transcription factor GATA-3 correlated with levels of IL-10 expression. We showed
that ectopic expression of GATA-3 in naive primary CD4+ T cells enhanced
expression of IL-10 by these cells and uncovered a possible mechanism for this
effect. We found that GATA-3 induced changes of the chromatin structure at the
Il-10 locus and that these changes occur even in the absence of IL-4. Furthermore
we found that in the presence of GATA-3 the histones at the Il-10 locus become
acetylated. Despite being recruited in vivo to two locations on the Il-10 locus, 
GATA-3 did not transactivate the IL-10 promoter. We therefore suggest a key role 
of GATA-3 in instructing Il-10 gene expression in primary CD4+ T cells, possibly 
by switching and stabilizing the Il-10 locus into a transcriptionally competent
status.

PMID: 16517715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jan;19(1):87-92.

A novel mutation in the GATA3 gene in a family with HDR syndrome
(Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural Deafness and Renal anomaly syndrome).

Adachi M(1), Tachibana K, Asakura Y, Tsuchiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Clinical Research Institute,
Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. madachi@mars.sannet.ne.jp

We report here on a girl and her father with HDR syndrome (Hypoparathyroidism,
sensorineural Deafness and Renal anomaly syndrome). The proband, an 11 year-old
girl, complained of periodic tetany lasting for 6 years, and also used a hearing 
aid because of sensorineural hearing impairment. Furthermore, she had
hemimegalencephaly, and had been taking an anti-epileptic agent to treat
psychomotor seizures for 6 years. Endocrine assessment showed modest
hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia and hypophosphaturia with lower normal
parathyroid hormone concentration, and she had no renal abnormalities. Her
father, who was 40 years old at the time of the investigation, had sensorineural 
hearing impairment, a lower than normal calcium level and normal renal function. 
Direct sequencing after PCR amplification of genomic DNA revealed a novel
insertional mutation (405insC) in the GATA3 gene of both patients. This mutation 
was hypothesized to disrupt dual zinc fingers as well as one transactivating
domain. The present findings lend additional support to the notion that the
phenotype cannot be precisely estimated from the genotype in HDR syndrome.

PMID: 16509533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Apr 10;24(11):1656-64. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Estrogen-regulated genes predict survival in hormone receptor-positive breast
cancers.

Oh DS(1), Troester MA, Usary J, Hu Z, He X, Fan C, Wu J, Carey LA, Perou CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2006 Apr 10;24(11):1649-50.

PURPOSE: The prognosis of a patient with estrogen receptor (ER) and/or
progesterone receptor (PR) -positive breast cancer can be highly variable.
Therefore, we developed a gene expression-based outcome predictor for ER+ and/or 
PR+ (ie, luminal) breast cancer patients using biologic differences among these
tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The ER+ MCF-7 breast cancer cell line was treated with
17beta-estradiol to identify estrogen-regulated genes. These genes were used to
develop an outcome predictor on a training set of 65 luminal epithelial primary
breast carcinomas. The outcome predictor was then validated on three independent 
published data sets. Results The estrogen-induced gene set identified in MCF-7
cells was used to hierarchically cluster a 65 tumor training set into two groups,
which showed significant differences in survival (P = .0004). Supervised analyses
identified 822 genes that optimally defined these two groups, with the
poor-prognosis group IIE showing high expression of cell proliferation and
antiapoptosis genes. The good prognosis group IE showed high expression of
estrogen- and GATA3-regulated genes. Mean expression profiles (ie, centroids)
created for each group were applied to ER+ and/or PR+ tumors from three published
data sets. For all data sets, Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed significant
differences in relapse-free and overall survival between group IE and IIE tumors.
Multivariate Cox analysis of the largest test data set showed that this predictor
added significant prognostic information independent of standard clinical
predictors and other gene expression-based predictors.
CONCLUSION: This study provides new biologic information concerning differences
within hormone receptor-positive breast cancers and a means of predicting
long-term outcomes in tamoxifen-treated patients.

PMID: 16505416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2006;139(4):306-16. Epub 2006 Feb 22.

Regulation of GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet mRNA expression in bronchoalveolar lavage
cells and bronchial biopsies after segmental allergen challenge.

Erpenbeck VJ(1), Hagenberg A, Krentel H, Discher M, Braun A, Hohlfeld JM, Krug N.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover,
Germany. erpenbeck@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: GATA-3 (GATA binding protein 3) and the proto-oncogene c-maf are
Th2-regulating transcription factors that control the expression of interleukin
(IL)-4 and IL-5, while T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) is a Th1-specific
transcription factor that controls the expression of interferon (IFN-gamma).
Allergen provocation in asthmatics induces a Th2-dominated cytokine profile, but 
so far it is unknown whether the skewed cytokine expression is reflected by the
expression of the respective transcriptional regulators.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the regulation of Th1- and
Th2-specific transcription factors and cytokines in 10 atopic subjects with mild 
asthma and 5 nonatopic healthy controls at baseline and after segmental sham and 
allergen challenge.
METHODS: The mRNA expression of GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet was determined by
real-time polymerase chain reaction in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and
bronchial biopsies. The percentage of IL-4+, IL-5+ and IFN-gamma+ BAL T cells was
determined by flow cytometry, and BAL levels of these cytokines were measured by 
ELISA.
RESULTS: In BAL cells of asthmatics, the mRNA expression of all transcription
factors was increased after allergen challenge. In bronchial biopsies, the basal 
expression of GATA-3 was increased in asthmatics compared to healthy controls but
decreased after allergen challenge. Compared to sham challenge, the percentage of
IL-5+/CD4+ BAL T cells was increased after allergen challenge in asthmatics while
the percentage of IFN-gamma+/CD4+ and IFN-gamma+/CD8+ T cells was decreased.
Expression of c-maf mRNA in BAL cells correlated with IL-4+/CD4+ BAL cells and
BAL IL-5 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Segmental allergen challenge in asthmatics leads to increased
GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet expression in BAL cells but not in bronchial biopsies.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16498264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 1;176(5):3248-56.

Regulatory networks induced by live parasites impair both Th1 and Th2 pathways in
patent lymphatic filariasis: implications for parasite persistence.

Babu S(1), Blauvelt CP, Kumaraswami V, Nutman TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
sbabu@niaid.nih.gov

Patent lymphatic filariasis is characterized by a profound down-regulation of
immune responses with both parasite Ag-specific tolerance and bystander
suppression. Although this down-regulation is confined to the Th1 arm of the
immune system in response to parasite Ag, we hypothesized a more generalized
suppression in response to live parasites. Indeed, when we examined the cytokine 
profile of a cohort of filaria-infected (n = 10) and uninfected (n = 10)
individuals in response to live infective-stage larvae or microfilariae of Brugia
malayi, we found significant impairment of both Th1 and Th2 cytokines
characterized by diminished production of IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-4, IL-5, and
IL-10 in infected patients. The molecular basis of this impaired Th1/Th2 response
was examined, and we identified three major networks of immunoregulation and
tolerance. First, impaired induction of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA underlies the
Th1/Th2 deficiency in infected individuals. Second, regulatory networks, as
evidenced by significantly increased expression of Foxp3 (natural regulatory T
cell marker) and regulatory effectors such as TGF-beta, CTLA-4, PD-1, ICOS, and
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase play an important role in immunosuppression. Third,
the compromise of effector T cell function is mediated by the enhanced induction 
of anergy-inducing factors cbl-b, c-cbl (cbl is abbreviation for Casitas B
lymphoma), Itch, and Nedd4. Indeed, blocking CTLA-4 or neutralizing TGF-beta
restored the ability to mount Th1/Th2 responses to live parasites and reversed
the induction of anergy-inducing factors. Hence, we conclude that a profound
impairment of live parasite-specific Th1 and Th2 immune responses occurs in
lymphatic filariasis that is governed at the transcriptional level by a complex
interplay of inhibitory mediators.

PMID: 16493086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):L1045-51. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Involvement of GATA-3-dependent Th2 lymphocyte activation in airway
hyperresponsiveness.

Yamashita N(1), Tashimo H, Ishida H, Matsuo Y, Tamauchi H, Terashima M, Yoshiwara
I, Habu S, Ohta K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Musashino University, 1-1-20
Shinmachi Nishitokyo-shi, Tokyo 202-8585, Japan. naoyama@musashino-u.ac.jp

The pathophysiological characteristics of bronchial asthma consist of chronic
inflammation of airways, airway hyperresponsiveness, and bronchoconstriction.
Studies have shown that T helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines produced by both T cells 
and mast cells in the airway contribute substantially to the initiation of
inflammation in both experimental and human bronchial asthma. GATA-3 is a
transcription factor essential to the production of Th2 cytokines by T
lymphocytes. To clarify the role of GATA-3-expressing T cells in the
pathophysiology of bronchial asthma, we utilized transgenic (Tg) mice carrying
the GATA-3 gene and the ovalbumin (OVA)-specific T cell receptor gene
(GATA-3-Tg/OVA-Tg). Mice were intranasally administrated OVA without systemic
immunization. Airway responses were analyzed with noninvasive and invasive whole 
body plethysmographs. GATA-3-Tg/OVA-Tg mice exhibited significantly higher IL-13 
and IL-4 protein expression in the airway. Although there were no differences in 
the types of infiltrating cells between GATA-3-Tg/OVA-Tg and GATA-3-non-Tg/OVA-Tg
mice and no significant increase in IgE level in either group compared with
nontreated mice, the response after ACh inhalation was significantly elevated in 
GATA-3-Tg/OVA-Tg on the seventh day of intranasal treatment with OVA. This
hyperresponsiveness was inhibited by 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor and IL-13
neutralization, suggesting that airway responses were induced through IL-13 and
leukotriene pathway. In conclusion, airway hyperresponsiveness, a characteristic 
of bronchial asthma, is regulated at the level of GATA-3 transcription by T
lymphocytes in vivo.

PMID: 16489117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Immunology. 2006 Mar;117(3):358-67.

Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 inhibits GATA-3 but not T-bet mRNA expression
during T helper cell differentiation.

Nasta F(1), Ubaldi V, Pace L, Doria G, Pioli C.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, Unit of Biotechnology, Section of Toxicology and Biomedicine, Rome,
Italy.

Naive CD4+ T-cell differentiation to T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells is dependent 
on T-bet and GATA-3 factors, respectively. T-bet and GATA-3, indeed, through
chromatin remodelling allow transcriptional activation of Ifngamma and Th2
cytokine (Il4, Il5, Il13) genes, respectively. We investigated the effects of the
negative costimulatory receptor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) on
GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA expression and Th cell differentiation in mouse naive CD4+ 
T cells. Our results show that CTLA-4 inhibits GATA-3 mRNA expression and Th2
cell differentiation. At variance, CTLA-4 does not affect T-bet mRNA expression
and Th1 cell differentiation. GATA-3 mRNA expression is inhibited when CD4+ cells
are stimulated under both neutral (i.e. absence of cytokines) and Th2-polarizing 
(i.e. presence of interleukin (IL)-4) conditions, the effect being larger under
the latter condition. Hence CTLA-4 might affect the IL-4/signal transducer and
activator of transcription-6 (STAT6) pathway leading to GATA-3 mRNA
up-regulation. We found, indeed, that CTLA-4 engagement inhibits STAT6 activation
leaving unaffected the STAT6 protein level. Moreover, CTLA-4 engagement
drastically inhibits IL-4Ralpha mRNA and protein up-regulation under
Th2-polarizing conditions. Thus, CTLA-4 exerts a tight control on Th2 cell
differentiation by negatively regulating both the CD3/CD28 and the IL-4/STAT6
pathways.

PMCID: PMC1782225
PMID: 16476055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Res. 2006 Jan;16(1):3-10.

GATA-3 promotes Th2 responses through three different mechanisms: induction of
Th2 cytokine production, selective growth of Th2 cells and inhibition of Th1
cell-specific factors.

Zhu J(1), Yamane H, Cote-Sierra J, Guo L, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Naïve CD4 T cells can differentiate into at least two different types of T
helpers, Th1 and Th2 cells. Th2 cells, capable of producing IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13,
are involved in humoral immunity against extracellular pathogens and in the
induction of asthma and other allergic diseases. In this review, we summarize
recent reports regarding the transcription factors involved in Th2
differentiation and cell expansion, including Stat5, Gfi-1 and GATA-3. Stat5
activation is necessary and sufficient for IL-2-mediated function in Th2
differentiation. Enhanced Stat5 signaling induces Th2 differentiation independent
of IL-4 signaling; although it does not up-regulate GATA-3 expression, it does
require the presence of GATA-3 for its action. Gfi-1, induced by IL-4, promotes
the expansion of GATA-3-expressing cells. Analysis of conditional Gata3 knockout 
mice confirmed the critical role of GATA-3 in Th2 cell differentiation (both IL-4
dependent and IL-4 independent) and in Th2 cell proliferation and also showed the
importance of basal GATA-3 expression in inhibiting Th1 differentiation.

PMID: 16467870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Aug;45(8):951-7. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Imbalance of Th1/Th2 transcription factors in patients with lupus nephritis.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by the aberrant
activation of T lymphocytes. Since T-bet and GATA-3 are the principal
transcription factors for the differentiation of type-1 and type-2 helper T
lymphocytes, respectively, we studied their mRNA expression in the urinary
sediment of SLE patients and compared this with their urinary and intra-renal
protein expression.
METHODS: We studied 100 SLE patients and 10 healthy subjects. Urinary mRNA
expression of T-bet and GATA-3 were studied by the real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. Intra-renal and urinary expressions of T-bet and
GATA-3 were studied by immunohistochemistry and western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: The urinary mRNA and protein expressions of T-bet were significantly
higher in SLE patients with active nephritis than those with inactive disease
(mRNA: P < 0.001; protein: P = 0.004). The urinary mRNA expression of T-bet
correlated with the SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score (r = 0.55, P <
0.001) and the histological activity index (r = 0.48, P = 0.03). On the other
hand, the urinary mRNA and protein expressions of GATA-3 were significantly lower
in SLE patients with active nephritis (mRNA: P < 0.001; protein: P = 0.006), and 
GATA-3 mRNA expression inversely correlated with the SLEDAI score (r = 0.38, P < 
0.001). For the 22 SLE patients with kidney biopsy, tubular expressions of T-bet 
and GATA-3 significantly correlated with the histological activity index (T-bet: 
r = 0.57, P = 0.006; GATA-3: r = -0.79, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with active lupus nephritis have increased T-bet and
depressed GATA-3 expression in the urinary sediment and kidney tissue, indicating
a predominant Th1 type of T-lymphocyte activation.

PMID: 16461436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Immunol. 2006 Feb 15;176(4):2546-54.

Impaired GATA3-dependent chromatin remodeling and Th2 cell differentiation
leading to attenuated allergic airway inflammation in aging mice.

Hasegawa A(1), Miki T, Hosokawa H, Hossain MB, Shimizu C, Hashimoto K, Kimura MY,
Yamashita M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan.

Age-related changes in lymphocytes are most prominent in the T cell compartment. 
There have been substantial numbers of reports on T cell function in aged mice
and humans, such as on the production of Th1 and Th2 cytokines, but the results
show considerable variation and contradictions. In the present study, we used 8- 
to 12-mo-old aging mice and a well-established in vitro Th1/Th2 cell
differentiation culture system to identify molecular defects in Th1/Th2 cell
differentiation that can be detected in the relatively early stages of aging. The
capability to differentiate into Th2 cells is reduced in aging mouse CD4(+) T
cells. Decreased activation of the ERK MAPK cascade upon TCR stimulation, but
normal intracellular-free calcium ion concentration mobilization and normal
IL-4-induced STAT6 activation were observed in aging mouse CD4(+) T cells. In
addition, reduced expression of GATA3 was detected in developing Th2 cells.
Chromatin remodeling of the Th2 cytokine gene locus was found to be impaired.
Th2-dependent allergic airway inflammation was milder in aging mice compared with
in young adult mice. These results suggest that the levels of Th2 cell
differentiation and resulting Th2-dependent immune responses, including allergic 
airway inflammation, decline during aging through defects in the activation of
the ERK MAPK cascade, expression of GATA3 protein and GATA3-dependent chromatin
remodeling of the Th2 cytokine gene locus. In the present study, we provide the
first evidence indicating that a chromatin-remodeling event in T cells is
impaired by aging.

PMID: 16456016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1384-90.

GATA5 activation of the progesterone receptor gene promoter in breast cancer
cells is influenced by the +331G/A polymorphism.

Huggins GS(1), Wong JY, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA.

Previously, a modest association was observed between the progesterone receptor
+331G/A gene variant and breast cancer risk. Here, in a larger sample of breast
cancer cases and controls (n = 1,322/n = 1,953) nested in the Nurses' Health
Study cohort, we confirm a significant association (odds ratio, 1.41; 95%
confidence interval, 1.10-1.79) and suggest a molecular model. The association of
the +331G/A variant with breast cancer was particularly strong among obese women 
(body mass index > 30; odds ratio, 2.87; 95% confidence interval, 1.40-5.90). To 
help understand the molecular mechanism by which this variant may predispose
women to breast cancer, we identified nearby transcription factor binding sites. 
This search predicted a binding site for the GATA family of transcriptional
regulators adjacent to this hPR polymorphism. Importantly, we found GATA3, GATA4,
and GATA6 are expressed in normal breast tissue and two breast cancer cell lines,
whereas GATA5 is minimally expressed in normal mammary tissue and more strongly
expressed in two breast cancer cell lines. This finding was relevant because
GATA5 bound the site adjacent to the +331G/A polymorphism, and activated the hPR 
(-711 to +822)-luciferase reporter plasmid in breast cancer cells. Overexpression
of GATA5 increased expression of the endogenous hPR transcript, and GATA5 more
strongly activated an hPR promoter construct encoding the PR-B isoform. Finally, 
hPR promoter constructs including the +331A were more strongly activated by GATA5
than constructs including +331G. Our findings suggest that GATA5 interacts with
the +331G/A polymorphism to stimulate hPR-B expression in mammary cells, which
may contribute to breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16452193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Apr;69(4):1486-91. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Cannabinoid receptor type 2 agonists induce transcription of the mu-opioid
receptor gene in Jurkat T cells.

Börner C(1), Höllt V, Kraus J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Magdeburg, 44
Leipziger Strasse, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany.

Opioids and cannabinoids are both associated with analgetic, psychotropic, and
immunomodulatory effects. It has been suggested that both systems interact on
multiple levels. We hypothesized that cannabinoids induce opioid receptors and
investigated cannabinoid-dependent expression of the mu-opioid receptor subtype
in a human T cell model. We report that activation of the peripheral cannabinoid 
receptor type 2 leads to a de novo induction of mu-opioid receptor transcription 
in Jurkat E6.1 cells. We show that interleukin-4 is transcriptionally induced in 
response to cannabinoids and that an interleukin-4 receptor antagonist blocks
cannabinoid-dependent induction of mu-opioid receptors, indicating that induced
expression of interleukin-4 is required in this process. Induction of
interleukin-4 is blocked by decoy oligonucleotides directed against STAT5,
indicating the requirement of this transcription factor. In addition, we show
cannabinoid-dependent phosphorylation of STAT5. Further experiments demonstrate
that interleukin-4 then induces phosphorylation of STAT6, which directly
transactivates the mu-opioid receptor gene. In addition, STAT6 induces expression
of the transcription factor GATA3, which also contributes to mu-opioid receptor
gene transcription. The responsive promoter region of the human mu-opioid
receptor gene with the binding sites for both factors was mapped to nt -1001 to
-950. To demonstrate functional mu-opioid receptor proteins, morphine-mediated
phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase was investigated. We show
that phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase occurs only in
cannabinoid-prestimulated Jurkat E6.1 cells and that it is blocked by the
mu-opioid receptor antagonist D-Phe-Cys-Tyr-D-Trp-Orn-Thr-Pen-Thr-NH2. In
summary, these findings provide a first example for
cannabinoid-opioid-interactions in cells of the immune system.

PMID: 16434616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Vaccine. 2006 Apr 5;24(15):2917-27. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Mouse model of respiratory Chlamydia pneumoniae infection for a genomic screen of
subunit vaccine candidates.

Li D(1), Borovkov A, Vaglenov A, Wang C, Kim T, Gao D, Sykes KF, Kaltenboeck B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University,
270 Greene Hall, Auburn, AL 36849-5519, USA.

An inbred A/J mouse respiratory challenge model was validated for vaccine testing
against Chlamydia (C.) pneumoniae and used to screen the C. pneumoniae genome for
vaccine candidates by expression library immunization (ELI). Biolistic delivery
of genetic vaccine constructs elicited Th2-like immunity that was associated with
inefficient elimination of C. pneumoniae. Delivery by injection elicited
protective Th1-like responses. Since biolistic delivery of pools of ORFs was used
in first round screening, the screen presumably selected against potent
immunogens. Nevertheless, it was sufficiently accurate to identify three weakly
protective antigens among all putative C. pneumoniae ORFs. The results suggest
ELI discovery of highly protective C. pneumoniae vaccine candidates requires
tight control of the Th1 immunity elicited by the genetically delivered library
of test antigens.

PMID: 16434129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Jun;45(6):694-702. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Signatures of differentially regulated interferon gene expression and
vasculotrophism in the peripheral blood cells of systemic sclerosis patients.

Tan FK(1), Zhou X, Mayes MD, Gourh P, Guo X, Marcum C, Jin L, Arnett FC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Houston Medical 
School, 6431 Fannin, MSB 5.270, Houston, TX 77030, USA. filemon.k.tan@uth.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To obtain a global view of the immunological alterations occurring in 
early systemic sclerosis (SSc) by transcriptional profiling of peripheral blood
cells (PBCs).
METHODS: Oligonucleotide microarrays were used to compare PBC gene expression
profiles in 18 SSc cases (<2 yr duration) and 18 controls matched for race,
gender and ethnicity. SSc cases had no prior or current exposure to cytotoxic
drugs. PAXgene tubes were used to stabilize RNA during phlebotomy. Changes in
gene expression were independently validated by real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: SSc PBCs demonstrated differential expression of 18 interferon-inducible
genes. Six of these genes were identical to the interferon signature genes in
lupus peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Notably, SSc PBCs also had increased
expression of allograft inflammatory factor (AIF1) and several selectins and
integrins involved in cellular adhesion to the endothelium. Global analysis of
284 known biological pathways revealed that 13 were differentially regulated in
SSc PBCs, including two pathways (IL2RB and GATA3) that lead to T(H)2
polarization.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional profiling reliably discriminates between PBCs from
SSc and normal donors despite the fact that they represent a heterogeneous cell
population. Multiple biological pathways were differentially regulated in SSc
PBCs, but a common thread across these pathways was alterations in protein
tyrosine kinase 2beta and mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling. Although
the SSc PBC gene expression profile demonstrated some parallels with the lupus
interferon gene signature, there was also increased expression of transcripts
encoding proteins that target PBCs to the endothelium, which might be relevant to
the vasculopathy of SSc.

PMID: 16418202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):880-8.

Regulation of Th2 cytokine expression in NKT cells: unconventional use of Stat6, 
GATA-3, and NFAT2.

Wang ZY(1), Kusam S, Munugalavadla V, Kapur R, Brutkiewicz RR, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

NKT cells are unique in that they can produce high levels of both Th1 and Th2
cytokines, yet little is known about how NKT cells control the transcription of
Th2 cytokines. The expression of IL-4 by NKT cells is independent of the
Th2-associated transcription factor Stat6. We have found that Stat6 is critical
for the expression of IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 by NKT cells. However, the Th2
cell-associated transcription factor GATA-3, normally induced by Stat6
activation, is expressed at low levels in NKT cells. CD4+ NKT cells are highly
enriched for Th2 cytokine expression compared with CD4- NKT cells, and we
searched for transcription factors that are up-regulated in CD4+ NKT cells that
could control Th2 cytokine expression. We found that the NFAT family member NFAT2
is selectively increased in CD4+ NKT cells. We tested the roles of NFAT2 and also
GATA-3 in Th2 cytokine expression by retrovirus-mediated gene transduction into
NKT cells and nonpolarized conventional T cells. Expression of NFAT2 increased
the expression of IL-4 in both NKT cells and conventional T cells, and NFAT2
activated IL-10 in conventional T cells but not in NKT cells. GATA-3 strongly
activated IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 expression in conventional T cells but had
comparatively weak effects on these cytokines in NKT cells. Thus, NFAT2, GATA-3, 
and Stat6 have surprisingly different roles in NKT cells than in conventional T
cells. We propose that one mechanism by which CD4+ NKT cells express IL-4
independent of Stat6 is via increased NFAT2 activity.

PMID: 16393972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncol Rep. 2006 Feb;15(2):297-303.

Chromosomal imbalances in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor detected by
metaphase and microarray comparative genomic hybridization.

Nakagawa Y(1), Yoshida A, Numoto K, Kunisada T, Wai D, Ohata N, Takeda K, Kawai
A, Ozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Science of Functional Recovery and Reconstruction, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are highly malignant tumors
affecting adolescents and adults. There have been a few reports on chromosomal
aberrations of MPNSTs; however, the tumor-specific alteration remains unknown. We
characterized the genomic alterations in 8 MPNSTs and 8 schwannomas by metaphase 
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). In 5 of 8 MPNSTs, microarray CGH was
added for more detailed analyses. Frequent gains were identified on 3q13-26,
5p13-14, and 12q11-23 and frequent losses were at 1p31, 10p, 11q24-qter, 16, and 
17. Microarray CGH revealed frequent gains of EGFR, DAB2, MSH2, KCNK12, DDX15,
CDK6, and LAMA3, and losses of CDH1, GLTSCR2, EGR1, CTSB, GATA3, and SULT2A1.
These genes seem to be responsible for developing MPNSTs. The concordance rate
between metaphase CGH and microarray CGH was 66%. Metaphase CGH was useful for
identifying chromosomal alterations before applying microarray CGH.

PMID: 16391845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Oncol. 2006 Feb;28(2):431-8.

T-cell response to p53 tumor-associated antigen in patients with colorectal
carcinoma.

Bueter M(1), Gasser M, Schramm N, Lebedeva T, Tocco G, Gerstlauer C, Grimm M,
Nichiporuk E, Thalheimer A, Thiede A, Meyer D, Benichou G, Waaga-Gasser AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery I, University of Wuerzburg, D-97080 Wuerzburg, Germany.

Despite the radical surgical resection performed in patients with colorectal
carcinoma, there is a high rate of tumor recurrence. Over an observation period
of 3 years, 18% of the patients in our collective suffered a tumor relapse with
local or distinct metastases after initial R0-resection. Some evidence suggests
that this may be due to suppression of anti-tumor responses, a phenomenon that
might be attributed to regulatory T cells. The aim of our study was to
investigate the tumor-specific immune response depending on the UICC stage of
patients with colorectal cancer. The cellular immune responses against defined
antigens that are overexpressed in most of the patients with colorectal cancer
were characterized. For this purpose, the tumor suppressor gene, p53, was chosen 
as the tumor-associated antigen that exhibits mutations and overexpression in up 
to 60% of colorectal carcinoma. We observed that p53 induced both IFN-gamma and
IL-10 secretion. The predominance of IL-10 production indicated that regulatory T
cells directly participate in modulating the anti-tumor immune response. IL-10
levels in the blood as well as the expression of regulatory T-cell specific genes
at the tumor site correlate with the UICC stage of the disease. These results may
provide an explanation for the poor prognosis and increased recurrence rate in
patients with advanced carcinoma.

PMID: 16391798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(2):313-23. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

A role for Ets1, synergizing with AP-1 and GATA-3 in the regulation of IL-5
transcription in mouse Th2 lymphocytes.

Wang J(1), Shannon MF, Young IG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Mills Road, Acton, ACT 0200 Australia.

IL-5 is a key regulator of eosinophilic inflammation and is selectively expressed
by antigen-activated Th2 lymphocytes. An important role for the proximal AP-1 and
GATA sites in regulating IL-5 transcription is generally accepted but the
significance of an adjacent Ets/NFAT site has remained unclear. We have
investigated its role using the mouse Th2 clone D10.G4.1. Transcription of IL-5
reporter gene plasmids could be induced in D10 cells by phorbol myristate
acetate/cyclic adenosine monophosphate (PMA/cAMP) stimulation and significantly
further enhanced by activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
pathways. Strong induction of IL-5 mRNA was also induced by PMA/cAMP. Mutagenesis
showed that the Ets/NFAT site is of critical importance along with the AP-1 and
GATA sites in regulating IL-5 transcription stimulated by PMA/cAMP and MAP kinase
activation. Transactivation was used to investigate the transcription factors
which could function at the three sites and possible synergistic interactions.
AP-1 (c-Fos/c-Jun) strongly induced IL-5 transcription and dominant negative AP-1
constructs confirmed that AP-1 plays an important role in regulating IL-5
expression. Ets1, unlike other members of the Ets/NFAT family, synergized
strongly with AP-1 suggesting that Ets1 is the family member which functions at
the Ets/NFAT site. AP-1/Ets1 transactivation also stimulated IL-5 mRNA
expression. Ets1 binding to the proximal promoter region, demonstrated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, was stimulated by PMA/cAMP. The absolute
dependence on the binding sites for Ets1, AP-1 and GATA-3 together with the
strong synergy between Ets1 and AP-1 suggest close cooperative interactions
between the three transcription factors in the regulation of IL-5 expression in
mouse T cells.

PMID: 16373364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11259-64.

Identification of GATA3 as a breast cancer prognostic marker by global gene
expression meta-analysis.

Mehra R(1), Varambally S, Ding L, Shen R, Sabel MS, Ghosh D, Chinnaiyan AM, Kleer
CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
48109, USA.

GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a transcriptional activator highly expressed by
the luminal epithelial cells in the breast. Here we did a meta-analysis of the
available breast cancer cDNA data sets on a cohort of 305 patients and found that
GATA3 was one of the top genes with low expression in invasive carcinomas with
poor clinical outcome. To validate its prognostic utility, we did a tissue
microarray analysis on a cohort of 139 consecutive invasive carcinomas (n = 417
tissue samples) immunostained with a monoclonal antibody against GATA3. Low GATA3
expression was associated with higher histologic grade (P < 0.001), positive
nodes (P = 0.002), larger tumor size (P = 0.03), negative estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor (P < 0.001 for both), and HER2-neu overexpression (P =
0.03). Patients whose tumors expressed low GATA3 had significantly shorter
overall and disease-free survival when compared with those whose tumors had high 
GATA3 levels. The hazard ratio of metastasis or recurrence according to the GATA3
status was 0.31 (95% confidence interval, 0.13-0.74; P = 0.009). Cox multivariate
analysis showed that GATA3 had independent prognostic significance above and
beyond conventional variables. Our data suggest that immunohistochemical analysis
of GATA3 may be the basis for a new clinically applicable test to predict tumor
recurrence early in the progression of breast cancer.

PMID: 16357129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2006;91:59-75.

The role of T lymphocytes in asthma.

Kay AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute,& Leukocyte Biology Section, Imperial
College, London, UK. a.b.kay@imperial.ac.uk

There is now overwhelming evidence to support a major role for T cells in asthma,
in particular the involvement of T helper type 2 (Th2) cells in atopic allergic
asthma as well as nonatopic and occupational asthma. There may also be a minor
contribution from T cytotoxic type 2 CD8+T cells. Several Th2 cytokines have
potential to modulate airway inflammation, in particular interleukin-13 which
induces airway hyperresponsiveness independently of IgE and eosinophilia in
animal models. The identification of transcription factors controlling Th1, Th2
and T-regulatory cell (T(Reg)) development further support the Th2 hypothesis
since GATA3 is overexpressed and T-bet underexpressed in the asthmatic airway and
Foxp3 is induced in asthma by corticosteroid treatment. Specific T-cell-directed 
immunotherapy may allow induction/modulation of T-cell responses, and elucidation
of the mechanisms of T(Regs) may allow further optimization of immunotherapy.
Recent advances in the understanding of dendritic cell function in directing
T-cell responses may uncover further therapeutic targets. Efficacy of cyclosporin
and anti-CD4 treatment in chronic severe asthma argues for continued T-cell
involvement, but whether remodeling contributes to pathology inaccessible to
antiinflammatory treatment or T-cell immunotherapy remains an important question.

PMID: 16354949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cancer Gene Ther. 2006 May;13(5):510-9.

Th2-dominated antitumor immunity induced by DNA immunization with the genes
coding for a basal core peptide PDTRP and GM-CSF.

Chu Y(1), Xia M, Lin Y, Li A, Wang Y, Liu R, Xiong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine of Ministry of 
Education, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Our previous study showed that DNA vaccination with a plasmid vector encoding a
core peptide of mucin1 (PDTRP) provided modest protection against challenge with 
tumor cells that expressed mucin1 protein. We report here that a DNA vaccine
comprising a modified PDTRP plasmid and GM-CSF coding sequence at the C-terminus 
induced better protection against tumor challenge. The increased protection was
directly correlated with a stronger PDTRP-specific immune response induced by the
GM-CSF fusion plasmid. The plasmid encoding GM-CSF and the target PDTRP antigen
induced a greater PDTRP-specific Th proliferation, antibodies, and cytotoxicity. 
Interestingly, the modified plasmid vaccine predominantly enhanced the type 2
immune responses manifested by an increased IgG1 to IgG2a antibody ratio and a
greater induction of GATA-3 and IL-4 mRNA than that of T-bet and IFN-gamma mRNA
in spleen cells from vaccinated mice. In addition, protection against tumor
challenge in vaccinated mice showed that there was no significant change in mice 
survival after in vivo CD8+CTL depletion, indicating that antitumor immunity
augmented by plasmid encoding GM-CSF and target PDTRP gene vaccine was dominated 
by Th2 immune response.

PMID: 16341143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Dec;116(6):1372-9.

CXCR3-mediated opposite effects of CXCL10 and CXCL4 on TH1 or TH2 cytokine
production.

Romagnani P(1), Maggi L, Mazzinghi B, Cosmi L, Lasagni L, Liotta F, Lazzeri E,
Angeli R, Rotondi M, Filì L, Parronchi P, Serio M, Maggi E, Romagnani S,
Annunziato F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research, Transfer, and High Education "DENOthe," University of
Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Two variants of the CXCR3 receptor exist, one (CXCR3-A) reactive with
CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 and the other (CXCR3-B) also reactive with CXCL4. Both 
variants are contemporarily expressed by human T cells.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate the in vitro effects of CXCL10 and CXCL4 on
the production of TH1 or TH2 cytokines.
METHODS: The cytokine profile of antigen-specific human CD4+ T-cell lines
obtained in the absence or presence of CXCL10 or CXCL4 was evaluated by means of 
quantitative RT-PCR, flow cytometry, and ELISA.
RESULTS: CXCL10 upregulated IFN-gamma and downregulated IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13
production, whereas CXCL4 downregulated IFN-gamma and upregulated TH2 cytokines. 
Similar effects were also observed on polyclonally activated pure naive CD4+ T
cells. The opposite effects of CXCL10 and CXCL4 on TH1 and TH2 cytokine
production were inhibited by an anti-CXCR3 antibody able to neutralize both
CXCR3-A and CXCR3-B and were apparently related to the activation of distinct
signal transduction pathways. Moreover, CXCL10 upregulated mRNA levels of T-box
expressed in T cells and downregulated GATA-3 expression, whereas CXCL4
downregulated T-box expressed in T cells and upregulated GATA-3. Finally, CXCL4, 
but not CXCL10, induced direct activation of IL-5 and IL-13 promoters.
CONCLUSION: CXCL10 and CXCL4 exert opposite effects on the production of human
TH1 and TH2 cytokines, likely through their respective interaction with CXCR3-A
or CXCR3-B and the consequent activation of different signal transduction
pathways. This might represent an internal regulatory pathway of TH cell
responses and might contribute to the modulation of chronic inflammatory
reactions, including allergy.

PMID: 16337473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Chin Med J (Engl). 2005 Dec 5;118(23):2000-4.

GATA-3 expression in the development of anterior chamber associated immune
deviation.

Fu T(1), Yang PZ, Huang XK, Huang Q, Zhou HY, Li B, Zhong HH, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Uveitis Study Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

BACKGROUND: Anterior chamber associated immune deviation (ACAID) is characterized
by a Th2 cell response. GATA-3 has been shown to be necessary for the activation 
of Th2 cells. This study was designed to examine the expression of GATA-3 in the 
development of ACAID.
METHODS: ACAID was induced by injection of 50 microg interphotoreceptor retinoid 
binding protein (IRBP) into the anterior chamber (AC) of Wistar rats.
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) was evaluated on day 3, 7, 14, 21, 28 after
IRBP inoculation. GATA-3 expression was detected using immunohistochemical
staining. The expression of GATA-3 mRNA at different time points after AC
injection of IRBP was assayed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: A significant DTH reaction was observed in Wistar rats on day 3 and 5
after IRBP inoculation. The DTH reaction was decreased 7 days after IRBP
inoculation. GATA-3 expression was weak at both mRNA and protein levels in the
normal spleen, but was significantly increased on day 5, 7, 14, and 21 after AC
injection of IRBP.
CONCLUSION: The expression of GATA-3 is increased during ACAID, suggesting that
GATA-3 may be involved in the development of ACAID.

PMID: 16336837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Development. 2006 Jan;133(1):53-61. Epub 2005 Nov 30.

Pax 2/8-regulated Gata 3 expression is necessary for morphogenesis and guidance
of the nephric duct in the developing kidney.

Grote D(1), Souabni A, Busslinger M, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre and Biochemistry Department, McGill University, 3655
Promenade Sir-William-Osler, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

The mammalian pro- and mesonephros are transient embryonic kidneys essential for 
urogenital system development. The nephric (Wolffian) duct, which is a central
constituent of both structures, elongates caudally along a stereotypical path to 
reach the hindlimb level where it induces metanephros (adult kidney) formation,
while the remaining duct gives rise to the male genital tract (epidydimis, vas
deferens). The transcription factors Pax2 and Pax8 are essential for the
initiation of pro- and mesonephros development. In a cDNA microarray screen for
genes specifically expressed in the pro/mesonephros and regulated by Pax
proteins, we identified Gata3, a transcription factor gene associated with
hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal anomaly (HDR) syndrome. Gata3 is already
expressed in the pronephric anlage, together with Pax2 and Pax8, suggesting that 
it may be a direct Pax2/8 target gene. Inactivation of Gata3 by insertion of an
Ires-GFP reporter gene resulted in a massive increase in nephric duct
cellularity, which was accompanied by enhanced cell proliferation and aberrant
elongation of the nephric duct. Interestingly, however, the nephrogenic cord
extended, with delayed kinetics, along the entire caudal path up to the level of 
the hindlimb bud, indicating that extension of the nephric duct and cord is
controlled by different guidance cues. At the molecular level, the nephric duct
of Gata3(-/-) embryos is characterized by the loss of Ret expression and
signaling, which may contribute to the guidance defect of the nephric duct.
Together, these results define Gata3 as a key regulator of nephric duct
morphogenesis and guidance in the pro/mesonephric kidney.

PMID: 16319112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2446-52. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Delta-like1-induced Notch1 signaling regulates the human plasmacytoid dendritic
cell versus T-cell lineage decision through control of GATA-3 and Spi-B.

Dontje W(1), Schotte R, Cupedo T, Nagasawa M, Scheeren F, Gimeno R, Spits H, Blom
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology of the AMC, University of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Human early thymic precursors have the potential to differentiate into multiple
cell lineages, including T cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). This
decision is guided by the induction or silencing of lineage-specific
transcription factors. The ETS family member Spi-B is a key regulator of pDC
development, whereas T-cell development is critically dependent on GATA-3. Here
we show that triggering of the Notch1 signaling pathway by Delta-like1 controls
the T/pDC lineage decision by regulating the balance between these factors. CD34+
CD1a- thymic progenitor cells express Notch1, but down-regulate this receptor
when differentiating into pDCs. On coculture with stromal cell lines expressing
either human Delta-like1 (DL1) or Jagged1 (Jag1) Notch ligands, thymic precursors
express GATA-3 and develop into CD4+ CD8+ TCRalphabeta+ T cells. On the other
hand, DL1, but not Jag1, down-regulates Spi-B expression, resulting in impaired
development of pDCs. The Notch1-induced block in pDC development can be relieved 
through the ectopic expression of Spi-B. These data indicate that DL1-induced
activation of the Notch1 pathway controls the lineage commitment of early thymic 
precursors by altering the levels between Spi-B and GATA-3.

PMID: 16317090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 6;25(15):2273-84.

Gene expression profiling of breast cell lines identifies potential new basal
markers.

Charafe-Jauffret E(1), Ginestier C, Monville F, Finetti P, Adélaïde J, Cervera N,
Fekairi S, Xerri L, Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D, Bertucci F.

Author information: 
(1)Marseille Cancer Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Inserm/Institut 
Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

A better molecular characterization of breast cell lines (BCL) may help discover 
new markers to apply to tumour samples. We performed gene and protein expression 
profiling of 31 BCL using whole-genome DNA microarrays and immunohistochemistry
(IHC) on 'cell microarrays' (CMA), respectively. Global hierarchical clustering
discriminated two groups of BCL: group I corresponded to luminal cell lines,
group II to basal and mesenchymal cell lines. Correlations with centroids
calculated from a published 'intrinsic 500-gene set' assigned 15 cell lines as
luminal, eight as basal and four as mesenchymal. A set of 1.233 genes was
differentially expressed between basal and luminal samples. Mesenchymal and basal
subtypes were rather similar and discriminated by only 227 genes. The expression 
of 10 proteins (CAV1, CD44, EGFR, MET, ETS1, GATA3, luminal cytokeratin CK19,
basal cytokeratin CK5/6, CD10, and ERM protein moesin) encoded by luminal vs
basal discriminator genes confirmed the subtype classification and the validity
of the identified markers. Our BCL basal/luminal signature correctly
re-classified the published series of tumour samples that originally served to
identify the molecular subtypes, suggesting that the identified markers should be
useful for tumour classification and might represent promising targets for
disease management.

PMID: 16288205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Dec;35(12):3581-90.

Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR family-related protein (GITR) activation exacerbates 
murine asthma and collagen-induced arthritis.

Patel M(1), Xu D, Kewin P, Choo-Kang B, McSharry C, Thomson NC, Liew FY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.

Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR family-related protein (GITR) is expressed at low
levels on resting T cells, B cells and macrophages but at high levels on
regulatory T cells (Treg). Although GITR expression is up-regulated on CD4+
effector cells upon activation, the role of GITR in Th1 and Th2 cell development 
is unclear. We report here that activation of GITR signalling by anti-GITR
antibody markedly enhanced the induction of both Th1 and Th2 cytokine production 
by naive CD4+CD25- T cells. Consistent with this observation, anti-GITR antibody 
significantly enhanced the expression of the key Th1 (T-bet) and Th2 (GATA3)
transcription factors in vitro. Administration of anti-GITR mAb in a murine model
of arthritis significantly exacerbated the severity and onset of joint
inflammation with elevated production of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-5, and
collagen-specific IgG1. Administration of anti-GITR mAb also significantly
exacerbated murine allergic airways inflammation with elevated production of
OVA-specific IFN-gamma, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IgE. Finally, we demonstrated that 
adoptive transfer of CD4+GITR+ T cells effectively abolished airway inflammation 
induced in SCID mice reconstituted with CD4+GITR- T cells. Our results therefore 
provide direct evidence that GITR can modulate both Th1- and Th2-mediated
inflammatory diseases, and may be a potential target for therapeutic
intervention.

PMID: 16285015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Mol Neurosci. 2005;27(3):281-92.

Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors select shared and unique target genes in
the noradrenergic cell type.

Rychlik JL(1), Hsieh M, Eiden LE, Lewis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.

The noradrenergic cell type is characterized by the expression of proteins
involved in the biosynthesis, transport, and secretion of noradrenaline and is
dependent on the sequential and combinatorial expression of numerous
transcription factors, including Phox2a, Phox2b, dHAND, GATA2, GATA3, and MASH1. 
Phox2a and Phox2b transactivate the promoter of the gene encoding the
noradrenergic biosynthetic enzyme, dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH), and dHAND
potentiates the activity of Phox2a. In this study, we use chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to identify target genes of the Phox2 proteins and
dHAND. All three proteins are bound to the DBH and PHOX2B promoter regions in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. The interaction between Phox2a and dHAND is analyzed
by fluorescent anisotropy, which demonstrates that dHAND causes an eightfold
increase in the affinity of Phox2a for its recognition sites on the DBH promoter 
region. The Phox2 proteins are not found on the genes encoding other
noradrenergic enzymatic or transport proteins but are reciprocally bound to each 
other's promoters in SH-SY5Y cells. Together with Phox2a and Phox2b, dHAND is
bound to the PHOX2B promoter and is also associated with the GATA2 and eHAND
genes in the absence of the Phox2 proteins. These results demonstrate the direct 
interactions of the Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors within a noradrenergic 
cell type. The Phox2 proteins were found to share all target genes, whereas dHAND
binds to genes independently of Phox2a.

PMID: 16280598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Oct;63 Suppl 10:357-61.

[Hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishikawa T(1), Okazaki R.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine,
Ichihara Hospital.

PMID: 16279662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Exp Med. 2005 Nov 7;202(9):1213-23.

TSLP-activated dendritic cells induce an inflammatory T helper type 2 cell
response through OX40 ligand.

Ito T(1), Wang YH, Duramad O, Hori T, Delespesse GJ, Watanabe N, Qin FX, Yao Z,
Cao W, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Immunology Research, Department of Immunology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

We recently showed that dendritic cells (DCs) activated by thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP) prime naive CD4(+) T cells to differentiate into T helper
type 2 (Th2) cells that produced high amounts of tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha), but no interleukin (IL)-10. Here we report that TSLP induced human
DCs to express OX40 ligand (OX40L) but not IL-12. TSLP-induced OX40L on DCs was
required for triggering naive CD4(+) T cells to produce IL-4, -5, and -13. We
further revealed the following three novel functional properties of OX40L: (a)
OX40L selectively promoted TNF-alpha, but inhibited IL-10 production in
developing Th2 cells; (b) OX40L lost the ability to polarize Th2 cells in the
presence of IL-12; and (c) OX40L exacerbated IL-12-induced Th1 cell inflammation 
by promoting TNF-alpha, while inhibiting IL-10. We conclude that OX40L on
TSLP-activated DCs triggers Th2 cell polarization in the absence of IL-12, and
propose that OX40L can switch IL-10-producing regulatory Th cell responses into
TNF-alpha-producing inflammatory Th cell responses.

PMCID: PMC2213234
PMID: 16275760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2005 Sep;70(9):1065-9.

Transcription factor GATA-3 is involved in repression of promoter activity of the
human interleukin-4 gene.

Schwenger GT(1), Mordvinov VA, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Curtin University School of Biomedical Sciences and the Western Australian
Institute of Medical Research, Molecular Immunology Group, Perth, 6000, Western
Australia, Australia.

GATA-3 was shown to bind to two sites of the IL-4 gene promoter in human T-cell
lines PER-117 and Jurkat. A motif located in the region of position -860 and
responsible for GATA-3 binding was detected for the first time. Mutation or
deletion of this site increased the promoter activity. The findings suggest a
direct involvement of GATA-3 in regulation of the human IL-4 gene transcription
as a repressor of the promoter activity.

PMID: 16266280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5981-5.

Transcriptional activators of helper T cell fate are required for establishment
but not maintenance of signature cytokine expression.

Martins GA(1), Hutchins AS, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The stability of helper T cell fates is not well understood. Using conditional
introduction of dominant-negative factors, we now show that T-bet and GATA-3 are 
far more critical in establishment than maintenance of IFN-gamma and IL-4
activity during Th1 and Th2 maturation, respectively. We also show that a genetic
interaction between T-bet and its target Hlx seems to be required for Th1
maturation, but that Hlx may also be dispensable for maintenance of a
transcriptionally permissive ifng gene. In parallel to progressive activator
independence in the permissive lineage, the ifng gene becomes more recalcitrant
to switching as the forbidden lineage matures. T-bet plus Hlx can disrupt ifng
silencing when introduced into developing Th2 cells, but they fail to perturb
ifng silencing in mature Th2 cells. In contrast, a hypermorphic allele of T-bet
can reverse silencing of the ifng gene in mature Th2 cells. These results suggest
that signature gene activity of helper T cells is initially plastic but later
becomes epigenetically fixed and offer an initial strategy for inducing mature
cells to switch their fate.

PMID: 16237092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5716-23.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) deficiency in macrophages results in increased 
stimulation of CD4+ T cells while 17beta-estradiol acts through ERalpha to
increase IL-4 and GATA-3 expression in CD4+ T cells independent of antigen
presentation.

Lambert KC(1), Curran EM, Judy BM, Milligan GN, Lubahn DB, Estes DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on immune function have been extensively
reported. The effects are dependent on concentration and duration of exposure and
potential differences in signaling between the known E2 receptors, estrogen
receptors (ER) alpha and ERbeta. Through the use of ER-deficient mice, we and
others have begun to demonstrate the role of the two known receptors in
modulating immune functional activities. Previous studies have shown that cells
of the innate immune system have altered function (bactericidal capacity) and
patterns of cytokine expression (increased proinflammatory cytokine expression)
through amelioration of ERalpha signaling. In this study, we extend these studies
to analysis of T cell differentiation and proliferation in APC-dependent and
APC-independent in vitro assay systems. Our results demonstrate that ERalpha
deficiency in splenic macrophages, but not CD11c+ splenic dendritic cells pulsed 
with OVA significantly enhances proliferative responses and IFN-gamma production 
by transgenic OVA peptide-specific (OT-II) CD4+ T cells when compared with
Ag-pulsed APC from wild-type littermates. The addition of E2 in this culture
system did not significantly affect the production of IFN-gamma. In addition,
when purified CD4+ T cells from ERalpha-deficient and wild-type littermates were 
stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 Ab in the absence of E2, there were no significant 
differences in IFN-gamma or IL-4 production. However, the addition of E2
significantly increased IL-4 secretion, as well as increased GATA-3 mRNA levels
from ERalpha-replete CD4+ T cells, while this effect was abrogated in
ERalpha-deficient CD4+ T cells.

PMID: 16237062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Nov;142(2):268-74.

Listeriolysin O, a cytolysin derived from Listeria monocytogenes, inhibits
generation of ovalbumin-specific Th2 immune response by skewing maturation of
antigen-specific T cells into Th1 cells.

Yamamoto K(1), Kawamura I, Tominaga T, Nomura T, Kohda C, Ito J, Mitsuyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.

Listeriolysin O (LLO), a cholesterol-dependent cytolysin derived from Listeria
monocytogenes, is a potent inducer of interleukin (IL)-12, IL-18 and interferon
(IFN)-gamma. We have shown that LLO facilitates development of T cells mediating 
protective immunity against L. monocytogenes through the induction of IFN-gamma
production at an early stage. Based on this finding, it is postulated that LLO
inhibits differentiation of Th2 cells and the Th2 immune response. By using a
murine model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergic rhinitis, we investigated
whether LLO has an ability to modulate the Th2-type immune disorder. In mice
sensitized intraperitoneally with ovalbumin (OVA)/alum and challenged
intranasally with OVA, a large number of eosinophils migrated into the nasal
tissue, and high titres of anti-OVA IgE and IgG(1) antibodies were detected in
sera. However, LLO treatment during sensitization markedly inhibited the
eosinophil infiltration and production of these anti-OVA antibodies. A large
number of T cells from mice sensitized and challenged with OVA produced high
level of IL-4 and IL-5 but not IFN-gamma after stimulation with OVA. In contrast,
OVA-specific IFN-gamma-producing T cells were preferentially induced in mice
treated with LLO at the time of sensitization. In the absence of LLO
administration, the expression level of GATA-3 and SOCS-3 in CD4(+) T cells was
enhanced after sensitization with OVA. LLO treatment resulted in a reduction of
GATA-3 and SOCS-3 expressions but induced the transcription of T-bet instead.
Taken together, these data show clearly that LLO is capable of inhibiting Th2
immune response by skewing differentiation of antigen-specific T cells into Th1
cells.

PMCID: PMC1809525
PMID: 16232213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3297-306.

IL-12 up-regulates T-bet independently of IFN-gamma in human CD4+ T cells.

Ylikoski E(1), Lund R, Kyläniemi M, Filén S, Kilpeläinen M, Savolainen J,
Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2006 Apr;36(4):1058.

T-bet is an important Th1 driving transcription factor regulated by
IFN-gamma/STAT1 pathway. T-bet turns on IFN-gamma transcription in CD4+ T cells
and T-bet-deficient cells fail to differentiate to Th1 direction. Previous
reports have characterized function of T-bet mainly in murine cells and very
little is known about its functions in human cells. Here, we studied T-bet
expression kinetics in parallel with GATA3 during Th1/Th2 polarization. We
demonstrate that in addition to CD3/CD28 activation, cytokines IL-12 and
IFN-alpha in the presence of neutralizing anti-IFN-gamma enhanced T-bet mRNA and 
protein expression in human CD4+ cells. T-bet is known to be a potent inducer of 
IFN-gamma. Even though IFN-gamma and IL-12 stimulation induced similar levels of 
T-bet protein in human CD4+ cells, IFN-gamma-treated cells produced considerably 
less IFN-gamma than cells treated with IL-12. Therefore, high T-bet protein
expression does not necessarily correlate with IFN-gamma production. In addition,
we show that the immunosuppressive cytokine TGF-beta inhibits T-bet and GATA3
protein expression only if it is present prior to primary T cell activation and
is maintained in the cultures during the early polarization of Th1/Th2 cells. In 
conclusion, we report new insights into the cytokine regulation of T-bet in human
CD4+ T cells.

PMID: 16220539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell Mol Immunol. 2004 Feb;1(1):63-70.

Type two cytokines predominance of human lung cancer and its reverse by
traditional Chinese medicine TTMP.

Wei H(1), Sun R, Xiao W, Feng J, Zhen C, Xu X, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
Anhui 230027, China.

Type 2 cytokines are usually predominant in tumor patients and associated with
tumor progression. To explore whether reversing of type 2 predominance could be a
promising strategy in tumor immunotherapy, PBMC of 35 lung cancer patients and 19
healthy subjects were prepared and subjected to be examined for cytokine
secretion and gene expression. Tetra-Methylpyrazine (TTMP), extracted from a
traditional Chinese medicinal herb which has been used in clinic to reverse the
Th2 status of cancer patients in China, was added to PBMC culture. Determined by 
RT-PCR, the positive percentages of mRNA expression of type 1 cytokines (8.6% for
IFN-gamma and 11.4% for IL-2) were lower than those of type 2 cytokines (71.4%
for IL-4, 60% for IL-6 and 80% for IL-10) in patients' PBMCs. The potential of
gene expressing (measured as relative intensity to the ratio of beta-actin) in
the patients for type 1 cytokines was also in a low level (0.111 for IFN-gamma,
0.119 for IL-2) in comparison with a relative high level for type 2 cytokines
(0.319 for IL-4, 0.303 for IL-6 and 0.377 for IL-10). Meanwhile, both positive
percentage and relative intensity of gene expression were lower for a type 1
cytokine-related transcription factor T-bet (31.4% and 0.142, respectively) than 
those for type 2 cytokine-related GATA3 (85.7% and 0.378, respectively). The
blood serum levels of IFN-gamma and IL-2 in the patients were slightly lower but 
not significantly when compared with healthy control. In contrast, the levels
IL-4 and IL-6 in patients were significantly higher than those in healthy
subjects by ELISA analysis. TTMP could enhance supernatant concentration and gene
expression levels of IFN-gamma, IL-2 and T-bet, but reduce those of type 2
cytokines. These results demonstrate that the lung cancer patients had a
predominant expression of type 2 cytokines and TTMP could reverse the type 2
dominant status, which might offer an alternative therapeutic regime for lung
cancer patients.

PMID: 16212923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cell Mol Immunol. 2005 Jun;2(3):189-96.

Antisense-induced blockade of GATA-3 expression could inhibit Th2 excursion of
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo.

Yao D(1), Zhang X, Wei H, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China.

Previous studies have shown that tumor cells predominantly express Th2 type
cytokines and transcription factors. GATA-3, as a Th2-specific transcription
factor, plays a central role in positive-regulating Th2 development. So whether
the expression of GATA-3 in tumor cells has any effect on tumor development is a 
question of interest. In the present study, we inhibited the expression of GATA-3
in tumor cells through antisense RNA blockade technique, and observed its effects
on tumor in vitro and in vivo. Our results showed that antisense GATA-3 treatment
could inhibit the expression of TNF-alpha and Th2 cytokines in tumor cells, and
antisense-induced blockade of GATA-3 could also depress tumor growth in
tumor-bearing mice. We suggest that the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 can be evaluated as
a more important marker of the status of Th1/Th2 type. And our results might
provide some evidence about the molecular regulatory mechanisms in tumor cell
development.

PMID: 16212886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 15;175(8):5457-62.

A genetic basis for IFN-gamma production and T-bet expression in humans.

Höhler T(1), Reuss E, Adams P, Bartsch B, Weigmann B, Wörns M, Galle PR, Victor
A, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz,
Germany. thomas.hoehler@prosper-hospital.de

Th1 and Th2 cytokines secreted by polarized effector T cells play a pivotal role 
in the development of autoimmune and allergic diseases. However, the genetic
basis of cytokine production by T lymphocytes in humans is poorly understood. In 
this study, we investigated the genetic contribution to cytokine production and
regulation of T cell-specific transcription factors in a prospective twin study. 
We found a substantial genetic contribution to the production of Th1 cytokines
such as IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha with heritabilities of 0.85 (95% confidence
intervals, 0.74-0.95) and 0.72 (0.50-0.93), respectively, whereas no genetic
influence on production of the Th2 signature cytokine IL-4 was observed.
Furthermore, the intrapair variability in IFN-gamma production by isolated T
cells was lower in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. In contrast to GATA-3,
NFAT, and NF-kappaB, intrapair variability of T-bet, the master transcription
factor of Th1 cells, was very low among monozygotic and high among dizygotic
twins, indicative of a strong genetic influence on T-bet (heritability 0.93, 95% 
confidence interval, 0.84-1.0). Our data provide novel insights into the genetic 
regulation of human Th cell polarization. These data suggest that signature
cytokines and cytokine signaling events of Th1 rather than Th2 cells are
genetically determined and implicate that Th2-associated diseases in humans might
be due to genetic variations in Th1 cytokine regulation via T-bet. This concept
is highlighted by the recent finding that inactivation of the T-bet gene in mice 
results in development of clinical hallmark features of asthma.

PMID: 16210653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):1039-47. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Increased GILZ expression in transgenic mice up-regulates Th-2 lymphokines.

Cannarile L(1), Fallarino F, Agostini M, Cuzzocrea S, Mazzon E, Vacca C, Genovese
T, Migliorati G, Ayroldi E, Riccardi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.

GILZ (glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper), a gene induced by dexamethasone, is
involved in control of T lymphocyte activation and apoptosis. In the present
study, using Gilz transgenic mice (TG), which overexpress GILZ in the T-cell
lineage, we demonstrate that Gilz is implicated in T helper-2 (Th-2) response
development. After in vitro stimulation by CD3/CD28 antibodies, peripheral naive 
CD4+ T cells from TG mice secrete more Th-2 cytokines such as interleukin-4
(IL-4), IL-5, IL-13, and IL-10, and produce less Th-1 cytokines such as
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) than wild-type mice (WT). CD4+ TG lymphocytes
up-regulated Th-2 cytokine expression in the specific response to ovalbumin
chicken egg (OVA) antigen immunization. Up-regulation correlated with increased
expression of GATA-3 and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6
(Stat6), Th-2-specific transcription factors and decreased expression of T-bet, a
transcription factor involved in Th-1 differentiation. Finally, in TG mice
delayed-type hypersensitivity, a Th-1 response, was inhibited and
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, a Th-2 mediated disease, was more severe.
These results indicate that Gilz contributes to CD4+ commitment toward a Th-2
phenotype and suggest this contribution may be another mechanism accounting for
glucocorticoid immunomodulation.

PMID: 16204313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Med Food. 2005 Fall;8(3):332-6.

The effects of allitridin on the expression of transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3 in mice infected by murine cytomegalovirus.

Yi X(1), Feng F, Xiang Z, Ge L.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Pediatric Clinical Virology of Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
xuyi70@163.com

This study was designed to investigate the effects of allitridin on the
expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in mice infected by murine
cytomegalovirus (MCMV). A BALB/c mouse model system of MCMV infection was
established. Twenty mice were allocated randomly into an allitridin-treated group
(n = 10) and a placebo control group (n = 10). The same dose (25 mg/kg/day) and
regimen of allitridin were used in the treated group in the 24 hours after virus 
infection; the same volume of saline solution was injected in placebo control
mice. In an additional blank control group (n = 10), the same volume of saline
solution was injected. The expression levels of the transcription factors T-bet
and GATA-3 were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The 
expression levels of the T helper (Th) 1 cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
and the Th2 cytokine interleukin (IL)-10 in supernatant of spleen cell culture
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. MCMV infection markedly
down-modulated the expression of IFN-gamma and T-bet and significantly
up-modulated the expression of IL-10 and GATA-3. Allitridin induced significantly
(P < .01) increased expression of the transcription factor T-bet and the Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma and markedly (P < .01) decreased expression of the
transcription factor GATA-3 and the Th2 cytokine IL-10. Thus MCMV infection could
lead to disequilibrium of Th1/Th2 cytokine expression: The level of the Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma was decreased significantly, and Th2 cytokine IL-10 was
overexpressed markedly. Allitridin could up-regulate the expression of T-bet and 
IFN-gamma and inhibit the expression of GATA-3 and IL-10 in MCMV-infected mice,
indicating a Th1 dominant state, which should enhance the specific cellular
immune reactions against cytomegalovirus (CMV) and be helpful for clearance of
CMV from the host.

PMID: 16176143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Exp Med. 2005 Sep 19;202(6):793-804.

Independent roles for IL-2 and GATA-3 in stimulating naive CD4+ T cells to
generate a Th2-inducing cytokine environment.

Yamane H(1), Zhu J, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

T cell receptor (TCR) signaling plays an important role in early interleukin
(IL)-4 production by naive CD4+ T cells. This "antigen-stimulated" early IL-4 is 
sufficient for in vitro Th2 differentiation. Here, we provide evidence that early
IL-4 production by naive CD4+ T cells stimulated with cognate peptide requires
TCR-induced early GATA-3 expression and IL-2 receptor signaling, both of which
are controlled by the degree of activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK). Stimulation of naive CD4+ T cells from TCR transgenic mice with low
concentrations of peptide-induced IL-2-dependent STAT5 phosphorylation,
IL-4-independent early GATA-3 expression, and IL-4 production. Neutralization of 
IL-2 abolished early IL-4 production without affecting early GATA-3 expression.
In addition, naive CD4+ T cells from GATA-3 conditional KO mice failed to produce
early IL-4 in response to TCR/CD28 stimulation. Stimulation with high
concentrations of peptide abrogated early GATA-3 expression and IL-2-dependent
STAT5 phosphorylation, and resulted in the failure to produce early IL-4. This
high concentration-mediated suppression of early IL-4 production was reversed by 
blockade of the ERK pathway. A MEK inhibition rescued early GATA-3 expression and
responsiveness to IL-2; these cells were now capable of producing early IL-4 and 
undergoing subsequent Th2 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2212937
PMID: 16172258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Sep;26(9):1117-22.

Effects of CpG oligodeoxynucleotide on transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet
mRNA expression in asthmatic mice.

Wu ZQ(1), Xu YP, Xiang H, Shen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
4Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. wuzuqun522@sohu.com

AIM: To investigate effects of CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG ODN) on the mRNA
expression of transcription factors GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) and T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) in asthmatic mice.
METHODS: An asthmatic mouse model was established and treated with CpG ODN. Total
inflammatory cells and eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were
counted and inflammatory cell infiltration in lung tissue was evaluated.
Interferon-gamma and interleukin-4 concentrations in BALF and splenocyte culture 
supernatants were detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Transcription factor GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA expression in splenocytes and lung
tissue were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Total inflammatory cells and eosinophils in BALF were reduced in the CpG
ODN-treated group compared with the asthma group, and inflammatory cell
infiltration in lung tissue was also significantly alleviated. CpG ODN treatment 
increased the interferon-gamma concentration but decreased the interleukin-4
concentration in both BALF and splenocyte culture supernatants. GATA-3 mRNA
expression was reduced in both lung tissue and splenocytes in the CpG ODN-treated
group, while the mRNA ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 in splenocytes was increased.
CONCLUSION: CpG ODN treatment inhibits airway inflammatory cell infiltration and 
regulates interferon-gamma/interleukin-4 synthesis in asthmatic mice, possibly
through a mechanism of downregulation of GATA-3 mRNA expression in both lung
tissue and splenocytes.

PMID: 16115380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005 Aug;46(2):328-38.

Interleukin-12 and -18 levels in peritoneal dialysate effluent correlate with the
outcome of peritonitis in patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis: implications
for the Type I/Type II T-cell immune response.

Wang HH(1), Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.

BACKGROUND: We previously showed that a positive impact of peritoneal defense
response on the outcome of peritoneal dialysis (PD)-related peritonitis is
characterized by an increased pattern of peritoneal CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio with a
predominant CD4(+)-T helper subtype 1 phenotype. To further explore longitudinal 
changes in peritoneal immunity during PD-related peritonitis, we examined the
production of interleukin 12 (IL-12), IL-18, and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) in 
peritoneal dialysate effluent (PDE) and kinetic expression of the transcription
factors T box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and guanine adenine thymine adenine
(GATA) binding protein 3 (GATA-3) in peritoneal T cells during peritonitis.
Correlations between these observations and responses to antibiotics were
analyzed.
METHODS: IL-12, IL-18, and IFN-gamma protein and IFN-gamma, T-bet, and GATA-3
messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured in PDE during various phases of peritonitis in
40 patients undergoing PD. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to
whether they had a rapid versus delayed response to antibiotic treatment.
RESULTS: In the early phase of peritonitis, IL-12, IL-18, and IFN-gamma levels in
PDE were significantly greater in the rapid-response group (P < 0.05). Changes in
peritoneal IL-12 and IL-18 levels preceded changes in IFN-gamma levels. The
kinetics of IFN-gamma, T-bet, and GATA-3 mRNA expression in peritoneal T cells,
measured by means of real-time polymerase chain reaction, differed between the 2 
groups. In the rapid-response group, IFN-gamma and T-bet mRNA expression
increased, whereas that of GATA-3 decreased over time. Results were opposite in
the delayed-response group, with IFN-gamma and T-bet levels decreasing and GATA-3
levels increasing over time.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that local IL-12 and IL-18 production is part of a
protective early immune response to PD-related peritonitis. High IL-12 and IL-18 
levels in PDE during the early phase of peritonitis correlated with a predominant
type 1 immune response and favorable outcome.

PMID: 16112053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Endocrinology. 2005 Nov;146(11):4905-16. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Protein kinase A-dependent synergism between GATA factors and the nuclear
receptor, liver receptor homolog-1, regulates human aromatase (CYP19) PII
promoter activity in breast cancer cells.

Bouchard MF(1), Taniguchi H, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, T1-49, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université Research Centre, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Ste-Foy, Quebec, Canada G1V
4G2.

Cancers, including that of the breast, are the result of multiple contributing
factors including aberrant gene expression. Indeed, the CYP19 gene encoding P450 
aromatase, the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthesis, is up-regulated in breast
tumors predominantly via the cAMP-responsive gonad-type PII promoter, ultimately 
leading to increased intratumoral estrogen production and tumor growth. Thus,
identifying the molecular factors involved in aromatase PII promoter regulation
is essential for our understanding and treatment of the disease. Because we have 
previously shown activity of the murine aromatase PII promoter to be markedly
up-regulated by GATA factors with respect to the gonads, we hypothesized that
GATA factors are also key determinants of human PII promoter-driven aromatase
transcription in breast tumors. We now show that GATA3 and GATA4 are indeed
expressed in several breast cancer cells lines. Consistent with the cAMP
dependence of the PII promoter, activation elicited by GATA3 or GATA4 alone and
the striking synergism between GATA3 or GATA4 and the nuclear receptor liver
receptor homolog (LRH)-1 was intimately linked to forskolin treatment or
overexpression of protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunit. PKA-mediated
phosphorylation increases the interaction between GATA3 and LRH-1 and the
requirement for PKA in aromatase PII promoter stimulation involves at least three
specific amino acid residues: GATA3 Ser308, GATA4 Ser261, and LRH-1 Ser469.
Finally, we show that the human LRH-1 promoter is itself a target for GATA
factors. Thus, taken together, our results suggest that GATA factors likely
contribute to aberrant aromatase expression in breast tumors through two
distinct, yet complementary mechanisms.

PMID: 16109788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Sep;35(9):2709-17.

Human T helper (Th) cell lineage commitment is not directly linked to the
secretion of IFN-gamma or IL-4: characterization of Th cells isolated by FACS
based on IFN-gamma and IL-4 secretion.

Cao W(1), Chen Y, Alkan S, Subramaniam A, Long F, Liu H, Diao R, Delohery T,
McCormick J, Chen R, Ni D, Wright PS, Zhang X, Busch S, Zilberstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Bridgewater, NJ 07059, USA. wcao@vrxus.jnj.com

Upon activation in vitro, only a fraction of the bulk human T helper cell
cultures secret the hallmark Th1/2 cytokines (IFN-gamma for Th1 and IL-4 for Th2,
respectively). It is uncertain whether these IFN-gamma-/IL-4- cells are
differentiated Th1 or Th2 cells. Here, we have characterized live IFN-gamma+,
IL-4+ and IFN-gamma-/IL-4- cells isolated from Th cell cultures treated under Th1
or Th2 polarizing conditions by employing affinity matrix capture technology. RNA
samples from the sorted cells were analyzed by real time RT-PCR and microarrays. 
The double negative cells from either Th1 or Th2 cultures expressed lower levels 
of Th1/Th2 marker cytokine genes (IFNgamma, IL4, and IL5). However, they were
comparable with the IFN-gamma+ or IL-4+ cells in the expression levels of other
Th1/Th2 marker genes (GATA3, Tbet, and IL12Rbeta2). Most importantly, these
double negative cells were already committed in their Th1/Th2 lineages. Gene
expression profiling analysis showed that very few previously identified Th1/Th2 
marker genes were differentially expressed between the IFN-gamma or IL-4
producers and the non-producers, further underscoring the similarity between
these two groups.

PMID: 16106470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Immunol Res. 2005;32(1-3):193-200.

Fate vs choice: the immune system reloaded.

Murphy KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. murphy@pathbox.wustl.edu

Development can occur by either instructive or stochastic processes. My
colleagues and I have studied the contributions of these processes to
differentiation of naïve CD4+ T-cells to either a Th1 or Th2 phenotype. Our
initial discovery that pathogens in our in vitro priming system led to the
development of Th1 cells through the action of interleukin-12 was important
evidence of a link between innate and adaptive immunity. Subsequent studies in
our laboratory revealed an important role for GATA-3 autoactivation in Th2
development. Other interesting projects that have emerged as a result of our Th
cell differentiation studies include understanding the role of the inhibitory
immunoreceptor B- and T-lymphocyte attenuator in the immune response, as well as 
the role of the transcription factor ERM in both T-cells and spermatogenesis. We 
currently maintain our interests in the Th differentiation field by trying to
understand the role of type 1 interferons in Th1 development and the role of
alternate promoters for the GATA-3 gene, among other things, but are also
actively embarking on studies related to the choice between divergent cell types 
during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

PMID: 16106070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3440-8. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Transcription factor GATA-1 potently represses the expression of the HIV-1
coreceptor CCR5 in human T cells and dendritic cells.

Sundrud MS(1), Vancompernolle SE, Eger KA, Bruno TC, Subramaniam A, Mummidi S,
Ahuja SK, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN, USA.

CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) is the major HIV-1 coreceptor and its expression
levels are a critical determinant of HIV-1 infection. However, the molecular
mechanisms of CCR5 regulation in primary targets of HIV-1 remain unknown. Despite
binding to conserved DNA elements, we show that the transcription factors GATA
binding protein 1 (GATA-1) and GATA-3 differentially suppress the expression of
CCR5 in stem-cell-derived dendritic cells and primary human T-cell subsets. In
addition, GATA-1 expression was also more potent than GATA-3 in suppressing T
helper 1 (Th1)-associated genes, interferon-gamma (IFNgamma), and CXC chemokine
receptor-3 (CXCR3). GATA-1, but not GATA-3, potently suppressed CCR5
transcription, thereby rendering human T cells resistant to CCR5-tropic HIV-1
infection. However, GATA-1 could also serve as a surrogate for GATA-3 in its
canonic role of programming Th2 gene expression. These findings provide insight
into GATA-3-mediated gene regulation during T-cell differentiation. Importantly, 
decoding the mechanisms of GATA-1-mediated repression of CCR5 may offer an
opportunity to develop novel approaches to inhibit CCR5 expression in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1895046
PMID: 16091457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Histochem Cytochem. 2006 Feb;54(2):161-9. Epub 2005 Aug 8.

Aberrant gata-3 expression in human pancreatic cancer.

Gulbinas A(1), Berberat PO, Dambrauskas Z, Giese T, Giese N, Autschbach F, Kleeff
J, Meuer S, Büchler MW, Friess H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
110 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

Gata-3 has been shown to specifically alter its expression patterns in different 
types of cancers. Recent evidence suggests that an interference of Gata-3 exists 
in the TGF-beta signaling pathway. To determine the role of Gata-3 in pancreatic 
cancer, pancreatic cancer samples were analyzed in comparison to normal
pancreatic tissues. Furthermore, four different pancreatic cancer cell lines with
different alterations of the TGF-beta pathway were studied. To evaluate if a
potential relationship with TGF-beta signaling pathway exists, we correlated mRNA
expression levels with the expression of TGF-betas, TGF-beta receptors, and
Smad-3. Finally, we analyzed the influence of TGF-beta on Gata-3 expression in
vitro. All pancreatic cancer samples demonstrated a marked overexpression of
Gata-3 mRNA and protein. Immunohistochemical staining revealed strong and
persistent cytoplasmic Gata-3 immunoreactivity in cancer cells. In an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, a disturbed nuclear translocation was
confirmed. The expression of Gata-3 showed a significant correlation with the
expression of TGF-betas, TGF-beta receptors, and Smad-3. TGF-beta responsive cell
lines showed a downregulation of Gata-3 mRNA upon TGF-beta exposure, whereas in
TGF-beta-unresponsive cell lines, Gata-3 mRNA expression persisted at high
levels. Furthermore, strong specific upregulation of Gata-3 impaired nuclear
translocation and its cooperative action with the TGF-beta pathway, suggesting
that Gata-3 plays a central role in human pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 16087702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Curr Biol. 2005 Aug 9;15(15):1340-51.

Sox9 is essential for outer root sheath differentiation and the formation of the 
hair stem cell compartment.

Vidal VP(1), Chaboissier MC, Lützkendorf S, Cotsarelis G, Mill P, Hui CC, Ortonne
N, Ortonne JP, Schedl A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636, Centre de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, Parc Valrose, 06108
Nice, France.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian hair represents an unparalleled model system to
understand both developmental processes and stem cell biology. The hair follicle 
consists of several concentric epithelial sheaths with the outer root sheath
(ORS) forming the outermost layer. Functionally, the ORS has been implicated in
the migration of hair stem cells from the stem cell niche toward the hair bulb.
However, factors required for the differentiation of this critical cell lineage
remain to be identified. Here, we describe an unexpected role of the
HMG-box-containing gene Sox9 in hair development.
RESULTS: Sox9 expression can be first detected in the epithelial component of the
hair placode but then becomes restricted to the outer root sheath (ORS) and the
hair stem cell compartment (bulge). Using tissue-specific inactivation of Sox9,
we demonstrate that this gene serves a crucial role in hair differentiation and
that skin deleted for Sox9 lacks external hair. Strikingly, the ORS acquires
epidermal characteristics with ectopic expression of GATA3. Moreover, Sox9 knock 
hair show severe proliferative defects and the stem cell niche never forms.
Finally, we show that Sox9 expression depends on sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
and demonstrate overexpression in skin tumors in mouse and man.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that although Sox9 is dispensable for hair induction, it
directs differentiation of the ORS and is required for the formation of the hair 
stem cell compartment. Our genetic analysis places Sox9 in a molecular cascade
downstream of sonic hedgehog and suggests that this gene is involved in basal
cell carcinoma.

PMID: 16085486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2655-65.

Morphine withdrawal contributes to Th cell differentiation by biasing cells
toward the Th2 lineage.

Kelschenbach J(1), Barke RA, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.

The consequences that drug withdrawal has on immune functioning has only recently
been appreciated; however, given the wide variety of use and abuse of opiate
analgesics, understanding the decrements to immune function that withdrawal from 
these drugs causes is of crucial importance. In previous work, we have
demonstrated that morphine treatment contributes to immunosuppression by
polarizing Th cells toward the Th2 lineage. In the current study, it was
hypothesized that morphine withdrawal would result in Th2 differentiation and
subsequent immune dysfunction. To address this hypothesis, mice were chronically 
treated with morphine for 72 h followed by a 24-h withdrawal period. It was
determined that 24-h morphine withdrawal resulted in a decrease in IFN-gamma, the
Th1 signature cytokine, whereas the Th2 cytokine, IL-4, was increased. In
addition, Western blot and EMSA experiments revealed that morphine
withdrawal-induced Th2 differentiation was mediated through the classical Th2
transcription factors Stat-6 and GATA-3. In addition, the consequence of morphine
withdrawal in the presence of an immune stimulation was also examined by treating
mice in vivo with LPS before morphine withdrawal. Following withdrawal, it was
found that the Th1-polarizing cytokine IL-12 was significantly decreased,
providing further support for the observation that withdrawal results in Th2
differentiation by possibly impacting the generation of an appropriate innate
immune response which directs subsequent adaptive Th1/Th2 responses.

PMID: 16081842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2102-10.

Opposing roles for RelB and Bcl-3 in regulation of T-box expressed in T cells,
GATA-3, and Th effector differentiation.

Corn RA(1), Hunter C, Liou HC, Siebenlist U, Boothby MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.

CD4+ T cells with a block in the NF-kappaB signaling pathway exhibit decreases in
Th1 responses and diminished nuclear levels of multiple transactivating
NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB proteins. To determine the lineage-intrinsic contributions 
of these transactivators to Th differentiation, T cells from mice deficient in
specific subunits were cultured in exogenous cytokines promoting either Th1 or
Th2 differentiation. RelB-deficient cells exhibited dramatic defects in Th1
differentiation and IFN-gamma production, whereas no consistent defect in either 
Th1 or Th2 responses was observed with c-Rel-deficient cells. In sharp contrast, 
Bcl-3-null T cells displayed no defect in IFN-gamma production, but their Th2
differentiation and IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production were significantly impaired.
The absence of RelB led to a dramatic decrease in the expression of T-box
expressed in T cells and Stat4. In contrast, Bcl-3-deficient cells exhibited
decreased GATA-3, consistent with evidence that Bcl-3 can transactivate a gata3
promoter. These data indicate that Bcl-3 and RelB exert distinct and opposing
effects on the expression of subset-determining transcription factors, suggesting
that the characteristics of Th cell responses may be regulated by titrating the
stoichiometry of transactivating NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB complexes in the nuclei of
developing helper effector cells.

PMID: 16081776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Jul;22(2):343-53.

Differentiation of an auditory neuronal cell line suitable for cell
transplantation.

Nicholl AJ(1), Kneebone A, Davies D, Cacciabue-Rivolta DI, Rivolta MN, Coffey P, 
Holley MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Addison Building, Western Bank, Sheffield, 
S10 2TN, UK.

The auditory neuroblast cell line US/VOT-N33 (N33), which is conditionally
immortal, was studied as an in vitro model for the differentiation of spiral
ganglion neurons (SGNs) and as a candidate for cell transplantation in rodents.
It expresses numerous molecular markers characteristic of auditory neuroblasts,
including the transcription factors GATA3, NeuroD, Brn3a and Islet1, as well as
the neuronal cytoskeletal protein beta3-tubulin. It displays active migratory
behaviour in vitro and in vivo. In the presence of the fibroblast growth factors 
FGF1 or FGF2 it differentiates bipolar morphologies similar to those of native
SGNs. In coculture with neonatal cochlear tissue it is repelled from epithelial
surfaces but not from native SGNs, alongside which it extends parallel neuronal
processes. When injected into the retina in vivo, EGFP-labelled N33 cells were
traced for 1-2 weeks and migrated rapidly within the subretinal space. Cells that
found their way into the retinal ganglion cell layer extended multiple processes 
but did not express beta3-tubulin. The ability of N33 to migrate, to
differentiate, to localize with native SGNs in vitro and to survive in vivo
suggests that they provide an effective model for SGN differentiation and for
cell transplantation into the ear.

PMID: 16045487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Immunol Lett. 2005 Jul 15;99(2):228-35. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Immune responses to Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and tuberculin protein in
GATA-3-transgenic mice.

Ozawa H(1), Tamauchi H, Ito M, Terashima M, Inoue M, Hozumi K, Habu S, Watanabe
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Jikei University School of Medicine,
Minatoku, Tokyo, Japan.

GATA-3 appears to be key to the Th2 response. However, few in vivo experiments
have examined the function of GATA-3 in Th1 and Th2 immune responses. We
developed two lines of GATA-3-transgenic (Tg) mice harboring the SRalpha or lck
promoters and examined the Th2 immune responses of mice infected with the
intestinal nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and the Th1 responses with
purified derivative of tuberculin (PPD) immunization. Numbers of peripheral blood
eosinophils in all GATA-3-Tg mice increased 10- to 20-fold after primary
infection with N. brasiliensis and 25-100-fold after secondary infection. The
number of eosinophils in infected GATA-3-Tg mice was significantly higher than
that in infected control littermates. Total IgE levels after primary infection in
GATA-3-Tg mice were 8-450-fold increased, which was significantly higher than
those of control mice. Mesenteric lymph node cells of infected GATA-3-Tg mice
upon stimulation with N. brasiliensis antigen secreted more IL-5 and IL-13 than
those of control mice. However, production of IL-4 and IFN-gamma were comparable 
between GATA-3-Tg and controls. Mice immunized with PPD were intradermally
challenged with PPD to induce delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH). The amount of 
footpad swelling caused by the DTH reaction in GATA-3-Tg mice was significantly
smaller than that of control littermates. Inguinal lymph node cells from
GATA-3-Tg mice stimulated with PPD in vitro secreted more IL-5, IL-10 and less
IFN-gamma than those of control littermates. These results suggested that Th1 and
Th2 driven conditions enhance IL-5 production in GATA-3-Tg mice through the
direct binding of GATA-3 to the IL-5 promoter region. The influence of GATA-3 on 
IL-13, IFN-gamma and IL-10 production varied according to the stimulating
conditions. However, IL-4 production was not significantly elevated in GATA-3-Tg 
mice, indicating that IL-4 and IL-5 production was differentially regulated in
these mice.

PMID: 16009272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diabetologia. 2005 Aug;48(8):1576-84. Epub 2005 Jul 8.

Wheat protein-induced proinflammatory T helper 1 bias in mesenteric lymph nodes
of young diabetes-prone rats.

Chakir H(1), Lefebvre DE, Wang H, Caraher E, Scott FW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6,
Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Type 1 diabetes is the result of an inflammatory T helper 1
(Th1) lymphocyte-mediated beta cell destructive process. The majority of
diabetes-prone BioBreeding (BBdp) rats fed wheat protein-based diets, such as
NTP-2000, develop type 1 diabetes and display a mild coeliac-like enteropathy.
Mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), which drain the gut, are the major inductive site 
where dietary antigens are recognised in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue
(GALT). We hypothesised that this compartment could be a site of abnormal wheat
protein-induced Th1 cell activation.
METHODS: MLN cells were isolated from BBdp and BB control (BBc) rats that were
fed NTP-2000 or a hydrolysed casein (HC)-based diet at ages that pre-date classic
insulitis. The inflammatory status, phenotype and proliferation of these cells in
response to wheat protein were determined.
RESULTS: The expression ratio of T-bet : Gata3, master transcription factors for 
Th1 and Th2 cytokines, was increased in the MLN from NTP-2000-fed BBdp rats
compared with that from BBc rats, mainly due to decreased Gata3 expression.
CD3(+)CD4(+)IFN-gamma(+) T cells were more prevalent in the MLN of wheat-fed BBdp
rats, but remained at control levels in BBdp rats fed a diabetes-retardant HC
diet. BBdp MLN cells proliferated in response to wheat protein antigens in a
specific, dose-dependent manner, and >93% of cells were CD3(+)CD4(+) T cells.
This proliferation was associated with a low proportion of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells 
and a high proportion of dendritic cells in the MLN of BBdp rats.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Before insulitis is established, the MLNs of
wheat-fed BBdp rats contain an unusually high proportion of Th1 cells that
proliferate specifically in response to wheat protein antigens.

PMID: 16003532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):914-23.

Type 1 and type 2 T-cell profiles in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Wang T(1), Zhao H, Ren H, Guo J, Xu M, Yang R, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, PR China.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):868.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Adult idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a
chronic acquired organ-specific autoimmune hemorrhagic disease characterized by
the production of antibodies against antigens on the membranes of platelet,
resulting in enhanced Fc-mediated destruction of the platelets by macrophages in 
the reticuloendothelial system. Dysfunctional cellular immunity is considered
important in the pathophysiology of ITP. The aim of this study was to explore the
profile of type1 and type2 T cells in chronic ITP patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The balance of Th1/Th2 and Tc1/Tc2 was studied by
simultaneous analysis of intracellular cytokines of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells and splenocytes in short-term cultures activated with PMA/ionomycin as well
as mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 
splenocytes using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Patients with active disease but not patients in remission had
significant higher Th1/Th2 (p<0.01) and Tc1/Tc2 (p<0.01) ratios in peripheral
blood (PB) and significant higher Th1/Th2 ratio in splenocytes (p<0.01) than
those in the control group. The Tc1/Tc2 ratio in splenocytes in ITP patients was 
higher than that in control, but did not reach significant difference (p=0.082). 
GATA-3 mRNA expression in ITP patients was significantly lower both in PB
(p<0.01) and in splenocytes (p<0.01) than in corresponding samples from controls 
while there was no difference in T-bet expression.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that ITP is a T1 cell (Th1 and 
Tc1) predominant disease although the precise mechanisms await further functional
assay. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio may provide a surrogate marker of T1/T2 cytokine
balance. Shifting the cytokine patterns from T1 to T2 might be a potential
immunotherapy for ITP.

PMID: 15996929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):868.

Type 1 and type 2 T cells profile in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Olsson B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section for Hematology and Coagulation,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital. Bob.Olsson@medic.gu.se

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):914-23.

PMID: 15996919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Neurobiol Dis. 2005 Dec;20(3):890-7. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

GATA3 haploinsufficiency causes a rapid deterioration of distortion product
otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) in mice.

van Looij MA(1), van der Burg H, van der Giessen RS, de Ruiter MM, van der Wees
J, van Doorninck JH, De Zeeuw CI, van Zanten GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT, Erasmus Medical Center, PO Box 2060, 3000 CB Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. m.vanlooij@erasmusmc.nl

Human HDR (hypoparathyroidism, deafness and renal dysplasia)-syndrome is caused
by haploinsufficiency of zinc-finger transcription factor GATA3. The hearing loss
due to GATA3 haploinsufficiency has been shown to be peripheral in origin, but it
is unclear to what extent potential aberrations in the outer hair cells (OHCs)
contribute to this disorder. To further elucidate the pathophysiological
mechanism underlying the hearing defect in HDR-syndrome, we investigated the OHCs
in heterozygous Gata3-knockout mice at both the functional and morphological
level. While the signal-to-noise ratios of distortion product otoacoustic
emissions (DPOAE) in wild type mice did not change significantly during the first
half-year of live, those in the heterozygous Gata3 mice decreased dramatically.
In addition, both light microscopic and transmission electron microscopic
analyses showed that the number of OHCs containing vacuoles was increased in the 
mutants. Together, these findings indicate that outer hair cell malfunctioning
plays a major role in the hearing loss in HDR-syndrome.

PMID: 15994092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Clin Immunol. 2005 May;25(3):209-14.

mRNA quantification of T-bet, GATA-3, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 shows a defective Th1
immune response in the peripheral blood from rheumatoid arthritis patients: link 
with disease activity.

Kawashima M(1), Miossec P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology and INSERM U-403, Hospital Edouard
Herriot, Lyon, France.

A T helper (Th)1 cytokine profile is predominant in the inflamed synovium of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Since the situation in the blood is more
controversial, we studied the Th1/Th2 balance in the peripheral blood of RA
patients using mRNA markers. Total RNA was isolated directly from whole blood
from 20 RA patients and 14 healthy controls. T-bet and GATA-3 transcription
factors associated with Th1 and Th2 responses respectively, and IFNgamma and IL-4
mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR. In RA but not in control samples,
T-bet mRNA levels correlated positively with IFNgamma mRNA levels, and negatively
with CRP levels. Accordingly, RA patients were divided into two groups according 
to CRP levels. In comparison to RA patients with a low CRP (CRP < 40 mg/l),
patients with a high CRP (CRP>or=40 mg/l) had lower IFNgamma/beta-actin,
T-bet/beta-actin mRNA levels and T-bet/GATA-3 expression ratios. In conclusion,
RA blood cells showed a decreased Th1 situation as indicated by low IFNgamma and 
T-bet mRNA expression. This pattern was found only in patients with the most
active disease.

PMID: 15981085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29409-19. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Ras-ERK MAPK cascade regulates GATA3 stability and Th2 differentiation through
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Yamashita M(1), Shinnakasu R, Asou H, Kimura M, Hasegawa A, Hashimoto K, Hatano
N, Ogata M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan.

Differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into Th2 cells requires protein expression
of GATA3. Interleukin-4 induces STAT6 activation and subsequent GATA3
transcription. Little is known, however, on how T cell receptor-mediated
signaling regulates GATA3 and Th2 cell differentiation. Here we demonstrated that
T cell receptor-mediated activation of the Ras-ERK MAPK cascade stabilizes GATA3 
protein in developing Th2 cells through the inhibition of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Mdm2 was associated with GATA3 and induced
ubiquitination on GATA3, suggesting its role as a ubiquitin-protein isopeptide
ligase for GATA3 ubiquitination. Thus, the Ras-ERK MAPK cascade controls GATA3
protein stability by a post-transcriptional mechanism and facilitates
GATA3-mediated chromatin remodeling at Th2 cytokine gene loci leading to
successful Th2 cell differentiation.

PMID: 15975924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 1;175(1):566-74.

5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside: a novel immunomodulator with
therapeutic efficacy in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Nath N(1), Giri S, Prasad R, Salem ML, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple
sclerosis, is a Th1-mediated inflammatory demyelinating disease of the CNS.
AMP-activated protein kinase was reported recently to have anti-inflammatory
activities by negatively regulating NF-kappaB signaling. In this study, we
investigated the prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy of an AMP-activated
protein kinase activator, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR), 
in active and passive EAE induced by active immunization with PLP(139-151) or
MOG(35-55) and in adoptive transfer of PLP(139-151)-sensitized T cells,
respectively. In vivo treatment with AICAR exerted both prophylactic and
therapeutic effects on EAE, attenuating the severity of clinical disease. The
anti-inflammatory effects of AICAR were associated with the inhibition of the
Ag-specific recall responses and inhibition of the Th1-type cytokines IFN-gamma
and TNF-alpha, whereas it induced the production of Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10.
Treatment of PLP(139-151)-specific T cells in vitro with AICAR decreased their
expression of T-bet in response to IL-12, a Th1 transcription factor, whereas in 
response to IL-4, it induced the expression and phosphorylation of Th2
transcription factors GATA3 and STAT6, respectively. Moreover, treatment of APCs 
in vitro with AICAR inhibited their capability to present the proteolipid protein
peptide to PLP(139-151)-specific T cells. In an irrelevant Th1-mediated, OT-2 TCR
transgenic mouse model, AICAR impaired in vivo Ag-specific expansion of CD4(+) T 
cells. Together, these findings show for the first time that AICAR is a novel
immunomodulator with promising beneficial effects for the treatment of multiple
sclerosis and other Th1-mediated inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 15972693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Immunity. 2005 Jun;22(6):693-703.

PU.1 expression delineates heterogeneity in primary Th2 cells.

Chang HC(1), Zhang S, Thieu VT, Slee RB, Bruns HA, Laribee RN, Klemsz MJ, Kaplan 
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Primary T helper 2 cells are heterogeneous, expressing subsets of cytokines at
varying levels. Mechanisms controlling this spectrum of phenotypes are still
unclear. The ETS family transcription factor PU.1 is expressed in Th2 but not Th1
cells. Th2 cytokine production is decreased in cultures transduced with a
PU.1-expressing retrovirus and increased in Th2 cells following RNAi that
decreases PU.1 expression. In primary cultures, PU.1 expression is restricted to 
a subpopulation of Th2 cells that express CCL22 and a subset of Th2 cytokines.
PU.1 regulates the Th2 phenotype by interfering with GATA-3 DNA binding without
altering GATA-3 protein levels. Thus, the expression of PU.1 in subsets of Th2
cells establishes a defined cytokine profile and contributes towards establishing
the spectrum of cytokine production observed in Th2 populations.

PMID: 15963784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int Immunopharmacol. 2005 Aug;5(9):1406-14. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Bee venom modulates murine Th1/Th2 lineage development.

Nam S(1), Ko E, Park SK, Ko S, Jun CY, Shin MK, Hong MC, Bae H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, #1 Hoeki-dong
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Korea.

Administration of bee venom (BV) elicits anti-inflammatory, anti-nociceptive and 
anti-allergic effects in various animal models. This study was designed to
evaluate the direct effects of BV on helper T cell activities and on Th1/Th2
lineage development using both in vitro and in vivo conditions. In the Th1 skewed
condition, BV increased the expression of IFN-gamma mRNA and enhanced the
expression of T-bet on purified CD4(+) T cells from splenocytes of BALB/c mice.
On the other hand, BV treatment did not alter the expression of IL-4 or GATA-3 in
a Th2 driven environment. To elucidate the effects of BV on Th1/Th2 lineage
development under in vivo conditions, BV was given by intraperitonial injection
to BALB/c mice. It significantly increased the CD4(+) T cell population and
enhanced IFN-gamma expression, while IL-4 transcripts were not altered upon in
vivo activation using an anti-CD3 antibody injection. Taken together, these
results imply that BV induces Th1 lineage development from CD4(+) T cells by
increasing the expression of a Th1-specific cytokine, IFN-gamma. In addition,
this result may be mediated by inducing a Th1-specific transcription factor,
T-bet.

PMID: 15953567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2005;137 Suppl 1:55-9. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Role of GATA-3 in IL-5 gene transcription by CD4+ T cells of asthmatic patients.

Kaminuma O(1), Mori A, Kitamura N, Hashimoto T, Kitamura F, Inokuma S, Miyatake
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Helper T cells and T cell cytokines play central roles in allergic
disorders including bronchial asthma. We reported enhanced IL-5 production by
peripheral blood T cells of asthmatic patients. A transcription factor, GATA-3,
has been implicated in IL-5 gene expression. This study was undertaken to clarify
the role of GATA-3 in the upregulation of IL-5 synthesis in asthmatic patients.
METHOD: Peripheral CD4+ T cells were transfected with an IL-5 promoter reporter
construct as well as its mutants in the presence or absence of a GATA-3
expression vector. Messenger RNA expression level of GATA-3 in CD4+ T cells of
asthmatic subjects was compared to that of healthy donors.
RESULTS: IL-5 promoter activity in CD4+ T cells was enhanced by overexpression of
GATA-3, whereas it was diminished by the introduction of mutations in the
putative GATA-3 binding sites. The GATA-3 expression level in CD4+ T cells of
asthmatic patients was equivalent to that of healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: The expression level of GATA-3 may not be an essential factor to
cause IL-5 hyperproduction in bronchial asthma, though GATA-3 is crucially
involved in IL-5 gene transcription in human peripheral CD4+ T cells.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15947486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Science. 2005 Jun 10;308(5728):1563-5.

Immunology. Opposites attract in differentiating T cells.

Bix M(1), Kim S, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology,University of Washington School of Medicine, 1959
N.E. Pacific Street, HSC I6071, Seattle,WA 98195, USA. arao.cbr.med.harvard.edu

PMID: 15947163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 5;280(31):28177-85. Epub 2005 Jun 7.

A critical control element for interleukin-4 memory expression in T helper
lymphocytes.

Tykocinski LO(1), Hajkova P, Chang HD, Stamm T, Sözeri O, Löhning M, Hu-Li J,
Niesner U, Kreher S, Friedrich B, Pannetier C, Grütz G, Walter J, Paul WE,
Radbruch A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum, Berlin 10117, Germany.

Naive T helper (Th) lymphocytes are induced to express the il4 (interleukin-4)
gene by simultaneous signaling through the T cell receptor and the interleukin
(IL)-4 receptor. Upon restimulation with antigen, such preactivated Th
lymphocytes can reexpress the il4 gene independent of IL-4 receptor signaling.
This memory for expression of the il4 gene depends on epigenetic modification of 
the il4 gene locus and an increased expression of GATA-3, the key transcription
factor for Th2 differentiation. Here, we have identified a phylogenetically
conserved sequence, the conserved intronic regulatory element, in the first
intron of the il4 gene containing a tandem GATA-3 binding site. We show that
GATA-3 binds to this sequence in a position- and orientation-dependent manner, in
vitro and in vivo. DNA demethylation and histone acetylation of this region
occurs early and selectively in differentiating, IL-4-secreting Th2 lymphocytes. 
Deletion of the conserved element by replacement of the first exon and part of
the first intron of the il4 gene with gfp leads to a defect in the establishment 
of memory for expression of IL-4, in that reexpression of IL-4 still requires
costimulation by exogenous IL-4. The conserved intronic regulatory element thus
links the initial epigenetic modification of the il4 gene to GATA-3 and serves as
a genetic control element for memory expression of IL-4.

PMID: 15941711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Infect Immun. 2005 Jun;73(6):3394-401.

Transcriptional control of impaired Th1 responses in patent lymphatic filariasis 
by T-box expressed in T cells and suppressor of cytokine signaling genes.

Babu S(1), Kumaraswami V, Nutman TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases/NIH, 4 Center Drive, Room 4/B1-05, Bethesda, MD 20892-0425, USA.
sbabu@niaid.nih.gov

T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) and GATA-3 are transcription factors that play
a critical role in the development of Th1 and Th2 cells, as do genes of the SOCS 
(suppressor of cytokine signaling) family, albeit indirectly. Another
transcription factor, Foxp3, is a master regulator of natural regulatory T cells 
(Tregs). To identify the role of these factors in impaired Th1 responses of
patent filarial infection, analysis of cytokine, SOCS, and transcription factor
mRNA expression was performed on purified T cells of filaria-infected individuals
(n = 6) and uninfected controls (n = 6). As expected (and in contrast to cells of
uninfected individuals), there was a significant depression of gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma) and a concomitant increase in interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-10
mRNA expression following stimulation with parasite antigen (BmA) but not with a 
polyclonal T-cell (anti-CD3) stimulus. T-bet (but not GATA-3) was expressed at
significantly lower levels in cells of filaria-infected individuals in response
to BmA compared with those from the uninfected group, accounting, at least
partially, for the diminished IFN-gamma expression. Second, we found no
significant differences in expression of Foxp3 between the two groups, although
induction of Foxp3 expression correlated with induced expression levels of IL-10,
implicating Tregs in the IL-10 expression seen. Finally, parasite-specific T-cell
expression of SOCS-1, SOCS-5, and SOCS-7 was significantly diminished among
infected patients; in contrast, expression of SOCS-3 increased. Our data
therefore indicate that the impaired Th1 responses observed in patent lymphatic
filariasis are associated with decreased expression of T-bet, SOCS-1, SOCS-5, and
SOCS-7 and increased expression of SOCS-3 in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1111868
PMID: 15908366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;5(3):264-71.

Inhibitors of the tyrosine kinase signaling cascade for asthma.

Wong WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Immunology Program, National 
University of Singapore, MD2 18 Medical Drive, 117597 Singapore.
phcwongf@nus.edu.sg

The pathogenesis of allergic asthma involves the interplay of inflammatory cells 
and resident airway cells, and of their secreted mediators including cytokines,
chemokines, growth factors and inflammatory mediators. Tyrosine kinase signaling 
cascades play a critical role in the pathogenesis of allergic airway
inflammation. Receptor tyrosine kinases (e.g. epidermal growth factor receptor
[EGFR] and platelet-derived growth factor receptor) are important for the
pathogenesis of airway remodeling. Stimulation of non-receptor tyrosine kinases
(e.g. Lyn, Lck, Syk, ZAP-70, Btk, Itk and JAK) is the earliest detectable
signaling response upon activation of immune receptors (T cell receptor, B cell
receptor and FCepsilonR1), cytokine receptors and chemokine receptors in
inflammatory cells. Activation of tyrosine kinases invokes multiple downstream
signaling pathways, including phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), leading to cell
differentiation, survival, proliferation, degranulation and chemotaxis.
Inhibitors targeted at different enzyme molecules of the tyrosine kinase
signaling cascade might afford therapeutic potential for asthma.
Anti-inflammatory effects of pharmacological agents targeted at tyrosine kinases,
Syk, Itk, signal transducer and activator of transcription-1, NF-kappaB, GATA3,
EGFR, PI3K, MEK1/2, p38 MAPK and JNK have been reported in animal models of
allergic airway inflammation. Therefore, development of inhibitors targeted at
the tyrosine kinase signaling cascade is an attractive strategy for the treatment
of asthma.

PMID: 15907913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Hum Cell. 2004 Jun;17(2):85-92.

Transcription factor expression in cell lines derived from natural killer-cell
and natural killer-like T-cell leukemia-lymphoma.

Matsuo Y(1), Drexler HG, Harashima A, Okochi A, Shimizu N, Orita K.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Cell Center, Hayashibara Biochemical Labs, Okayama 702-8006, Japan.
yomatsuo@hayashibara.co.jp

Although a number of transcription factors (TFs) have been identified that play a
pivotal role in the development of hematopoietic lineages, only little is known
about factors that may influence development and lineage commitment of natural
killer (NK) or NK-like T (NKT)-cells. Obviously to fully appreciate the NK- and
NKT-cell differentiation process, it is important to identify and characterize
the TFs effecting the NK- and NKT-cell lineage. Furthermore, these TFs may play a
role in NK- or NKT-cell leukemias, in which the normal differentiation program is
presumably disturbed. The present study analyzed the expression of the following 
13 TFs: AML1, CEBPA, E2A, ETS1, GATA1, GATA2, GATA3, IKAROS, IRF1, PAX5, PU1,
TBET and TCF1 in 7 malignant NK-cell lines together with 5 malignant NKT-cell
lines, 5 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines including 3
gamma/delta T-cell receptor (TCR) type and 2 alpha/beta TCR type, and 3 B-cell
precursor (BCP) leukemia cell lines. AML1, E2A, ETS1, IKAROS and IRF1 were found 
to be positive for all cell lines tested whereas GATA1 turned out to be
universally negative. CEBPA, PAX5 and PU1 were negative for all cell lines tested
except in the three positive BCP-cell lines. GATA2 was positive for 3/5 T-cell
lines but negative for the other cell lines. GATA3 was positive for 7/7 NK-, 4/5 
NKT-, 5/5 T- and 2/3 BCP-cell lines. TBET was positive for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines and negative for all T- and BCP-cell lines except one BCP-cell line. In
contrast to the expression of TBET, TCF1 was negative for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines, being positive for 4/5 T- and 1/3 BCP-cell lines. Expression analysis of
TFs revealed that NK- and NKT-cell lines showed identical profiles, clearly
distinct from those of the other T-ALL or BCP-ALL leukemia-derived cell lines..

PMID: 15369140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 7;23(46):7669-78.

Mutation of GATA3 in human breast tumors.

Usary J(1), Llaca V, Karaca G, Presswala S, Karaca M, He X, Langerød A, Kåresen
R, Oh DS, Dressler LG, Lønning PE, Strausberg RL, Chanock S, Børresen-Dale AL,
Perou CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

GATA3 is an essential transcription factor that was first identified as a
regulator of immune cell function. In recent microarray analyses of human breast 
tumors, both normal breast luminal epithelium and estrogen receptor
(ESR1)-positive tumors showed high expression of GATA3. We sequenced genomic DNA 
from 111 breast tumors and three breast-tumor-derived cell lines and identified
somatic mutations of GATA3 in five tumors and the MCF-7 cell line. These
mutations cluster in the vicinity of the highly conserved second zinc-finger that
is required for DNA binding. In addition to these five, we identified using cDNA 
sequencing a unique mis-splicing variant that caused a frameshift mutation. One
of the somatic mutations we identified was identical to a germline GATA3 mutation
reported in two kindreds with HDR syndrome/OMIM #146255, which is an autosomal
dominant syndrome caused by the haplo-insufficiency of GATA3. The ectopic
expression of GATA3 in human 293T cells caused the induction of 73 genes
including six cytokeratins, and inhibited cell line doubling times. These data
suggest that GATA3 is involved in growth control and the maintenance of the
differentiated state in epithelial cells, and that GATA3 variants may contribute 
to tumorigenesis in ESR1-positive breast tumors.

PMID: 15361840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3935-44.

Analysis of Notch1 function by in vitro T cell differentiation of Pax5 mutant
lymphoid progenitors.

Höflinger S(1), Kesavan K, Fuxa M, Hutter C, Heavey B, Radtke F, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria.

Signaling through the Notch1 receptor is essential for T cell development in the 
thymus. Stromal OP9 cells ectopically expressing the Notch ligand Delta-like1
mimic the thymic environment by inducing hemopoietic stem cells to undergo in
vitro T cell development. Notch1 is also expressed on Pax5-/- pro-B cells, which 
are clonable lymphoid progenitors with a latent myeloid potential. In this study,
we demonstrate that Pax5-/- progenitors efficiently differentiate in vitro into
CD4+CD8+ alphabeta and gammadelta T cells upon coculture with OP9-Delta-like1
cells. In vitro T cell development of Pax5-/- progenitors strictly depends on
Notch1 function and progresses through normal developmental stages by expressing 
T cell markers and rearranging TCRbeta, gamma, and delta loci in the correct
temporal sequence. Notch-stimulated Pax5-/- progenitors efficiently down-regulate
the expression of B cell-specific genes, consistent with a role of Notch1 in
preventing B lymphopoiesis in the thymus. At the same time, Notch signaling
rapidly induces cell surface expression of the c-Kit receptor and transcription
of the target genes Deltex1 and pre-Talpha concomitant with the activation of TCR
Vbeta germline transcription and the regulatory genes GATA3 and Tcf1. These data 
suggest that Notch1 acts upstream of GATA3 and Tcf1 in early T cell development
and regulates Vbeta-DJbeta rearrangements by controlling the chromatin
accessibility of Vbeta genes at the TCRbeta locus.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 15356142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Ann Genet. 2004 Jul-Sep;47(3):281-7.

Chromosome 10p deletion in a patient with hypoparathyroidism, severe mental
retardation, autism and basal ganglia calcifications.

Verri A(1), Maraschio P, Devriendt K, Uggetti C, Spadoni E, Haeusler E, Federico 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurological Institute C. Mondino Foundation, Via Ferrata, 6 27100 Pavia,
Italy. annapia.verri@mondino.it

Chromosome 10p terminal deletions have been associated with a DiGeorge like
phenotype. Haploinsufficiency of the region 10p14-pter, results in
hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, renal anomaly, that is the triad that
features the HDR syndrome. Van Esch (2000) identified in a HDR patient, within a 
200 kb critical region, the GATA3 gene, a transcription factor involved in the
embryonic development of the parathyroids, auditory system and kidneys. We
describe a new male patient, 33-year-old, with 10p partial deletion affected by
hypocalcemia, basal ganglia calcifications and a severe autistic syndrome
associated with mental retardation. Neurologically he presented severe impairment
of language, hypotonia, clumsiness and a postural dystonic attitude. A peripheral
involvement of auditory pathways was documented by auditory evoked potentials
alterations. CT scan documented basal ganglia calcifications. Hyperintensity of
the lentiform nuclei was evident at the MRI examination. Renal ultrasound scan
was normal. Haploinsufficiency for GATA3 gene was documented with FISH analysis
using cosmid clone 1.2. Phenotypic spectrum observed in del (10p) is more severe 
than the classical DGS spectrum. GATA3 has been found to regulate the development
of serotoninergic neurons. A serotoninergic dysfunction may be linked with autism
in this patient.

PMID: 15337474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Development. 2004 Oct;131(19):4775-86. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

Essential role of Gata transcription factors in sympathetic neuron development.

Tsarovina K(1), Pattyn A, Stubbusch J, Müller F, van der Wees J, Schneider C,
Brunet JF, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Abteilung Neurochemie, Deutschordenstr.
46, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Sympathetic neurons are specified during their development from neural crest
precursors by a network of crossregulatory transcription factors, which includes 
Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a. Here, we have studied the function of Gata2 and 
Gata3 zinc-finger transcription factors in autonomic neuron development. In the
chick, Gata2 but not Gata3 is expressed in developing sympathetic precursor
cells. Gata2 expression starts after Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a expression, 
but before the onset of the noradrenergic marker genes Th and Dbh, and is
maintained throughout development. Gata2 expression is affected in the chick
embryo by Bmp gain- and loss-of-function experiments, and by overexpression of
Phox2b, Phox2a, Hand2 and Mash1. Together with the lack of Gata2/3 expression in 
Phox2b knockout mice, these results characterize Gata2 as member of the
Bmp-induced cluster of transcription factors. Loss-of-function experiments
resulted in a strong reduction in the size of the sympathetic chain and in
decreased Th expression. Ectopic expression of Gata2 in chick neural crest
precursors elicited the generation of neurons with a non-autonomic, Th-negative
phenotype. This implies a function for Gata factors in autonomic neuron
differentiation, which, however, depends on co-regulators present in the
sympathetic lineage. The present data establish Gata2 and Gata3 in the chick and 
mouse, respectively, as essential members of the transcription factor network
controlling sympathetic neuron development.

PMID: 15329349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Blood. 2004 Dec 15;104(13):4300-7. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Oral administration of K-11706 inhibits GATA binding activity, enhances
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 binding activity, and restores indicators in an in
vivo mouse model of anemia of chronic disease.

Nakano Y(1), Imagawa S, Matsumoto K, Stockmann C, Obara N, Suzuki N, Doi T,
Kodama T, Takahashi S, Nagasawa T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575,
Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) gene expression is under the control of hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1), and is negatively regulated by GATA. Interleukin 1beta
(IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), which increase the
binding activity of GATA and inhibit Epo promoter activity, are increased in
patients with anemia of chronic disease (ACD). We previously demonstrated the
ability of K-7174 (a GATA-specific inhibitor), when injected intraperitoneally,
to improve Epo production that had been inhibited by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha
treatment. In the present study, we examined the ability of both K-11706, which
inhibits GATA and enhances HIF-1 binding activity, and K-13144, which has no
effect on GATA or HIF-1 binding activity, to improve Epo production following
inhibition by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha in Hep3B cells in vitro and in an in vivo
mouse assay. Oral administration of K-11706 reversed the decreases in hemoglobin 
and serum Epo concentrations, reticulocyte counts, and numbers of erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-Es) induced by IL-1beta or TNF-alpha. These results
raise the possibility of using orally administered K-11706 for treating patients 
with ACD.

PMID: 15328158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 1;173(5):3432-6.

Vitamin D receptor-deficient mice fail to develop experimental allergic asthma.

Wittke A(1), Weaver V, Mahon BD, August A, Cantorna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Immunology Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park 16802, USA.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2005 Apr 15;174(8):4451; author reply 4451.

The active metabolite of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)))
is known to modulate the immune response in Th1 cell-directed diseases. To
investigate the role of vitamin D in Th2 cell-directed diseases, experimental
allergic asthma was induced in vitamin D receptor (VDR) knockout and in wild-type
(WT) mice. As expected, WT mice developed symptoms of airway inflammation with an
influx of eosinophils, elevated Th2 cytokine levels, mucous production, and
airway hyperresponsiveness. The administration of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) had no effect
on asthma severity. The only discernable effect of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) on
experimental allergic asthma in WT mice was an increased expression of two
Th2-related genes (soluble CD23 and GATA-3) in lungs of BALB/c mice exposed to Ag
through the nasal route only. By contrast, asthma-induced VDR knockout mice
failed to develop airway inflammation, eosinophilia, or airway
hyperresponsiveness, despite high IgE concentrations and elevated Th2 cytokines. 
The data suggest that although 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) induced these Th2-type genes, the 
treatment failed to have any affect on experimental asthma severity. However,
VDR-deficient mice failed to develop experimental allergic asthma, suggesting an 
important role for the vitamin D endocrine system in the generation of Th2-driven
inflammation in the lung.

PMID: 15322208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Vis. 2004 Aug 9;10:537-43.

Retinal selectivity of gene expression in rat retinal versus brain capillary
endothelial cell lines by differential display analysis.

Tomi M(1), Abukawa H, Nagai Y, Hata T, Takanaga H, Ohtsuki S, Terasaki T, Hosoya 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Toyama, Japan.

PURPOSE: The retina is a neural tissue especially differentiated for vision and, 
thus, the inner blood-retinal barrier (inner BRB) specific molecules may play an 
essential role in maintaining neural functions in the retina. The purpose of the 
present study was to identify selectively expressed genes at the inner
blood-retinal barrier compared with the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
METHODS: A comparison of expressed genes between conditionally immortalized rat
retinal (TR-iBRB) cell lines and brain capillary endothelial (TR-BBB) cell lines 
was performed using mRNA differential display analysis and quantitative real time
PCR analysis. The rat M-cadherin gene was cloned by performing 5' RACE, and its
protein expression was detected by immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: Eight clones were identified as highly expressed genes in TR-iBRB cells 
including GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3), cytosolic branched chain amino
transferase (BCATc), and M-cadherin (cadherin-15). The rat M-cadherin gene was
cloned from TR-iBRB cells, for the first time, and has >86% amino acid sequence
identity to the previously cloned mammalian M-cadherins. Rat M-cadherin
expression in TR-iBRB cells was much greater than that in TR-BBB cells as far as 
mRNA and protein levels were concerned.
CONCLUSIONS: M-cadherin, GATA-3, and BCATc are highly expressed in TR-iBRB cells 
compared with TR-BBB cells and may indeed be involved in unique functions at the 
inner BRB.

PMID: 15316464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4413-23. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Endothelin-A receptor-dependent and -independent signaling pathways in
establishing mandibular identity.

Ruest LB(1), Xiang X, Lim KC, Levi G, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and the Birth
Defects Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The lower jaw skeleton is derived from cephalic neural crest (CNC) cells that
reside in the mandibular region of the first pharyngeal arch. Endothelin-A
receptor (Ednra) signaling in crest cells is crucial for their development, as
Ednra(-/-) mice are born with severe craniofacial defects resulting in neonatal
lethality. In this study, we undertook a more detailed analysis of mandibular
arch development in Ednra(-/-) embryos to better understand the cellular and
molecular basis for these defects. We show that most lower jaw structures in
Ednra(-/-) embryos undergo a homeotic transformation into maxillary-like
structures similar to those observed in Dlx5/Dlx6(-/-) embryos, though lower
incisors are still present in both mutant embryos. These structural changes are
preceded by aberrant expansion of proximal first arch gene expression into the
distal arch, in addition to the previously described loss of a Dlx6/Hand2
expression network. However, a small distal Hand2 expression domain remains.
Although this distal expression is not dependent on either Ednra or Dlx5/Dlx6
function, it may require one or more GATA factors. Using fate analysis, we show
that these distal Hand2-positive cells probably contribute to lower incisor
formation. Together, our results suggest that the establishment of a 'mandibular 
identity' during lower jaw development requires both Ednra-dependent and
-independent signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2818681
PMID: 15306564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jul;17(7):1031-4.

HDR (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, renal dysplasia) syndrome
presenting with hypocalcemia-induced generalized psoriasis.

Aksoylar S(1), Aydinok Y, Serdaroglu E, Coker M, Ozdemir F, Ozkinay F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey.
serap@med.ege.edu.tr

HDR syndrome is a newly recognized very rare syndrome defined by the combination 
of hypoparathyroidism, renal dysplasia and sensorineural deafness.
Haplo-insufficiency of the GATA3 gene is the underlying mechanism of the HDR
syndrome. Here we report a 16 year-old girl with HDR syndrome who presented with 
generalized psoriasis, which is an unusual presentation. Skin lesions rapidly
disappeared after replacement therapy with calcium. It is suggested that
generalized psoriasis might have been induced by hypocalcemia due to
hypoparathyroidism associated with HDR syndrome.

PMID: 15301053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Mar;64(3):415-8. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

Effect of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with infliximab on IFN gamma, IL4,
T-bet, and GATA-3 expression: link with improvement of systemic inflammation and 
disease activity.

Kawashima M(1), Miossec P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, INSERM U-403, Hospital Edouard
Herriot, 69437 Lyon Cedex 03, France.

OBJECTIVE: To study interferon gamma (IFN gamma) production and the expression of
T-bet and GATA-3, the transcription factors associated with Th1 and Th2, in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from patients with rheumatoid arthritis
before and during infliximab treatment, so as to distinguish between a disease
specific and a disease activity dependent defect.
METHODS: Rheumatoid PBMC were obtained at weeks 0 and 6 of infliximab treatment
and cultured for seven days with or without interleukin (IL)12 or the combination
of IL12 and IL18. IFN gamma concentrations in supernatants were determined by
ELISA. mRNA expression of IFN gamma, IL4, T-bet, and GATA-3 was determined by
real time RT-PCR in whole blood at weeks 0 and 22.
RESULTS: A reduction in spontaneous IFN gamma production and in the response to
Th1 inducing cytokines occurred in rheumatoid PBMC. Reduction of systemic
inflammation with infliximab treatment increased IFN gamma production in response
to IL12 or IL12+IL18. The IFN gamma/IL4 expression ratio of rheumatoid blood
before treatment was lower than in healthy controls but was increased by
infliximab treatment. T-bet expression or T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of rheumatoid blood 
was less than in controls. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was not influenced by
infliximab treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 or IFN gamma and IL4 expression
appeared different. The IFN gamma/IL4 ratio might express the blood Th1/Th2
balance better than the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Reduced IFN gamma production by
rheumatoid PBMC and levels of IFN gamma and IL4 mRNA expression in blood were
linked to disease improvement, indicating an association between this systemic
Th1 feature and disease activity.

PMCID: PMC1755397
PMID: 15286007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Neurobiol. 2004 Sep 5;60(3):275-88.

Hedgehog and Fgf signaling pathways regulate the development of tphR-expressing
serotonergic raphe neurons in zebrafish embryos.

Teraoka H(1), Russell C, Regan J, Chandrasekhar A, Concha ML, Yokoyama R, Higashi
K, Take-Uchi M, Dong W, Hiraga T, Holder N, Wilson SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. hteraoka@rakuno.ac.jp

Serotonin (5HT) plays major roles in the physiological regulation of many
behavioral processes, including sleep, feeding, and mood, but the genetic
mechanisms by which serotonergic neurons arise during development are poorly
understood. In the present study, we have investigated the development of
serotonergic neurons in the zebrafish. Neurons exhibiting 5HT-immunoreactivity
(5HT-IR) are detected from 45 h postfertilization (hpf) in the ventral hindbrain 
raphe, the hypothalamus, pineal organ, and pretectal area. Tryptophan
hydroxylases encode rate-limiting enzymes that function in the synthesis of 5HT. 
As part of this study, we cloned and analyzed a novel zebrafish tph gene named
tphR. Unlike two other zebrafish tph genes (tphD1 and tphD2), tphR is expressed
in serotonergic raphe neurons, similar to tph genes in mammalian species. tphR is
also expressed in the pineal organ where it is likely to be involved in the
pathway leading to synthesis of melatonin. To better understand the signaling
pathways involved in the induction of the serotonergic phenotype, we analyzed
tphR expression and 5HT-IR in embryos in which either Hh or Fgf signals are
abrogated. Hindbrain 5HT neurons are severely reduced in mutants lacking activity
of either Ace/Fgf8 or the transcription factor Noi/Pax2.1, which regulates
expression of ace/fgf8, and probably other genes encoding signaling proteins.
Similarly, serotonergic raphe neurons are absent in embryos lacking Hh activity
confirming a conserved role for Hh signals in the induction of these cells.
Conversely, over-activation of the Hh pathway increases the number of
serotonergic neurons. As in mammals, our results are consistent with the
transcription factors Nk2.2 and Gata3 acting downstream of Hh activity in the
development of serotonergic raphe neurons. Our results show that the pathways
involved in induction of hindbrain serotonergic neurons are likely to be
conserved in all vertebrates and help establish the zebrafish as a model system
to study this important neuronal class.

PMCID: PMC2789256
PMID: 15281067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Aug;137(2):444-9.

Th1 and Th2 cytokine production is suppressed at the level of transcriptional
regulation in Kawasaki disease.

Kimura J(1), Takada H, Nomura A, Ohno T, Mizuno Y, Saito M, Kusuhara K, Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

To clarify the functional state of T cells in Kawasaki disease, we analysed mRNA 
expression levels of Th1/Th2 cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-4) along with
Th1/Th2-inducing transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, which play pivotal
roles in the development of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. By real-time PCR,
IFN-gamma mRNA levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were
significantly decreased in Kawasaki disease patients compared with those with
measles, and tended to be lower than those in healthy controls. T-bet mRNA levels
were significantly decreased in patients with Kawasaki disease compared with
healthy controls. In addition, IL-4 and GATA-3 mRNA levels were significantly
decreased in Kawasaki disease compared with healthy controls. Regulatory cytokine
mRNA levels (TGF-beta and IL-10) were also decreased in Kawasaki disease. The
mRNA levels of IFN-gamma showed a significant positive correlation with those of 
T-bet in Kawasaki disease. These results suggest that the suppressed function of 
Th1 and Th2, associated with the suppression of both T-bet and GATA-3 gene
expression, may be one of the immunological characteristics of Kawasaki disease.

PMCID: PMC1809116
PMID: 15270865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Immunology. 2004 Aug;112(4):615-23.

Chronic intestinal nematode infection induces Stat6-independent interleukin-5
production and causes eosinophilic inflammatory responses in mice.

Sakamoto Y(1), Hiromatsu K, Ishiwata K, Inagaki-Ohara K, Ikeda T,
Nakamura-Uchiyama F, Nawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of Parasitic Diseases, Miyazaki
Medical College, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

The role of Stat6 (signal transducers and activators of transcription) in the
recruitment and activation of eosinophils has been studied in detail in asthma
and other allergic diseases. In this study, we demonstrated that eosinophil
responses occur in a Stat6-independent manner in mice infected with the
intestinal nematode, Nippostrongylus brasiliensis. Stat6-deficient (Stat6(-/-))
mice cannot expel N. brasiliensis and establish chronic infections. Prominent
blood and intestinal eosinophilia were induced after day 14 postinfection (p.i.) 
and maintained at this level in Stat6(-/-) mice, whereas in wild-type mice
eosinophil responses reached a peak on day 10 p.i. and declined thereafter. The
introduction of a secondary infection of N. brasiliensis into wild-type mice
induced rapid and exaggerated eosinophilia, whereas secondary infection in
Stat6(-/-) mice resulted in almost the same eosinophil responses as those of the 
primary infection, suggesting a lack of memory responses. Blood eosinophilia was 
also induced in Stat6(-/-) mice implanted with N. brasiliensis in the small
intestine, suggesting that intestinal exposure to parasitic antigen is sufficient
to induce eosinophil responses. Furthermore, this prominent eosinophil response
of Stat6(-/-) mice after day 14 was closely associated with an increase of
interleukin (IL)-5 production in serum and intestine. Neither IL-4 nor eotaxin
were significantly induced in Stat6(-/-) mice after infection with N.
brasiliensis. We also found that mRNA for IL-5, GATA-3 and eosinophil peroxidase 
(EPO) are induced in the intestine of Stat6(-/-) mice on day 14 p.i. Taken
together, these results provide evidence for Stat6-independent IL-5 production
and subsequent eosinophil responses after chronic infection with N. brasiliensis.

PMCID: PMC1782534
PMID: 15270733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2004 Sep;86(1):45-76.

Transcriptional control networks of cell differentiation: insights from helper T 
lymphocytes.

Mariani L(1), Löhning M, Radbruch A, Höfer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Institute of Biology, Humboldt
University Berlin, Invalidenstrasse 42, 10115 Berlin, Germany.

Coordinated programs of gene expression during cell differentiation can be
controlled by master transcription factors. The differentiation of helper T (Th) 
lymphocytes during the immune response has been shown to occur along alternative 
pathways designated as Th1 and Th2. Induction of the Th1 and Th2 pathways is
associated with the conversely regulated expression of the master factors T-bet
and GATA-3, respectively. Both autoactivation and inhibition of GATA-3 play a
crucial role in this process. We develop mathematical models of the underlying
regulatory networks to provide a framework for the analysis of experimental data.
Modeling concepts for gene expression dynamics are introduced, and paradigms for 
the behavior of gene-regulatory networks are reviewed. A mechanistic model for
the regulation of GATA-3 in Th cells is developed that accounts for
autoactivation and regulation by external differentiation signals. This system
works as a bistable switch that enables the triggering of a differentiation
program by transient inductive signals. GATA-3 inhibitors (such as FOG-1 and ROG)
modulate GATA-3 expression by yet unidentified mechanisms. Three potential modes 
of inhibition, sequestration by a binding protein, repression of basal
transcription, and repression of autoactivation, are predicted to have distinct, 
and strongly concentration-dependent, regulatory effects on GATA-3 dynamics.
Based on these results, we develop a model for the cross-regulation of the
alternative Th1 and Th2 differentiation programs which are governed by the
dynamics of T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. The steady states of this model
correlate with naïve, Th1-polarized, and Th2-polarized phenotypes. Our analysis
makes predictions on the stability of the Th1 and Th2 programs and raises
questions on the relation between transcription factor regulation and epigenetic 
determination in cell differentiation.

PMID: 15261525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 17;279(38):39454-64. Epub 2004 Jul 16.

Interleukin (IL)-4-independent maintenance of histone modification of the IL-4
gene loci in memory Th2 cells.

Yamashita M(1), Shinnakasu R, Nigo Y, Kimura M, Hasegawa A, Taniguchi M, Nakayama
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan.

Interleukin (IL)-4-induced STAT6 activation and the subsequent up-regulation of
GATA3 are crucial for the induction of chromatin remodeling of the Th2 cytokine
gene loci as Th2 cells undergo development. This study probes the role of these
molecules in the maintenance of memory Th2 cells. IL-4 was not required to
maintain the capability for Th2 cytokine production in in vivo generated
antigen-specific memory Th2 cells. Histone H3-K9/14 hyperacetylation and
intergenic transcripts associated with the IL-4 gene locus were preserved in the 
absence of IL-4, but those associated with the IL-13 gene were partially
IL-4-dependent. Histone H3-K4 methylation of the IL-13 and IL-4 gene loci was
fully preserved in memory Th2 cells and accompanied by memory cell-specific
accumulation of Pol II complex to highly restricted sites. Thus, memory Th2 cells
maintain a unique Th2-specific remodeled chromatin in the IL-4 and IL-13 gene
loci by active molecular events that are IL-4-independent.

PMID: 15258154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2004 Jun;27(6):398-402.

[Imbalanced T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 contributes to
type 2 T helper cell polarization in asthmatic patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu CT(1), Wang G, Luo FM, Wang ZL, Liu R, Wang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the T helper cell predominant differentiation in asthmatic
patients and to explore the modulation of T cell-specific transcription factors
T-bet/GATA-3.
METHODS: Thirty-two asthmatic patients were enrolled, among whom 18 were atopic
defined by positive antigen skin test and 12 were children. Lymphocytes were
isolated from peripheral blood and incubated with PHA (100 microg/ml) at 37
degrees C for 48 hours. INF-gamma and IL-4 concentrations in the supernatant were
detected by ELISA. The T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression levels in lymphocytes
were assayed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) while
the ratio of CCR3+ and CCR5+ cells in lymphocytes was counted by flow cytometry
(FCM) after direct immunofluorescence staining.
RESULTS: IL-4 concentration in the lymphocyte supernatant of the asthmatic group 
was (118 +/- 25) microg/L, which was significantly elevated compared to that of
the healthy control group (75 +/- 12) microg/L (P < 0.01). When subgroups of
asthmatic patients were compared, the results showed that atopic subjects had a
higher IL-4 level than non-atopic subjects [(126 +/- 23) microg/L vs (107 +/- 26)
microg/L, P < 0.01], but no significant difference was demonstrated between
adults and children [(118 +/- 25) micro g/L vs (121 +/- 25) microg/L, P > 0.05]. 
Significantly lower concentration of INF-gamma in the asthmatic group was
detected as compared to the control [(651 +/- 85) microg/L vs (1 179 +/- 332)
microg/L, P < 0.001]. The concentration of INF-gamma was higher in atopic
subjects than in non-atopic subjects [(618 +/- 89) micro g/L vs (680 +/- 83)
microg/L, P < 0.01], but no difference was found between adults and children. The
percentage of CCR3+ cells in lymphocytes was (9.4 +/- 5.8)% in the asthmatic
group and (4.9 +/- 2.3)% in the control (P < 0.05), while the percentages of
CCR5+ cells was (6 +/- 7)% and (13 +/- 7)%, respectively (P < 0.05). RT-PCR
revealed that T-bet mRNA expression levels were as follows: 0.13 +/- 0.03 in the 
asthmatic group and 0.18 +/- 0.04 in the control (P < 0.01); 0.120 +/- 0.030 in
atopic subjects and 0.140 +/- 0.010 in the non-atopic subjects (P < 0.05); 0.120 
+/- 0.020 in children and 0.130 +/- 0.020 in adults (P > 0.05). The levels of
GATA-3 mRNA expression were 0.43 +/- 0.07 in asthma and 0.29 +/- 0.09 in the
control (P < 0.01), however, no differences were found between atopic and
non-atopic, children and adults (0.50 +/- 0.12 vs 0.40 +/- 0.10, 0.44 +/- 0.09 vs
0.43 +/- 0.07, respectively, P > 0.05). A positive correlation was found between 
concentration of INF-gamma and T-bet mRNA level (r=0.663, P < 0.01), while no
correlation with GATA-3 mRNA expression was found. The concentration of IL-4 was 
negatively correlated with T-bet mRNA level (r=-0.250, P < 0.05) and positively
with GATA-3 mRNA level (r=0.72, P < 0.01). It was interesting that a closer
relationship existed between the ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 and the ratio of
INF-gamma to IL-4 (r=0.873, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: In asthma there is a tendency of Th2 polarization with
over-production of Th2-like cytokines in which T-bet deficiency may be a key
factor. T-bet might direct T cells to Th1 differentiation while GATA-3 orientated
Th2 maturation. Considering the fact that committed Th2 cells underwent
re-differentiation induced by T-bet, this novel Th1-specific transcription factor
is a fascinating target gene for modifying to restore the Th1 and Th2 balance.

PMID: 15256090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jul 16;570(1-3):63-8.

GATA-3 suppresses IFN-gamma promoter activity independently of binding to
cis-regulatory elements.

Kaminuma O(1), Kitamura F, Kitamura N, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Yamamoto K, Miura O,
Miyatake S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
3-18-22, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

The regulatory mechanism by which GATA-3 suppresses IFN-gamma gene expression was
investigated. A reduction of GATA-3 using RNA interference technology enhanced,
whereas overexpression of GATA-3 suppressed IFN-gamma mRNA expression. IL-4
expression was reciprocally affected by GATA-3. GATA-3-mediated down-regulation
of IFN-gamma was achieved through the inhibition of its promoter/enhancer
activity. Two GATA elements located in the cis-regulatory elements did not
contribute to the suppression of IFN-gamma promoter activity, even though they
behaved as binding sites for GATA-3. The effect of GATA-3 on IFN-gamma promoter
was lost upon removal of the region encompassing -257 to -172. Among several
transcription factors putatively interacting with this region, Stat4, which
enhanced IFN-gamma promoter activity, was down-regulated by GATA-3 at gene
transcription level. Although GATA-3 has the capacity to interact with the
cis-regulatory elements, it suppresses IFN-gamma gene transcription via
down-regulation of Stat4.

PMID: 15251440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Biol. 2004 Aug 1;272(1):161-75.

The role of Pax2 in mouse inner ear development.

Burton Q(1), Cole LK, Mulheisen M, Chang W, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The paired box transcription factor, Pax2, is important for cochlear development 
in the mouse inner ear. Two mutant alleles of Pax2, a knockout and a frameshift
mutation (Pax21Neu), show either agenesis or severe malformation of the cochlea, 
respectively. In humans, mutations in the PAX2 gene cause renal coloboma syndrome
that is characterized by kidney abnormalities, optic nerve colobomas and mild
sensorineural deafness. To better understand the role of Pax2 in inner ear
development, we examined the inner ear phenotype in the Pax2 knockout mice using 
paint-fill and gene expression analyses. We show that Pax2-/- ears often lack a
distinct saccule, and the endolymphatic duct and common crus are invariably
fused. However, a rudimentary cochlea is always present in all Pax2 knockout
inner ears. Cochlear outgrowth in the mutants is arrested at an early stage due
to apoptosis of cells that normally express Pax2 in the cochlear anlage. Lack of 
Pax2 affects tissue specification within the cochlear duct, particularly regions 
between the sensory tissue and the stria vascularis. Because the cochlear
phenotypes observed in Pax2 mutants are more severe than those observed in mice
lacking Otx1 and Otx2, we postulate that Pax2 plays a key role in regulating the 
differential growth within the cochlear duct and thus, its proper outgrowth and
coiling.

PMID: 15242798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):1249-57.

Human dendritic cells respond to Helicobacter pylori, promoting NK cell and
Th1-effector responses in vitro.

Hafsi N(1), Voland P, Schwendy S, Rad R, Reindl W, Gerhard M, Prinz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Technical University, Munich, Germany.

Helicobacter pylori infection leads to chronic gastric inflammation. The current 
study determined the response of human APCs, NK cells, and T cells toward the
bacteria in vitro. Human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC) were incubated
with bacteria for 48 h. Intact H. pylori at a multitude of infection 5 stimulated
the expression of MHC class II (4- to 7-fold), CD80, and CD86 B7 molecules (10-
to 12-fold) and the CD83 costimulatory molecule (>30-fold) as well as IL-12
secretion (>50-fold) in DCs, and thereby, strongly induced their maturation and
activation. CD56(+)/CD4(-) NK cells, as well as CD4(+)/CD45RA(+) naive T cells,
were isolated and incubated with DCs pulsed with intact bacteria or different
cellular fractions. Coculture of H. pylori-pulsed DCs with NK cells strongly
potentiated the secretion of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma. Coculture of naive T cells 
with H. pylori-pulsed DCs significantly enhanced TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and IL-2
secretion as well as T-bet mRNA levels, while GATA-3 mRNA was lowered. However,
the effect appeared attenuated compared with coculture with Escherichia coli. A
greater stimulation was seen with naive T cells and DCs pulsed with H. pylori
membrane preparations. Intact H. pylori potently induced the maturation and
activation of human monocyte-derived DC and thereby promote NK and Th1 effector
responses. The strong activation of NK cells may be important for the innate
immune response. Th1-polarized T cells were induced especially by incubation with
membrane preparations of H. pylori, suggesting that membrane proteins may account
for the specific adaptive immune response.

PMID: 15240717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Dev Comp Immunol. 2004 Aug;28(10):993-1003.

Transcriptome analysis of hagfish leukocytes: a framework for understanding the
immune system of jawless fishes.

Suzuki T(1), Shin-I T, Kohara Y, Kasahara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science, School of Advanced Sciences, The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai), Shonan Village, Hayama 240-0193,
Japan.

Jawless fishes occupy a critical phylogenetic position in understanding the
origin of the adaptive immune system. Here, we performed large-scale expressed
sequence tag analysis of leukocytes isolated from the inshore hagfish Eptatretus 
burgeri. Although we found many immunity-related genes such as those involved in 
lymphocyte or hematopoietic cell signaling and development as well as cytokine
and cytokine receptor genes, MHC molecules or antigen receptors were not
identified. We characterized two hagfish cDNAs that closely resembled mammalian
proteins with essential roles in adaptive immunity, one encoding a GATA3-like
molecule and another encoding a Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk)-like molecule. The
GATA3-like gene of hagfish was equidistant from GATA3 and GATA2 in jawed
vertebrates. Similarly, the hagfish Btk-like molecule was not Btk itself, but
qualified as a pre-duplicated form of Btk and Bmx in jawed vertebrates. In total,
our work provides circumstantial evidence that adaptive immunity is unique to
jawed vertebrates.

PMID: 15236930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004 Jul;4(7):529-40.

CD4/CD8-lineage differentiation in the thymus: from nuclear effectors to membrane
signals.

Bosselut R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
remy@helix.nih.gov

PMID: 15229472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Neurobiol Dis. 2004 Jun;16(1):169-78.

Hearing loss following Gata3 haploinsufficiency is caused by cochlear disorder.

van der Wees J(1), van Looij MA, de Ruiter MM, Elias H, van der Burg H, Liem SS, 
Kurek D, Engel JD, Karis A, van Zanten BG, de Zeeuw CI, Grosveld FG, van
Doorninck JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Patients with HDR syndrome suffer from hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
dysplasia due to a heterozygous deletion of the transcription factor GATA3. Since
GATA3 is prominently expressed in both the inner ear and different parts of the
auditory nervous system, it is not clear whether the deafness in HDR patients is 
caused by peripheral and/or central deficits. Therefore, we have created and
examined heterozygous Gata3 knockout mice. Auditory brainstem response (ABR)
thresholds of alert heterozygous Gata3 mice, analyzed from 1 to 19 months of age,
showed a hearing loss of 30 dB compared to wild-type littermates. Neither
physiological nor morphological abnormalities were found in the brainstem,
cerebral cortex, the outer or the middle ear. In contrast, cochleae of
heterozygous Gata3 mice showed significant progressive morphological degeneration
starting with the outer hair cells (OHCs) at the apex and ultimately affecting
all hair cells and supporting cells in the entire cochlea. Together, these
findings indicate that hearing loss following Gata3 haploinsufficiency is
peripheral in origin and that this defect is detectable from early postnatal
development and maintains through adulthood.

PMID: 15207274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 15;172(12):7289-96.

c-Maf and JunB mediation of Th2 differentiation induced by the type 2 G
protein-coupled receptor (VPAC2) for vasoactive intestinal peptide.

Voice J(1), Donnelly S, Dorsam G, Dolganov G, Paul S, Goetzl EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology/Immunology, Medical Center,
University of California-San Francisco, 533 Parnassus at 4th, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide and its G protein-coupled receptors, VPAC(1) and
VPAC(2), regulate critical aspects of innate and adaptive immunity. T cell
VPAC(2)Rs mediate changes in cytokine generation, which potently increase the
Th2/Th1 ratio and consequently shift the effector responses toward allergy and
inflammation. To examine mechanisms of VPAC(2) promotion of the Th2 phenotype, we
analyzed controls of IL-4 transcription in CD4 T cells from T cell-targeted
VPAC(2) transgenic (Tg), VPAC(2) knockout, and wild-type (WT) mice. c-maf and
junB mRNA, protein, and activity were significantly up-regulated to a higher
level in TCR-stimulated CD4 T cells from Tg mice compared with those from
knockout and WT C57BL/6 mice. In contrast, GATA3, T-bet, and NFATc levels were
identical in WT and Tg CD4 T cells. Vasoactive intestinal peptide binding to
VPAC(2) on CD4 T cells specifically induces an up-regulation of the Th2-type
transcription factors c-Maf and JunB, which consequently enhances IL-4 and IL-5
production, leading to a Th2-type phenotype.

PMID: 15187104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Apr 30;219(1-2):1-7.

About GATA3, HNF3A, and XBP1, three genes co-expressed with the oestrogen
receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) in breast cancer.

Lacroix M(1), Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 127 Boulevard de Waterloo, B-1000
Bruxelles, Belgium. marc.lacroix@ulb.ac.be

In breast tumours and breast cancer cell (BCC) lines, microarray analyses have
revealed that a series of genes are expressed in close association with the
oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) gene, ESR1. Three of them, GATA3, HNF3A (also
known as FOXA1), and XBP1 encode transcription factors. Here, we present these
factors and we discuss their potential involvement in the ER-alpha-mediated
actions in BCC. We notably show the relations that exist, or that might exist,
between these factors and the oestrogen-inducible trefoil factor TFF1.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15149721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Tissue Antigens. 2004 Jun;63(6):538-46.

A novel polymorphic GATA site in the human IL-12Rbeta2 promoter region affects
transcriptional activity.

van Rietschoten JG(1), Westland R, van den Bogaard R, Nieste-Otter MA, van Veen
A, Jonkers RE, van der Pouw Kraan TC, den Hartog MT, Wierenga EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Histology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. jgi.vanrietschoten@vumc.nl

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a potent inducer of interferon-gamma production by T
cells and is a major factor for the development of T-helper 1 (Th1) cells. It
exerts its biological effects through binding to the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R), a
heterodimer composed of a 1 and a beta2 subunits. The signaling beta2 chain is
expressed on Th1 cells and to a lesser extent on Th0 cells, but not on Th2 cells,
rendering these latter cells unresponsive to IL-12. Polymorphisms in the coding
region of the IL-12Rbeta2 gene were shown to be associated with atopic disease.
Here, we analyzed the 5'-regulatory region of the human IL-12Rbeta2 gene by
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (Transgenomic WAVE system, San 
Jose, CA). We found five novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
proximal 1.2 kb IL-12Rbeta2 promoter region, i.e. -237C/T, -465A/G, -1023A/G,
-1033T/C, and -1035A/G. SNP -465A/G is of particular interest as it determines
the integrity of a GATA consensus site. By functional comparison of both -465
alleles in transient transfection assays, we show that promoter activity is
increased in case of the -465G allele, disrupting the intact GATA site.
Comparison of the prevalence of -465A/G SNP alleles in small cohorts of allergic 
asthmatic and healthy control individuals provided no evidence for an altered
distribution in the asthmatic population. In conclusion, we have identified a
novel polymorphic GATA site that may affect transciptional activity of the human 
IL-12Rbeta2 gene under GATA3-mediated, Th2-polarizing conditions.

Copyright 2004 Blackwell Munksgaard

PMID: 15140029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cell. 2004 May 14;117(4):515-26.

Instruction of distinct CD4 T helper cell fates by different notch ligands on
antigen-presenting cells.

Amsen D(1), Blander JM, Lee GR, Tanigaki K, Honjo T, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Antigen-presenting cells (APC) tailor immune responses to microbial encounters by
stimulating differentiation of CD4 T cells into the Th1 and Th2 lineages. We
demonstrate that APC use the Notch pathway to instruct T cell differentiation.
Strikingly, of the two Notch ligand families, Delta induces Th1, while Jagged
induces the alternate Th2 fate. Expression of these different Notch ligands on
APC is induced by Th1- or Th2-promoting stimuli. Th2 differentiation has been
considered a default process as APC-derived instructive signals are unknown. We
demonstrate that Jagged constitutes an instructive signal for Th2
differentiation, which is independent of IL4/STAT6. Th2 differentiation induced
by APC is abrogated in T cells lacking the Notch effector RBPJkappa. Notch
directs Th2 differentiation by inducing GATA3 and by directly regulating il4 gene
transcription through RBPJkappa sites in a 3' enhancer.

PMID: 15137944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Jun;7(6):589-95. Epub 2004 May 9.

Ascl1/Mash1 is required for the development of central serotonergic neurons.

Pattyn A(1), Simplicio N, van Doorninck JH, Goridis C, Guillemot F, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France.

The transcriptional control of the differentiation of central serotonergic (5-HT)
neurons in vertebrates has recently come under scrutiny and has been shown to
involve the homeobox genes Nkx2-2 and Lmx1b, the Ets-domain gene Pet1 (also known
as Fev) and the zinc-finger gene Gata3. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene
Ascl1 (also known as Mash1) is coexpressed with Nkx2-2 in the neuroepithelial
domain of the hindbrain, which gives rise to 5-HT neurons. Here we show in the
mouse that Ascl1 is essential for the birth of 5-HT neurons, both as a proneural 
gene for the production of postmitotic neuronal precursors and as a determinant
of the serotonergic phenotype for the parallel activation of Gata3, Lmx1b and
Pet1. Thus Ascl1, which is essential for noradrenergic differentiation, is also a
determinant of the serotonergic phenotype.

PMID: 15133515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Immunol. 2004 May 15;172(10):6158-66.

IL-4-induced GATA-3 expression is a time-restricted instruction switch for Th2
cell differentiation.

Seki N(1), Miyazaki M, Suzuki W, Hayashi K, Arima K, Myburgh E, Izuhara K,
Brombacher F, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Sciences, Tokyo University of Science,
Yamazaki, Noda City, Chiba, Japan.

An initial activation signal via the TCR in a restricted cytokine environment is 
critical for the onset of Th cell development. Cytokines regulate the expression 
of key transcriptional factors, T-bet and GATA-3, which instruct the direction of
Th1 and Th2 differentiation, through changes in chromatin conformation. In this
study, we investigated the kinetics of IL-4-mediated signaling in a transgenic
mouse, expressing human IL-4R on a mouse IL-4alphaR-deficient background. These
experiments, allowing induction with human IL-4 at defined times, demonstrated
that an IL-4 signal was required at the early stage of TCR-mediated T cell
activation for lineage commitment to Th2, along with structural changes in
chromatin, which take place in the conserved noncoding sequence-1 and -2 within
the IL-4 locus. At later times, however, IL-4 failed to promote efficient Th2
differentiation and decondensation of chromatin, even though GATA-3 was clearly
induced in the nuclei by IL-4 stimulation. Moreover, IL-4-mediated Th2
instruction was independent from cell division mediated by initial TCR
stimulation. The role of IL-4 signaling may have a time restriction during Th2
differentiation. In late stages of initial T cell activation, the chromatin
structure of the IL-4 locus retains condensation state. These results demonstrate
that IL-4-induced GATA-3 expression is time-restriction switch for Th2
differentiation.

PMID: 15128803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Immunol. 2004 May 15;172(10):5851-60.

Evolutionary origins of lymphocytes: ensembles of T cell and B cell
transcriptional regulators in a cartilaginous fish.

Anderson MK(1), Pant R, Miracle AL, Sun X, Luer CA, Walsh CJ, Telfer JC, Litman
GW, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

The evolutionary origins of lymphocytes can be traced by phylogenetic comparisons
of key features. Homologs of rearranging TCR and Ig (B cell receptor) genes are
present in jawed vertebrates, but have not been identified in other animal
groups. In contrast, most of the transcription factors that are essential for the
development of mammalian T and B lymphocytes belong to multigene families that
are represented by members in the majority of the metazoans, providing a
potential bridge to prevertebrate ancestral roles. This work investigates the
structure and regulation of homologs of specific transcription factors known to
regulate mammalian T and B cell development in a representative of the earliest
diverging jawed vertebrates, the clearnose skate (Raja eglanteria). Skate
orthologs of mammalian GATA-3, GATA-1, EBF-1, Pax-5, Pax-6, Runx2, and Runx3 have
been characterized. GATA-3, Pax-5, Runx3, EBF-1, Spi-C, and most members of the
Ikaros family are shown throughout ontogeny to be 1) coregulated with TCR or Ig
expression, and 2) coexpressed with each other in combinations that for the most 
part correspond to known mouse T and B cell patterns, supporting conservation of 
function. These results indicate that multiple components of the gene regulatory 
networks that operate in mammalian T cell and B cell development were present in 
the common ancestor of the mammals and the cartilaginous fish. However, certain
factors relevant to the B lineage differ in their tissue-specific expression
patterns from their mouse counterparts, suggesting expanded or divergent B
lineage characteristics or tissue specificity in these animals.

PMID: 15128764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 2004 May;131(10):2257-68. Epub 2004 Apr 21.

Epithelial Bmpr1a regulates differentiation and proliferation in postnatal hair
follicles and is essential for tooth development.

Andl T(1), Ahn K, Kairo A, Chu EY, Wine-Lee L, Reddy ST, Croft NJ, Cebra-Thomas
JA, Metzger D, Chambon P, Lyons KM, Mishina Y, Seykora JT, Crenshaw EB 3rd,
Millar SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is thought to perform multiple
functions in the regulation of skin appendage morphogenesis and the postnatal
growth of hair follicles. However, definitive genetic evidence for these roles
has been lacking. Here, we show that Cre-mediated mutation of the gene encoding
BMP receptor 1A in the surface epithelium and its derivatives causes arrest of
tooth morphogenesis and lack of external hair. The hair shaft and hair follicle
inner root sheath (IRS) fail to differentiate, and expression of the known
transcriptional regulators of follicular differentiation Msx1, Msx2, Foxn1 and
Gata3 is markedly downregulated or absent in mutant follicles. Lef1 expression is
maintained, but nuclear beta-catenin is absent from the epithelium of severely
affected mutant follicles, indicating that activation of the WNT pathway lies
downstream of BMPR1A signaling in postnatal follicles. Mutant hair follicles fail
to undergo programmed regression, and instead continue to proliferate, producing 
follicular cysts and matricomas. These results provide definitive genetic
evidence that epithelial Bmpr1a is required for completion of tooth
morphogenesis, and regulates terminal differentiation and proliferation in
postnatal hair follicles.

PMID: 15102710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):26983-90. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

Essential role of GATA3 for the maintenance of type 2 helper T (Th2) cytokine
production and chromatin remodeling at the Th2 cytokine gene loci.

Yamashita M(1), Ukai-Tadenuma M, Miyamoto T, Sugaya K, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A,
Kimura M, Taniguchi M, DeGregori J, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO Project, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Department of
Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana Chuo-ku,
Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

GATA3 expression is essential for type-2 helper T (Th2) cell differentiation.
GATA3-mediated chromatin remodeling at the Th2 cytokine gene loci, including
Th2-specific long range histone hyperacetylation of the interleukin (IL)-13/IL-4 
gene loci, occurs in developing Th2 cells. However, little is known about the
role of GATA3, if any, in the maintenance of established remodeled chromatin at
the Th2 cytokine gene loci. Here, we established a Cre/LoxP-based site-specific
recombination system in cultured CD4 T cells using a unique adenovirus-mediated
gene transfer technique. This system allowed us to investigate the effect of loss
of GATA3 expression in in vitro differentiated Th2 cells. After ablation of
GATA3, we detected reduced production of all Th2 cytokines, increased DNA
methylation at the IL-4 gene locus, and decreased histone hyperacetylation at the
IL-5 gene locus but not significantly so at the IL-13/IL-4 gene loci. Thus, GATA3
plays important roles in the maintenance of the Th2 phenotype and continuous
chromatin remodeling of the specific Th2 cytokine gene locus through cell
division.

PMID: 15087456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mod Pathol. 2004 Jul;17(7):756-64.

Utilizing Nottingham Prognostic Index in microarray gene expression profiling of 
breast carcinomas.

Miller DV(1), Leontovich AA, Lingle WL, Suman VJ, Mertens ML, Lillie J, Ingalls
KA, Perez EA, Ingle JN, Couch FJ, Visscher DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55906, USA.

We report a novel approach to gene expression profiling using the Nottingham
Prognostic Index (NPI) to stratify 26 patients with invasive breast carcinoma. As
an aggregate index of parameters reflecting metastatic potential, growth rate,
and genetic instability the NPI has distinct advantages over other
clinicopathologic features used to segregate breast cancer patients. As a
continuous variable it offers a responsive and sensitive means of modeling a
continuum of clinical aggressiveness. Using RNA extracted from 26 tumors and cDNA
microarrays with 23 343 unique genetic elements, 84 genes and expressed sequence 
tags were identified whose expression patterns correlated with NPI. Differential 
expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) was also observed for two of three genes
evaluated by this method. Correlation was determined by the Spearman rank
correlation method with null distribution analysis. Among the 84 genetic elements
were seven previously implicated in neoplastic progression (including the two
demonstrating differential expression by IHC), 11 without specific cancer
association but localized to chromosomal sites whose loss or gain has been
identified in cytogenetic studies of breast carcinoma, and 73 not previously
associated with breast carcinoma. Collectively, the expression patterns of these 
84 elements have potential to distinguish high and low NPI patient samples. These
data add support to the assertion that prognostic groups of breast carcinoma are 
reflected in distinguishable expression profiles of a limited set of genes.

Copyright 2004 USCAP, Inc.

PMID: 15073601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Immunol. 2004 Apr 15;172(8):4724-32.

Cellular FLIP long form-transgenic mice manifest a Th2 cytokine bias and enhanced
allergic airway inflammation.

Wu W(1), Rinaldi L, Fortner KA, Russell JQ, Tschopp J, Irvin C, Budd RC.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Program, Department of Medicine, University of Vermont College
of Medicine, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Cellular FLIP long form (c-FLIP(L)) is a caspase-defective homologue of caspase-8
that blocks apoptosis by death receptors. The expression of c-FLIP(L) in T cells 
can also augment extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation after TCR 
ligation via the association of c-FLIP(L) with Raf-1. This contributes to the
hyperproliferative capacity of T cells from c-FLIP(L)-transgenic mice. In this
study we show that activated CD4(+) T cells from c-FLIP(L)-transgenic mice
produce increased amounts of Th2 cytokines and decreased amounts of Th1
cytokines. This correlates with increased serum concentrations of the
Th2-dependent IgG1 and IgE. The Th2 bias of c-FLIP(L)-transgenic CD4(+) T cells
parallels impaired NF-kappa B activity and increased levels of GATA-3, which
contribute, respectively, to decreased IFN-gamma and increased Th2 cytokines. The
Th2 bias of c-FLIP(L)-transgenic mice extends to an enhanced sensitivity to
OVA-induced asthma. Taken together, these results show that c-FLIP(L) can
influence cytokine gene expression to promote Th2-driven allergic reaction, in
addition to its traditional role of blocking caspase activation induced by death 
receptors.

PMID: 15067048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23123-33. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

CD28 costimulation controls histone hyperacetylation of the interleukin 5 gene
locus in developing th2 cells.

Inami M(1), Yamashita M, Tenda Y, Hasegawa A, Kimura M, Hashimoto K, Seki N,
Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Interleukin 5 (IL-5) plays a unique role in allergic inflammatory responses, and 
the understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying the generation of
IL-5-producing cells is crucial for the regulation of allergic disorders.
Differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into type-2 helper (Th2) cells is
accompanied by chromatin remodeling including hyperacetylation of histones H3 and
H4 in the nucleosomes associated with the IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5 genes. Histone
hyperacetylation of the IL-5 gene displayed a delayed kinetics compared with that
of the IL-4 and IL-13 genes, suggesting a distinct remodeling mechanism for the
IL-5-gene locus. Here we studied the role of CD28 costimulation in the generation
of IL-5-producing cells and the histone hyperacetylation of the IL-5 gene locus. 
CD28-costimulation selectively enhanced histone hyperacetylation of the IL-5 gene
locus that appeared to be mediated through NF-kappaB activation and subsequent
up-regulation of GATA3. The CD28 costimulation-sensitive histone hyperacetylation
spanned almost the entire intergenic region between the IL-5 and RAD50
accompanied with intergenic transcript. Thus, this is the first demonstration
that CD28 costimulation controls a chromatin-remodeling process during Th2 cell
differentiation.

PMID: 15039422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Mar;135(3):505-10.

Differential expression of mRNA for Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription
factors and suppressors of cytokine signalling in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of patients with atopic dermatitis.

Arakawa S(1), Hatano Y, Katagiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Biology and Medicine (Dermatology), Faculty of
Medicine, Oita University, Oita, Japan. arakawa@med.oita-u.ac.jp

Atopic dermatitis is characterized by Th2-dominant immunity. Recently many
intracellular molecules have been reported to regulate cytokine expression and T 
cell differentiation. GATA-3 and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) are
transcription factors that play a critical role in the development of Th2 and Th1
immunity, respectively. Suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS)-3 and SOCS-5,
are negative regulators of the cytokine signalling induced by IL-12 and IL-4,
respectively. Txk is a transcription factor that activates IFN-gamma gene
directly. The present study was designed to identify intracellular molecules that
are responsible for the pathogenesis and the imbalance of cytokines in atopic
dermatitis. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells without any stimulation the levels of mRNA for GATA-3 and
SOCS-3 were elevated, the levels of mRNA for Txk were depressed and the levels of
mRNA for T-bet and SOCS-5 were comparable in patients with atopic dermatitis as
compared with healthy controls. In addition, successful therapy normalized levels
of mRNA for GATA-3 and Txk, although those for the others including IL-4, IL-5,
IL-10, IL-13 and IFN-gamma did not change. Levels of Txk mRNA correlated with
those of IFN-gamma, while the mRNA levels of the other regulators did not
correlate with those of any of the cytokines. These results suggest GATA-3 and
Txk might be involved in skin lesions, while SOCS-3 might be associated with an
imbalance of cytokines that is difficult to normalize in atopic dermatitis.

PMCID: PMC1808976
PMID: 15008986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3880-5. Epub 2004 Mar 5.

Interleukin 2 plays a central role in Th2 differentiation.

Cote-Sierra J(1), Foucras G, Guo L, Chiodetti L, Young HA, Hu-Li J, Zhu J, Paul
WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper (Th) 2 cells requires
signaling through the T cell receptor and an appropriate cytokine environment.
IL-4 is critical for such Th2 differentiation. We show that IL-2 plays a central 
role in this process. The effect of IL-2 on Th2 generation does not depend on its
cell growth or survival effects. Stat5a(-/-) cells show diminished
differentiation to IL-4 production, and forced expression of a constitutively
active form of Stat5a replaces the need for IL-2. In vivo IL-2 neutralization
inhibits IL-4 production in two models. Studies of restriction enzyme
accessibility and binding of Stat5 to chromatin indicate that IL-2 mediates its
effect by stabilizing the accessibility of the Il4 gene. Thus, IL-2 plays a
critical role in the polarization of naive CD4 T cells to the Th2 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC374338
PMID: 15004274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mech Dev. 2004 Mar;121(3):287-99.

GATA3 and NeuroD distinguish auditory and vestibular neurons during development
of the mammalian inner ear.

Lawoko-Kerali G(1), Rivolta MN, Lawlor P, Cacciabue-Rivolta DI, Langton-Hewer C, 
van Doorninck JH, Holley MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Molecular Physiology, Addison 
Building, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The function of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA3 was studied in a newly
established, conditionally immortal cell line derived to represent auditory
sensory neuroblasts migrating from the mouse otic vesicle at embryonic day E10.5.
The cell line, US/VOT-33, expressed GATA3, the bHLH transcription factor NeuroD
and the POU-domain transcription factor Brn3a, as do auditory neuroblasts in
vivo. When GATA3 was knocked down reversibly with antisense oligonucleotides,
NeuroD was reversibly down-regulated. Auditory and vestibular neurons form from
neuroblasts that express NeuroD and that migrate from the antero-ventral, otic
epithelium at E9.5-10.5. On the medial side, neuroblasts and epithelial cells
express GATA3 but on the lateral side they do not. At E13.5 most auditory neurons
express GATA3 but no longer express NeuroD, whereas vestibular neurons express
NeuroD but not GATA3. Neuroblasts expressing NeuroD and GATA3 were located in the
ventral, otic epithelium, the adjacent mesenchyme and the developing auditory
ganglion. The results suggest that auditory and vestibular neurons arise from
different, otic epithelial domains and that they gain their identity prior to
migration. In auditory neuroblasts, NeuroD appears to be dependent on the
expression of GATA3.

PMID: 15003631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):22624-34. Epub 2004 Feb 24.

Characterization of GATA3 mutations in the hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and
renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome.

Nesbit MA(1), Bowl MR, Harding B, Ali A, Ayala A, Crowe C, Dobbie A, Hampson G,
Holdaway I, Levine MA, McWilliams R, Rigden S, Sampson J, Williams AJ, Thakker
RV.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford Centre for
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LJ,
United Kingdom.

The hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome is an
autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations of the dual zinc finger
transcription factor, GATA3. The C-terminal zinc finger (ZnF2) binds DNA, whereas
the N-terminal finger (ZnF1) stabilizes this DNA binding and interacts with other
zinc finger proteins, such as the Friends of GATA (FOG). We have investigated
seven HDR probands and their families for GATA3 abnormalities and have identified
two nonsense mutations (Glu-228 --> Stop and Arg-367 --> Stop); two intragenic
deletions that result in frameshifts from codons 201 and 355 with premature
terminations at codons 205 and 370, respectively; one acceptor splice site
mutation that leads to a frameshift from codon 351 and a premature termination at
codon 367; and two missense mutations (Cys-318 --> Arg and Asn-320 --> Lys). The 
functional effects of these mutations, together with a previously reported GATA3 
ZnF1 mutation and seven other engineered ZnF1 mutations, were assessed by
electrophoretic mobility shift, dissociation, yeast two-hybrid and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays. Mutations involving GATA3 ZnF2 or adjacent basic 
amino acids resulted in a loss of DNA binding, but those of ZnF1 either lead to a
loss of interaction with specific FOG2 ZnFs or altered DNA-binding affinity.
These findings are consistent with the proposed three-dimensional model of ZnF1, 
which has separate DNA and protein binding surfaces. Thus, our results, which
expand the spectrum of HDR-associated GATA3 mutations and report the first
acceptor splice site mutation, help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that
alter the function of this zinc finger transcription factor and its role in
causing this developmental anomaly.

PMID: 14985365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int Immunol. 2004 Mar;16(3):501-8.

IL-4-mediated inhibition of IFN-gamma production by CD4+ T cells proceeds by
several developmentally regulated mechanisms.

Wurtz O(1), Bajénoff M, Guerder S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Université de 
la Méditerranée, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, Case 906, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09,
France.

The mechanisms by which Th1 and Th2 cells inter-regulate in vivo are still poorly
understood. In this study we examined the plasticity of Th1 cell differentiation 
and how Th2 cells may down-regulate these responses. We show here that IL-4
affects Th1 cell responses by two developmentally regulated mechanisms. During
the commitment phase of naive CD4+ T cells, IL-4 inhibits Th1 cell
differentiation and induces a reversion of developing Th1 cells to the Th2
lineage. In contrast, for effector Th1 cells IL-4 does not affect the
developmental process, but only the transcription of the IFN-gamma gene. We
further show that the difference in IL-4 responsiveness correlates with a loss,
in effector Th1 cells, of IL-4-dependent up-regulation of GATA-3 expression
despite normal activation of STAT6. Transient inhibition of IFN-gamma production 
by differentiated effector cells may explain why Th1 and Th2 responses can
co-exist in vivo although Th2 effector cells dominate functionally, as observed
in some infectious or autoimmune mice models.

PMID: 14978023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Immunity. 2004 Feb;20(2):193-203.

Probabilistic regulation of IL-4 production in Th2 cells: accessibility at the
Il4 locus.

Guo L(1), Hu-Li J, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-4 secreting and nonsecreting cells from Th2 cultures have a similar
probability of producing IL-4 upon subsequent stimulation, implying that there is
stochastic element in IL-4 production by stimulated Th2 cells. Purified IL-4
producers and nonproducers have similar Gata3 and c-maf mRNA expression. Il4 gene
accessibility, analyzed by restriction enzyme accessibility (REA) at sites in the
promoter, in the second intron (DNase I hypersensitivity sites HSII and HSIII)
and in CNS-1 in the two populations was also similar. However, upon TCR
stimulation, site VA, which is 5 kB 3' of exon 4, displayed a striking increase
in accessibility but REA was 2- to 3-fold greater in producers than nonproducers.
Cyclosporin A treatment inhibited VA opening, implying the involvement of NFAT in
increased VA accessibility. Induction of VA accessibility is sensitive to
cycloheximide, suggesting an additional factor(s) is needed. Thus, opening of VA 
is a probabilistic event determining which Th2 cells transcribe Il4.

PMID: 14975241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1165-73.

Gata2 specifies serotonergic neurons downstream of sonic hedgehog.

Craven SE(1), Lim KC, Ye W, Engel JD, de Sauvage F, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. craven@gene.com

Distinct classes of serotonergic (5-HT) neurons develop along the ventral midline
of the vertebrate hindbrain. Here, we identify a Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-regulated
cascade of transcription factors that acts to generate a specific subset of 5-HT 
neurons. This transcriptional cascade is sufficient for the induction of rostral 
5-HT neurons within rhombomere 1 (r1), which project to the forebrain, but not
for the induction of caudal 5-HT neurons, which largely terminate in the spinal
cord. Within the rostral hindbrain, the Shh-activated homeodomain proteins Nkx2.2
and Nkx6.1 cooperate to induce the closely related zinc-finger transcription
factors Gata2 and Gata3. Gata2 in turn is necessary and sufficient to activate
the transcription factors Lmx1b and Pet1, and to induce 5-HT neurons within r1.
In contrast to Gata2, Gata3 is not required for the specification of rostral 5-HT
neurons and appears unable to substitute for the loss of Gata2. Our findings
reveal that the identity of closely related 5-HT subclasses occurs through
distinct responses of adjacent rostrocaudal progenitor domains to broad ventral
inducers.

PMID: 14973276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jun;286(6):E958-62. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

Subcutaneous abdominal preadipocyte differentiation in vitro inversely correlates
with central obesity.

Permana PA(1), Nair S, Lee YH, Luczy-Bachman G, Vozarova De Courten B, Tataranni 
PA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Diabetes and Nutrition Section, Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical
Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Phoenix, Arizona 85016, USA.
paska.permana@med.va.gov

Expansion of adipose tissue mass results from increased number and size of
adipocyte cells. We hypothesized that subcutaneous abdominal preadipocytes in
obese individuals might have an intrinsically higher propensity to differentiate 
into adipocytes. Thus we investigated the relationship between obesity and the
level of in vitro preadipocyte differentiation in Pima Indians. Subcutaneous
abdominal stromal vascular fractions containing preadipocytes were cultured from 
58 nondiabetic subjects [31 M/27 F, 30 +/- 6 yr, body fat 34 +/- 8% by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (means +/- SD)]. The average percentage of
preadipocyte differentiation (PDIFF; cell count by microscopy) was 11 +/- 11%
(range 0.2-51%). PDIFF correlated negatively with percent body fat (r = -0.35, P 
= 0.006) and waist circumference (r = -0.45, P = 0.0004). Multiple regression
analysis indicated that waist circumference (P = 0.01), sex (P = 0.01), and
percent body fat (P = 0.05) were significant determinants of PDIFF. Molecular
characterization of predifferentiated cultured cells was performed by real-time
PCR measurements of glucocorticoid receptor-alpha (GRalpha), insulin-like growth 
factor I receptor (IGF-IR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
(PPARgamma), enhancer-binding protein GATA-3, CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-alpha undifferentiated protein (CUP/AP-2alpha), and endothelial
cell-specific marker 2 (ECSM2). The mRNA concentrations of GRalpha correlated
with PDIFF (r = 0.29, P = 0.03), but the others did not (IGF-IR, r = 0.003, P =
1.0; PPARgamma, r = -0.1, P = 0.5; GATA-3, r = 0.02, P = 0.9; CUP/AP-2alpha, r = 
-0.2, P = 0.1; ECSM2, r = 0.04, P = 0.7). Contrary to our hypothesis, the results
may indicate a blunted in vitro differentiation potential of preadipocytes in
centrally obese individuals. The lower differentiation potential of preadipocytes
in the obese subjects might be due, at least partly, to decreased glucocorticoid 
receptor expression.

PMID: 14970008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 17;101(7):1993-8. Epub 2004 Feb 9.

GATA-3 deficiency abrogates the development and maintenance of T helper type 2
cells.

Pai SY(1), Truitt ML, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T helper type 2 (Th2) cells secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 and mediate
allergic and asthmatic disease. GATA-3 is a Th2-specific transcription factor
that appears in overexpression studies and transgenic systems to function as a
Th2 lineage determinant. Because GATA-3 is also crucial for development of the T 
lineage and throughout thymic development, direct demonstration that GATA-3 is
required for Th2 development by targeted deletion has been lacking. Using a
conditional knockout approach, we found that GATA-3 is required for optimal Th2
cytokine production in vitro and in vivo. Our data also show that GATA-3
expression must be sustained to maintain the Th2 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC357040
PMID: 14769923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 Feb;113(2):268-76.

Immunomodulatory effect of the antiasthma Chinese herbal formula MSSM-002 on TH2 
cells.

Srivastava K(1), Teper AA, Zhang TF, Li S, Walsh MJ, Huang CK, Kattan M,
Schofield BH, Sampson HA, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: T(H)2 cytokines play a central role in the pathogenesis of allergic
asthma. We previously showed that the "antiasthma" Chinese herbal formula
MSSM-002 exhibited therapeutic effects on established allergic airway responses
in a murine model of allergic asthma. However, the mechanisms underlying these
effects are largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether and how MSSM-002 
modulates an established T(H)2 response and whether the actions of MSSM-002 on
T(H)2 cell differs from corticosteroids.
METHODS: T(H)2 polarized splenocytes (T(H)2-SPCs) from mice with antigen-induced 
airway hyperresponsiveness and T(H)2 cloned cells, D10 G4.1 (D10), were cultured 
in the presence or absence of antigen with or without MSSM-002 and dexamethasone,
and the proliferative responses and cytokine profiles were determined. Apoptosis 
and T(H)2 transcription factor GATA-3 expression and binding to IL-4 gene
promoter and V(A) enhancer in MSSM-002-treated D10 cells were also determined.
RESULTS: MSSM-002 significantly decreased antigen-induced proliferation and IL-4 
and IL-5 production but increased IFN-gamma production by T(H)2-SPCs, whereas
dexamethasone suppressed IFN-gamma as well as IL-4 and IL-5. Anti-IL-12 antibody,
although abrogating MSSM-002 induction of IFN-gamma, had no significant effect on
MSSM-002 suppression of IL-4 and IL-5 secretion. MSSM-002 also suppressed T(H)2
cytokine secretion by D10 cells, and in contrast to dexamethasone, MSSM-002 did
not induce apoptosis of D10 cells. MSSM-002 markedly suppressed GATA-3 mRNA and
protein expression and the binding to IL-4 gene promoter and V(A) enhancer in D10
cells.
CONCLUSION: MSSM-002, in contrast to the overall suppression of T cells by
dexamethasone, exhibits immunomodulatory actions on T(H)2 cells caused, at least 
partially, by downregulation of GATA-3.

PMID: 14767441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Exp Med. 2004 Feb 2;199(3):423-8.

GATA-3 in human T cell helper type 2 development.

Skapenko A(1), Leipe J, Niesner U, Devriendt K, Beetz R, Radbruch A, Kalden JR,
Lipsky PE, Schulze-Koops H.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus Fiebiger Center for Molecular Medicine, Clinical Research Group III, 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054, Germany.

The delineation of the in vivo role of GATA-3 in human T cell differentiation is 
a critical step in the understanding of molecular mechanisms directing human
immune responses. We examined T cell differentiation and T cell-mediated effector
functions in individuals lacking one functional GATA-3 allele. CD4 T cells from
GATA-3+/- individuals expressed significantly reduced levels of GATA-3,
associated with markedly decreased T helper cell (Th)2 frequencies in vivo and in
vitro. Moreover, Th2 cell-mediated effector functions, as assessed by serum
levels of Th2-dependent immunoglobulins (Igs; IgG4, IgE), were dramatically
decreased, whereas the Th1-dependent IgG1 was elevated compared with GATA-3+/+
controls. Concordant with these data, silencing of GATA-3 in GATA-3+/+ CD4 T
cells with small interfering RNA significantly reduced Th2 cell differentiation. 
Moreover, GATA-3 mRNA levels increased under Th2-inducing conditions and
decreased under Th1-inducing conditions. Taken together, the data strongly
suggest that GATA-3 is an important transcription factor in regulating human Th2 
cell differentiation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2211796
PMID: 14757746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Neuroimmunol. 2004 Feb;147(1-2):91-4.

Cannabinoid receptors and T helper cells.

Klein TW(1), Newton C, Larsen K, Chou J, Perkins I, Lu L, Nong L, Friedman H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Florida, 12901 Bruce Downs Boulevard, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. tklein@hsc.usf.edu

We have reported that injection of marijuana cannabinoids, such as
Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), into mice, followed by infection with
Legionella pneumophila (Lp), suppresses the development of cell-mediated immunity
T helper 1 (Th1) activity. These effects are accompanied by suppression of
interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon (IFN) gamma production and enhancement of IL-4
production suggesting THC-induced T helper cell biasing. In the current report,
other T helper cell biasing mechanisms were studied. Mice were injected with THC 
followed 18 h later by a challenge infection with Lp. Two-hour post-infection,
spleens were removed and analyzed for mRNA to either IL-12Rbeta2 or GATA3 gene
products. The results showed that THC suppressed IL-12Rbeta2 but increased GATA3.
Receptor antagonists for CB1 (SR141716A, SR1) and CB2 (SR144528, SR2) were also
injected to analyze the involvement of cannabinoid receptors. It was determined
that SR1 attenuated the THC suppression of IL-12Rbeta2, while SR2 attenuated the 
increase in GATA3 mRNA. These results suggest that THC suppresses Th1 biasing
activity such as IL-12Rbeta2 by a CB1 mediated mechanism and enhances the Th2
biasing activity, GATA3, by a CB2 mechanism. This dichotomy of receptor
involvement might result from differential expression and/or signaling function
of CB1 and CB2 on Th1 and Th2 cells.

PMID: 14741435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Neuroimmunol. 2004 Feb;147(1-2):78-81.

Chronic morphine treatment differentiates T helper cells to Th2 effector cells by
modulating transcription factors GATA 3 and T-bet.

Roy S(1), Wang J, Gupta S, Charboneau R, Loh HH, Barke RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. royxx002@umn.edu

Chronic morphine treatment in animal models has been shown to alter a number of
immune parameters including suppression of cellular immunity. T helper cell
differentiation into Th2 effector cell may be a major contributing factor to
impaired cellular immunity following chronic drug abuse. We had previously shown 
that chronic morphine treatment in vivo and in vitro decreases IL-2 and IFNgamma 
(Th1) protein levels and increases IL-4 and IL-5 (Th2) protein levels in a
time-dependent manner. In addition in this paper, we show that chronic morphine
treatment resulted in a decrease in IFNgamma and IL-2 mRNA and an increase in
IL-4 and IL-5 mRNA accumulation in murine splenocytes. Furthermore, chronic
morphine treatment inhibited IFNgamma promoter activity and increased IL-4
promoter activity in respective promoter transfected primary T cells. In
addition, we also demonstrate that chronic morphine treatment resulted in an
increase in GATA 3 binding to DNA consensus elements in electromobility shift
assays and an increase in GATA 3 protein and mRNA levels. In contrast, chronic
morphine treatment resulted in a decrease in T-bet mRNA levels. From these data, 
we conclude that chronic morphine treatment differentiates T helper cell to Th2
effector cells by modulating key master switches that results in committing T
helper cell to a Th2 phenotype.

PMID: 14741432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Int Immunol. 2004 Feb;16(2):315-26.

Immunologic immaturity, but high IL-4 productivity, of murine neonatal thymic CD4
single-positive T cells in the last stage of maturation.

Koyanagi M(1), Imanishi K, Arimura Y, Kato H, Yagi J, Uchiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University,8-1 Kawada-Cho, Shinjuku-Ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

To determine the levels of maturation and differentiation of murine CD4
single-positive (SP) T cells, we compared the secondary responses of
staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA)-induced neonatal thymic, adult thymic and
adult splenic CD4 SP T cell blasts prepared from whole or heat-stable
antigen(low) CD4 SP T cells. Proliferative responses upon re-stimulation with SEA
were strong in adult splenic CD4 SP T cell blasts, but quite weak in neonatal
thymic and adult thymic CD4 SP T cell blasts. SEA-induced IL-2 production was
weaker in neonatal thymic blasts than in the adult splenic CD4 SP T cell blasts. 
In contrast, SEA-induced IL-4 production was high in neonatal thymic CD4 SP T
cell blasts, and low in adult splenic and thymic CD4 SP T cell blasts. Expression
of GATA-3, that directs production of IL-4 in T cells, examined at protein and
mRNA levels, was higher in neonatal thymic cells than in adult thymic and splenic
cells. These results suggest that neonatal and adult thymic CD4 SP T cells in the
final stage of maturation are relatively immature compared with adult splenic CD4
SP T cells. The cytokine production profile of neonatal thymic CD4 SP T cells
suggests that they are inclined towards a T(h)2 response.

PMID: 14734617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Exp Hematol. 2004 Jan;32(1):104-12.

Analysis of transcription factors in thymic and CD34+ progenitor-derived
plasmacytoid and myeloid dendritic cells: evidence for distinct expression
profiles.

Fohrer H(1), Audit IM, Sainz A, Schmitt C, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Dalloul AH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U543, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: The expression of mRNA for pre-Talpha is specific for human
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC), a population ontogenically close to T cells. 
The latter need Gata-3 transcription factor to develop. PU1 and RelB are two
transcription factors involved in the development of murine myeloid DC (MDC). To 
determine the lineage origin of human thymic DC, the expression of these genes
was investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fresh thymic DC, CD34(+)CD1a(-) progenitors, and
progenitor-derived DC populations were sorted, analyzed, and compared to blood
DC.
RESULTS: Three DC populations were found in the thymus. 1) CD123(-/lo)HLA-DR(hi) 
DC expressing PU1 and RelB; 2) CD123(hi)HLA-DR(+) DC expressing only pre-Talpha, 
the expression of which was similar to that of MDC and PDC from peripheral blood;
and 3) a new mature CD123(hi)HLA-DR(hi) PDC population with pre-Talpha, PU1 and
RelB mRNAs. In culture, most CD34(+)CD1a(-) progenitors remained CD1a(-)CD123(-);
had a T and natural killer cell differentiation potential; and expressed Gata-3
mRNA contrary to DC precursors. A few cells (10%) became CD1a(+)CD123(+)
expressing pre-Talpha, PU1, and RelB mRNAs and were able to differentiate into
typical Langerhans cells with transforming growth factor-beta. Coculture of
thymic progenitors on a murine cell line generated CD123(hi)CD1a(-) cells with
typical PDC morphology, expressing pre-Talpha but not PU1 and RelB transcripts.
Activated PDC acquired myeloid antigens, and up-regulated PU1 and RelB mRNAs
while down-regulating pre-Talpha mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: Both DC maturation pathways may arise from distinct precursors but
are interconnected. DC differentiation seems to occur from Gata-3(-) precursors
upstream of T and natural killer precursors.

PMID: 14725907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1273-86.

Potential targets of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor
for multiple sclerosis therapy.

Nath N(1), Giri S, Prasad R, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Ralph H.
Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, SC
29425.

The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors or
statins are newly identified immunomodulators. In vivo treatment of SJL/J mice
with lovastatin reduced the duration and clinical severity of active and passive 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for multiple
sclerosis. Lovastatin induced the expression of GATA3 and the phosphorylation of 
STAT6, whereas it inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, tyrosine 
kinase 2, and STAT4. Inhibition of the Janus kinase-STAT4 pathway by lovastatin
modulated T0 to Th1 differentiation and reduced cytokine (IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha) production, thus inducing Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10). It
inhibited T-bet (T box transcription factor) and NF-kappaB in activated T cells
and significantly reduced infiltration of CD4- and MHC class II-positive cells to
CNS. Further, it stabilized IL-4 production and GATA-3 expression in
differentiated Th2 cells, whereas in differentiated Th1 cells it inhibited the
expression of T-bet and reduced the production of IFN-gamma. Moreover,
lovastatin-exposed macrophage and BV2 (microglia) in allogeneic MLRs induced the 
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. These observations indicate
that the anti-inflammatory effects of lovastatin are mediated via T cells as well
as APCs, because it modulates the polarization patterns of naive T cell
activation in an APC-independent system. Together, these findings reveal that
lovastatin may have possible therapeutic value involving new targets (in both
APCs and T cells) for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and other inflammatory 
diseases.

PMID: 14707106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Drug News Perspect. 2003 Nov;16(9):585-8.

GATA transcription factors and fat cell formation.

Tong Q(1), Tsai J, Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, ARS/Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. ghotamis@hsph.harvard.edu

GATA transcription factors play important roles in a variety of developmental
processes. Recently, we discovered that GATA factors also play a key role in
adipogenesis. Two isoforms, GATA-2 and GATA-3, are specifically expressed in
murine preadipocytes but not mature adipocytes. Continuous expression of GATA
factors in preadipocyte cell lines inhibits terminal differentiation into mature 
adipocytes. In contrast, GATA-3-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells possess a
higher capacity to convert to adipocytes. The inhibitory effect of GATA on
adipogenesis is mediated in part by suppression of promoters of adipogenic
factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, but
additional mechanisms are also likely to be in effect. These findings indicate
that GATA factors function as molecular gatekeepers at the onset of terminal
adipocyte differentiation. Whether GATA factors are also involved in the
commitment of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells to progenitors of the adipogenic
lineage is under investigation.

PMID: 14702139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3320-5. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Essential role of HGF (hepatocyte growth factor) in blood formation in Xenopus.

Koibuchi N(1), Kaneda Y, Taniyama Y, Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Ogihara T,
Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Suita, Japan.

In this study, we investigated the role of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in
blood formation during Xenopus development. First, we examined the gene
expression of HGF and its receptor, c-met, by whole-mount in situ hybridization
during development. Strong signals of HGF as well as c-met were detected early in
the developing ventral mesoderm, which later gives rise to the ventral blood
island. Furthermore, to study the role of HGF, we blocked the HGF signaling
pathway in Xenopus embryos by using truncated c-met lacking the tyrosine kinase
domain. Injection of truncated c-met mRNA resulted in a marked decrease in the
number of circulating blood cells. Similar results were obtained using morpholino
antisense HGF oligonucleotides. Moreover, we also analyzed the expression of
several early primitive blood markers in the blood island of these embryos. RNA
in situ analysis revealed a significant reduction (or absence) of stem cell
leukemia (SCL), alpha-globin, and GATA-1 expression, but not GATA-2 expression.
In contrast, no significant difference was observed in the levels of expression
of early definitive blood markers, SCL, GATA-2, and GATA-3 in the dorsolateral
plate, as analyzed by in situ hybridization. Overall, the present study
demonstrated that HGF is necessary for primitive hematopoiesis by regulating the 
expression of SCL.

PMID: 14701703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):170-7.

A repressor of GATA-mediated negative feedback mechanism of T cell activation.

Miaw SC(1), Kang BY, White IA, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The NF-AT family is a group of potent transcription factors that are essential
for T cell activation in vitro. However, NF-ATc2-deficient Th cells display
hyperproliferation in response to stimulation, suggesting that NF-ATc2 functions 
as a negative regulator of Th cell activation/proliferation. In this study we
show that the transcriptional repressor of GATA (ROG) is a direct target gene of 
NF-ATc2 and that NF-ATc2-deficient Th cells are unable to fully up-regulate ROG
upon stimulation. Restoration of ROG expression in vivo partly corrects the
hyperproliferation of NF-ATc2-deficient Th cells by attenuating TCR signals. Our 
data, therefore, depict a ROG-mediated negative feedback mechanism of T cell
activation.

PMID: 14688323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int Immunol. 2004 Jan;16(1):179-87.

Evidence of GATA-3-dependent Th2 commitment during the in vivo immune response.

Tamauchi H(1), Terashima M, Ito M, Maruyama H, Ikewaki N, Inoue M, Gao X, Hozumi 
K, Habu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, 228-8555 Kanagawa, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA-3 has been shown to play an important role for the 
in vitro induction of T(h)2 cells. To clarify how the in vivo immune response is 
governed under GATA-3 function, we generated double-transgenic mice by crossing
GATA-3 transgenic mice with ovalbumin (OVA)-specific TCR transgenic mice. After
immunization with OVA, the double-transgenic mice showed increased expression of 
GATA-3 in antigen-reactive fresh CD4(+) T cells, and higher production of IL-5
and IL-13 in cultured spleen cells in the presence of cognate antigen without any
polarizing conditions for T(h)2 cells. Moreover, the immunized double-transgenic 
mice showed a higher increase of in vivo secretion of IL-5 and IL-13 in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid after OVA aerosol challenging. The serum levels of
OVA-specific IgG1, IgE and IgA antibodies were much higher in the immunized
double-transgenic mice than TCR transgenic mice. These findings provide direct
evidence that antigen-stimulated CD4(+) T cells in the immunized mice have
already been committed into T(h)2 cells producing IL-5 and IL-13 selectively
through enhanced GATA-3 expression in vivo, thereby inducing higher production of
antigen-specific antibody for three isotypes other than IgM.

PMID: 14688073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cell Res. 2003 Oct;13(5):319-33.

Methylation profiling of twenty four genes and the concordant methylation
behaviours of nineteen genes that may contribute to hepatocellular
carcinogenesis.

Yu J(1), Zhang HY, Ma ZZ, Lu W, Wang YF, Zhu JD.

Author information: 
(1)The State-Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University, LN 2200/25, Xietu Road, Shanghai 200032,
China.

To determine the possible role of the epigenetic mechanisms in carcinogenesis of 
the hepatocellular carcinoma, we methylation-profiled the promoter CpG islands of
twenty four genes both in HCC tumors and the neighboring non-cancerous tissues of
twenty eight patients using the methylation-specific PCR (MSP) method in
conjunction with the DNA sequencing. In comparison with the normal liver tissues 
from the healthy donors, it was found that while remained unmethylated the ABL,
CAV, EPO, GATA3, LKB1, NEP, NFL, NIS and p27KIP1 genes, varying extents of the
HCC specific hypermethylation were found associated with the ABO, AR, CSPG2,
cyclin a1, DBCCR1, GALR2, IRF7, MGMT, MT1A, MYOD1, OCT6, p57KIP2, p73, WT1 genes,
and demethylation with the MAGEA1 gene, respectively. Judged by whether the
hypermethylated occurred in HCC more frequently than in their neighboring normal 
tissues, the hypermethylation status of the AR, DBCCR1, IRF7, OCT6, and p73 genes
was considered as the event specific to the late stage, while that the rest that 
lacked such a distinguished contrast, as the event specific to the early stage of
HCC carcinogenesis. Among all the clinical pathological parameters tested for the
association with, the hypermethylation of the cyclin a1 gene was more prevalent
in the non-cirrhosis group (P=0.021) while the hypermethylated p16INK4a gene was 
more common in the cirrhosis group (P=0.017). The concordant methylation
behaviors of nineteen genes, including the four previously studied and their
association with cirrhosis has been evaluated by the best subgroup selection
method. The data presented in this report would enable us to shape our
understanding of the mechanisms for the HCC specific loss of the epigenetic
stability of the genome, as well as the strategy of developing the novel robust
methylation based diagnostic and prognostic tools.

PMID: 14672555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Immunity. 2003 Dec;19(6):863-75.

Critical roles for transcription factor GATA-3 in thymocyte development.

Pai SY(1), Truitt ML, Ting CN, Leiden JM, Glimcher LH, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is expressed at every stage of thymic
development, but its role in thymocyte differentiation is unknown. The fact that 
RAG chimeric animals lacking GATA-3 cannot generate early thymocytes from common 
lymphoid progenitors has thus far precluded investigation of the function of
GATA-3 in the thymus. To address this, we generated mice deficient in GATA-3 at
early and late stages of thymic differentiation. Our studies revealed that GATA-3
is involved in beta selection and is indispensable for single-positive CD4
thymocyte development. Thus, our data demonstrate that the coordinated and
regulated expression of GATA-3 at each stage of thymic development is critical
for the generation of mature T cells.

PMID: 14670303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):15047-52. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

IL-27 regulates IL-12 responsiveness of naive CD4+ T cells through
Stat1-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Lucas S(1), Ghilardi N, Li J, de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

IL-27, a novel heterodimeric cytokine produced by antigen-presenting cells,
signals through the T cell cytokine receptor (TCCR)/WSX-1 expressed on naïve CD4+
T cells and natural killer cells. TCCR/WSX-1 deficiency results in delayed T
helper type 1 (TH1) development through an unresolved mechanism. We report here
that IL-27 stimulation in developing murine T helper cells potently induces the
expression of the major TH1-specific transcription factor T-bet and its
downstream target IL-12R beta2, independently of IFN gamma. In addition, IL-27
suppresses basal expression of GATA-3, the critical TH2-specific transcription
factor that inhibits TH1 development by down-regulating signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) 4. IL-27 signaling through TCCR/WSX-1 induces
phosphorylation of Stat1, Stat3, Stat4, and Stat5. Stat1 is required for
suppression of GATA-3, but T-bet induction by IL-27 can also be mediated through 
a Stat1-independent pathway. Despite its TH1-like signaling profile, IL-27 is not
sufficient to drive the differentiation of CD4+ T cells into IFN gamma-producing 
cells. Similarly, IL-27 induces T-bet expression in primary natural killer cells,
but this does not result in an increase of IFN gamma production or cytotoxic
activity. Therefore, although IL-27 is unable to drive IFN gamma production on
its own, it plays an important role in the early steps of TH1 commitment by
contributing in a paracrine manner to the control of IL-12 responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC299900
PMID: 14657353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Sep 25;83(18):1615-8.

[Effect of endotoxin-induced uveitis on GATA-3 expression and ACAID development].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu T(1), Yang PZ, Huang XK, Zheng HL, Zhou HY, Zhong HH.

Author information: 
(1)Tongren Ophthalmic Center, Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes of the GATA-3 expression and development of
anterior chamber associated immune deviation (ACAID) after anterior chamber (AC) 
injection of interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein (IRBP) under ocular
inflammation.
METHODS: ACAID was induced by injection of IRBP into the AC of 30 Spar-Dawley
(SD) rats. Then the animals were divided into -4 days group, -24 hours group, 0
hour group, 3 days group, and 7 days group according to the lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) injection 4 days and 24 hours before, or 0 hour, 3 days and 7 days after
IRBP inoculation respectively. 6 rats were used as controls 8 days after IRBP
injection, Serum interleukin-4 (IL-4) was evaluated to count the development of
ACAID; Western blot and RT-PCR were used to determine the protein and mRNA levels
of GATA-3 expression.
RESULTS: In -24 hours group and 0 hour group, the ocular inflammation reached a
maximum 24 hours after LPS injection; on 8 days after IRBP inoculation, serum
IL-4 couldn't be detected and GATA-3 expression were not changed both on mRNA and
protein levels compared with control group. In -4 days group, the ocular
inflammation was subsided gradually 24 hours and disappeared 96 hours after LPS
injection; serum IL-4 and GATA-3 expression were significantly elevated 8 days
after IRBP injection. In 7 days group, the serum IL-4 and GATA-3 expression in
spleen increased 8 days after IRBP inoculation.
CONCLUSION: In ocular inflammation, the up-regulation of GATA-3 expression is
inhibited and ACAID development is blocked after antigen was injected into
anterior chamber. Once GATA-3 is up-regulated, LPS injection cannot affect ACAID 
development.

PMID: 14642121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Immunity. 2003 Nov;19(5):739-48.

Stat5 activation plays a critical role in Th2 differentiation.

Zhu J(1), Cote-Sierra J, Guo L, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Upon TCR engagement, naive CD4 T cells differentiate toward the Th1 or Th2
phenotype. IL-4, acting through Stat6, plays a major role in Th2 differentiation;
IL-2 has also been reported to be essential. Here, we report that retroviral
(RV)-mediated expression of a constitutively active Stat5A mutant (STAT5A1*6) can
fully restore IL-4 production when naive CD4 T cells are primed in the absence of
IL-2. Furthermore, STAT5A1*6 expression causes Th2 differentiation in the absence
of IL-4 or in Stat6- or IL-4Ralpha-deficient cells. Infection with
STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV does not enhance GATA-3 expression. STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV and
GATA-3-GFP-RV each render the Il4 gene accessible, but the sites of restriction
enzyme accessibility are different. Stat5A binds to HSII and HSIII sites of the
Il4 gene. Coinfection with STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV and GATA-3-GFP-RV results in optimal
Th2 priming.

PMID: 14614860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Dyn. 2002 Jun;224(2):231-7.

Coexpression of SCL and GATA3 in the V2 interneurons of the developing mouse
spinal cord.

Smith E(1), Hargrave M, Yamada T, Begley CG, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, incorporating the Special Research Centre 
for Functional and Applied Genomics, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.

The differentiation of neural progenitors into the many classes of neurons that
exist in the mature spinal cord is a process that relies heavily on the
activation of precise combinations of transcription factors. Defining these
transcription factor combinations is an important aspect of research in
developmental neurobiology that promises to provide incredible insights into the 
structure, function, and pathology of the central nervous system. The present
study aimed to investigate a possible role for the Stem Cell Leukemia (SCL) gene,
a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor gene, in the specification
of a population of neural cells in the ventral neural tube. Section RNA in situ
hybridisation revealed that SCL is transiently expressed within the V2
postmitotic domain of the developing mouse spinal cord between 10.5 and 13.5 days
post coitum. Double-immunofluorescence experiments were subsequently carried out 
to directly compare the expression of SCL with other V2-specific markers at the
cellular level. These experiments revealed that SCL is expressed in a medially
restricted subpopulation of GATA-3 producing cells, suggesting a possible role
for this factor in the differentiation of the GATA population of V2 interneurons.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Jul;80(7):431-42. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Expression and mutation analysis of BRUNOL3, a candidate gene for heart and
thymus developmental defects associated with partial monosomy 10p.

Lichtner P(1), Attié-Bitach T, Schuffenhauer S, Henwood J, Bouvagnet P, Scambler 
PJ, Meitinger T, Vekemans M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University,
Munich, Germany. lichtner@gsf.de

Partial monosomy 10p is a rare chromosomal aberration. Patients often show
symptoms of the DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome spectrum. The phenotype is the
result of haploinsufficiency of at least two regions on 10p, the HDR1 region
associated with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal defects
(HDR syndrome) and the more proximal region DGCR2 responsible for heart defects
and thymus hypoplasia/aplasia. While GATA3 was identified as the disease causing 
gene for HDR syndrome, no genes have been identified thus far for the symptoms
associated with DGCR2 haploinsufficiency. We constructed a deletion map of
partial monosomy 10p patients and narrowed the critical region DGCR2 to about 300
kb. The genomic draft sequence of this region contains only one known gene,
BRUNOL3 ( NAPOR, CUGBP2, ETR3). In situ hybridization of human embryos and
fetuses revealed as well as in other tissues a strong expression of BRUNOL3 in
thymus during different developmental stages. BRUNOL3 appears to be an important 
factor for thymus development and is therefore a candidate gene for the thymus
hypoplasia/aplasia seen in partial monosomy 10p patients. We did not find BRUNOL3
mutations in 92 DiGeorge syndrome-like patients without chromosomal deletions and
in 8 parents with congenital heart defect children.

PMID: 12110949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2002 Aug;12(4):416-22.

The GATA family (vertebrates and invertebrates).

Patient RK(1), McGhee JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, UK.

Over the past year, vertebrate GATA factors have been found to participate
directly in several signal-transduction pathways. Smad3, phosphorylated by
TGF-beta signalling, interacts with GATA3 to induce differentiation of T helper
cells. Hypertrophic stimuli act through RhoA GTPase and ROCK kinase to activate
GATA4 in cardiac myocytes. In the liver, GATA4 is elevated by BMP and FGF
signalling, and is able to bind to chromatin targets. Invertebrate GATA factors
play a central role in specifying the mesendoderm.

PMID: 12100886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Immunol. 2002 Jul 15;169(2):647-50.

Cutting edge: changes in histone acetylation at the IL-4 and IFN-gamma loci
accompany Th1/Th2 differentiation.

Fields PE(1), Kim ST, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Peripheral T cell differentiation is accompanied by chromatin changes at the
signature cytokine loci. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that 
profound increases in histone acetylation occur at the IFN-gamma and IL-4 loci
during Th1/Th2 differentiation. These changes in histone acetylation status are
locus and lineage specific, and are maintained by the transcription factors Tbet 
and GATA3 in a STAT-dependent manner. Our results suggest a model of cytokine
locus activation in which TCR signals initiate chromatin remodeling and locus
opening in a cytokine-independent fashion. Subsequently, cytokine signaling
reinforces polarization by expanding and maintaining the accessible state at the 
relevant cytokine locus (IL-4 or IFN-gamma). In this model, GATA3 and Tbet serve 
as transcriptional maintenance factors, which keep the locus accessible to the
transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 12097365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Genome Res. 2002 Jul;12(7):1091-9.

Transcript profiling of functionally related groups of genes during conditional
differentiation of a mammalian cochlear hair cell line.

Rivolta MN(1), Halsall A, Johnson CM, Tones MA, Holley MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.
m.n.rivolta@sheffield.ac.uk

We have used Affymetrix high-density gene arrays to generate a temporal profile
of gene expression during differentiation of UB/OC-1, a conditionally immortal
cell line derived from the mouse cochlea. Gene expression was assessed daily for 
14 days under differentiating conditions. The experiment was replicated in two
separate populations of cells. Profiles for selected genes were correlated with
those obtained by RT-PCR, TaqMan analysis, immunoblotting, and
immunofluorescence. The results suggest that UB/OC-1 is derived from a population
of nonsensory epithelial cells in the greater epithelial ridge that have the
potential to differentiate into a hair-cell-like phenotype, without the
intervention of Math1. Elements of the Notch signaling cascade were identified,
including the receptor Notch3, with a transient up-regulation that suggests a
role in hair cell differentiation. Several genes showed a profile similar to
Notch3, including the transcriptional co-repressor Groucho1. UB/OC-1 also
expressed Me1, a putative partner of Math1 that may confer competence to
differentiate into hair cells. Cluster analysis revealed expression profiles for 
neural guidance genes associated with Gata3. The temporal dimension of this
analysis provides a powerful tool to study genetic mechanisms that underlie the
conversion of nonsensory epithelial cells into hair cells.

PMCID: PMC186616
PMID: 12097346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jul 9;99(14):9364-8. Epub 2002 Jun 26.

GATA-3 transcriptional imprinting in Th2 lymphocytes: a mathematical model.

Höfer T(1), Nathansen H, Löhning M, Radbruch A, Heinrich R.

Author information: 
(1)Theoretische Biophysik, Institut für Biologie, Humboldt-Universität Berlin,
Invalidenstrasse 42, 10115 Berlin, Germany. thomas.hoefer@rz.hu-berlin.de

Immunological memory involves the fast recall of cytokine expression by T helper 
(Th) lymphocytes. Two distinct profiles of cytokine expression, Th1 and Th2, can 
be induced by antigen and polarizing signals during activation of naive Th cells 
and can subsequently be reexpressed on stimulation by antigen alone. The
transcription factor GATA-3 induces Th2 development. GATA-3 is activated by the
Th2-polarizing stimulus, IL-4, and has recently been observed to autoactivate its
transcription. Based on these experimental data, we developed a mathematical
model of GATA-3 expression that assumes independent activation of GATA-3
transcription by IL-4 and by GATA-3. Cooperativity of GATA-3 transcriptional
activation is shown to create a threshold for autoactivation, resulting in the
coexistence of two distinct GATA-3 expression states: a state of basal expression
and a state of high expression sustained by autoactivation. Suprathreshold IL-4
signals induce a transition from basal to high GATA-3 expression. Thus, GATA-3
autoactivation creates a bistable system that can memorize a transient inductive 
signal. The model further predicts conditions under which the state of high
GATA-3 expression can be abolished, which may extinguish the Th2 cytokine memory.

PMCID: PMC123146
PMID: 12087127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Adv Immunol. 2002;80:115-81.

Cytokine memory of T helper lymphocytes.

Löhning M(1), Richter A, Radbruch A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheumaforschungszentrum, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Memory is one of the key features of the adaptive immune system. Specific T and B
lymphocytes are primed for a particular antigen and upon challenge with it will
react faster than naive lymphocytes. They also memorize the expression of key
effector molecules, in particular cytokines, which determine the type and scale
of an immune reaction. While in primary activations differential expression of
cytokine genes is dependent on antigen-receptor signaling and differentiation
signals, in later activations the expression is triggered by antigen-receptor
signaling and dependent on the cytokine memory. The molecular basis of the
cytokine memory implies differential expression of transcription factors and
epigenetic modifications of cytokine genes and gene loci. GATA-3 for Th2 and
T-bet for Th1 cells expressing interleukin-4 or interferon-gamma, respectively,
are prime candidates for key transcription factors of cytokine memory. The
essential role of epigenetic modifications is suggested by the requirement of DNA
synthesis for the establishment of a cytokine memory in Th lymphocytes. At
present the molecular link between transcription factors and epigenetic
modifications of cytokine genes in the establishment and maintenance of cytokine 
memory is not clear. The initial cytokine memory is not stable against adverse
differentiation signals, while in repeatedly stimulated lymphocytes it is
stabilized by a variety of mechanisms.

PMID: 12078480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Immunol. 2002 Jul 1;169(1):248-53.

Transcriptional regulation of GATA-3 by an intronic regulatory region and fetal
liver zinc finger protein 1.

Hwang ES(1), Choi A, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA-3 is a T cell-specific transcription factor and is essential for the
development of the T cell lineage. The transcriptional regulation of GATA-3,
however, remains elusive. In this study, we report the identification of a
regulatory region located within the first intron of the murine GATA-3 gene. The 
intronic regulatory region contains both a positive and a negative cis-acting
element but, as a whole, serves as a potent T cell-specific enhancer and is
essential for the promoter activity in vitro. By using yeast one-hybrid
screening, we discovered that fetal liver zinc finger protein 1 (Fliz1) could
bind specifically to the negative cis-acting element, the sequence of which is
conserved between the mouse and human GATA-3 genes. More importantly,
overexpression of Fliz1 repressed the expression of GATA-3 in vivo and in vitro. 
Our data suggest that the expression of GATA-3 might be partly regulated by the
intronic regulatory region and Fliz1 in a developmental stage-specific fashion.

PMID: 12077251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jun;160(6):1945-51.

Down-regulation of GATA-3 expression during human papillomavirus-mediated
immortalization and cervical carcinogenesis.

Steenbergen RD(1), OudeEngberink VE, Kramer D, Schrijnemakers HF, Verheijen RH,
Meijer CJ, Snijders PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Unit of Molecular Pathology, Vrije Universiteit
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

To identify cellular genes that may be involved in human papillomavirus
(HPV)-mediated immortalization mRNA differential display analysis was performed
on preimmortal and subsequent immortal stages of four human keratinocyte cell
lines transformed by HPV type 16 or 18 DNA. This yielded a cDNA fragment encoding
the transcription factor GATA-3 that was strongly reduced in intensity in all
immortal stages of the four cell lines. A marked reduction in both GATA-3 mRNA
and protein expression in HPV-immortalized cell lines was confirmed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot analysis, and
immunohistochemistry and was also shown to be apparent in cervical carcinoma cell
lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of cervical tissue specimens showed a clear
nuclear staining for GATA-3 in normal cervical squamous epithelium (n = 14) and
all cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) I (n = 6) and CIN II lesions (n =
2). In contrast, 11% (1 of 9) of CIN III lesions and 67% (8 of 12) of cervical
squamous cell carcinomas revealed a complete absence of GATA-3 immunostaining.
Hence, complete down-regulation of GATA-3 expression represents a rather late
event during cervical carcinogenesis. Whether GATA-3 down-regulation is
etiologically involved in HPV-mediated immortalization and cervical
carcinogenesis remains to be examined.

PMCID: PMC1850837
PMID: 12057898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jul;3(7):643-51. Epub 2002 Jun 10.

T(H) cell differentiation is accompanied by dynamic changes in histone
acetylation of cytokine genes.

Avni O(1), Lee D, Macian F, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Blood Research and the Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical
School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Naïve T cells differentiate into effector cells upon stimulation with antigen, a 
process that is accompanied by changes in the chromatin structure of effector
cytokine genes. Using histone acetylation to evaluate these changes, we showed
that T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation results in early activation of the genes
encoding both interleukin 4 and interferon-gamma. We found that continued culture
in the presence of polarizing cytokines established a selective pattern of
histone acetylation on both cytokine genes; this correlated with restricted
access of the transcription factor NFAT1 to these gene regulatory regions as well
as mutually exclusive gene expression by the differentiated T cells. Our data
point to a biphasic process in which cytokine-driven signaling pathways maintain 
and reinforce chromatin structural changes initiated by the TCR. This process
ensures that cytokine genes remain accessible to the relevant transcription
factors and promotes functional cooperation of the inducible transcription factor
NFAT with lineage-specific transcription factors such as GATA-3 and T-bet.

PMID: 12055628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Immunity. 2002 May;16(5):733-44.

Growth factor independent-1 induced by IL-4 regulates Th2 cell proliferation.

Zhu J(1), Guo L, Min B, Watson CJ, Hu-Li J, Young HA, Tsichlis PN, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

IL-4 is important in Th2 differentiation and in cell expansion. Stat6 is
necessary and sufficient for both functions. Although Gata3 is critical for Th2
polarization, it is not sufficient to mediate IL-4-driven cell expansion. We
report that growth factor independent-1 (Gfi-1), a Stat6-dependent
transcriptional repressor, strikingly increases Th2 cell expansion by promoting
proliferation and preventing apoptosis. Cells infected with a Gfi-1 retrovirus
show striking enhancement of IL-2-induced Stat5 phosphorylation and repression of
p27(Kip-1) expression, suggesting a potential mechanism for the Gfi-1 growth
effect. The synergy of Gfi-1 and Gata3 provides a mechanism through which IL-4
could selectively promote Th2 cell expansion.

PMID: 12049724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Hematol. 2002 May;75(4):376-81.

GATA suppresses erythropoietin gene expression through GATA site in mouse
erythropoietin gene promoter.

Imagawa S(1), Suzuki N, Ohmine K, Obara N, Mukai HY, Ozawa K, Yamamoto M,
Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. simagawa@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

The promoter and enhancer elements of the mouse erythropoietin (mEpo) gene, which
have high homology with those of the human erythropoietin (hEpo) gene, were fused
with luciferase. The construct was transfected into erythropoietin-producing
hepatoma cell line (Hep3B) cells by lipofectin with lacZ as an internal standard.
The wild type (TGATA) showed a 39.5-fold increase in induction by hypoxia. Mouse 
GATA-2 inhibited the hypoxic induction of the wild-type (m3), promoterluciferase 
construct but not the hypoxic induction of the mutant (m4, 5) promoter-luciferase
constructs. N(G)-monomethyl L-arginine (L-NMMA) inhibited the hypoxic induction
of the m3 promoter-luciferase construct, but this inhibition was recovered by
L-arginine. H2O2 also inhibited the hypoxic induction of the m3
promoter-luciferase construct, but this inhibition was recovered by catalase. Gel
shift assays performed on nuclear extracts of 293 cells overexpressing mGATA-1,
-2, and -3 revealed that mGATA-1, -2, and -3 bind to the TGATA element of the
mEpo promoter. These results indicate that mGATA binds to the TGATA site of the
mEpo promoter and negatively regulates mEpo gene expression. Negative regulation 
of mEpo gene by GATA transcriptional factors is discussed.

PMID: 12041667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int Immunol. 2002 Jun;14(6):567-75.

A two-step model of T cell subset commitment: antigen-independent commitment of T
cells before encountering nominal antigen during pathogenic infections.

Kanoh M(1), Uetani T, Sakan H, Maruyama S, Liu F, Sumita K, Asano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Host Defenses, Ehime University School of
Medicine, Shigenobu, Onsen-gun, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

Pathogenic infections lead to activation of innate immunity followed by induction
of a type 1 T cell subset and, therefore, provide a good model to evaluate when T
cells commit to type 1 T cells. Here we show a two-step mechanism of T cell
subset commitment during pathogenic infection. The first step is mediated by the 
basal function of macrophage/dendritic cells and is antigen independent. This
step modulates the committed precursor frequency of T cell subsets and influences
the expression of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-3 genes. IL-12 and 
NK cells are not required for this step. The second step requires antigenic
stimulation of T cells together with IL-12 or IL-4, and influences on the
expression of T-bet and GATA-3. We propose a two-step T cell subset commitment
pathway based on these observations. Therefore, pathogenic infections influence
functional T cell commitment before T cells encounter nominal antigen.

PMID: 12039908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Dev Biol. 2002 Jun 1;246(1):103-21.

Definition of regulatory network elements for T cell development by perturbation 
analysis with PU.1 and GATA-3.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Dionne CJ, Arias AM, Chen D, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

PU.1 and GATA-3 are transcription factors that are required for development of T 
cell progenitors from the earliest stages. Neither one is a simple positive
regulator for T lineage specification, however. When expressed at elevated levels
at early stages of T cell development, each of these transcription factors blocks
T cell development within a different, characteristic time window, with GATA-3
overexpression initially inhibiting at an earlier stage than PU.1. These
perturbations are each associated with a distinct spectrum of changes in the
regulation of genes needed for T cell development. Both transcription factors can
interfere with expression of the Rag-1 and Rag-2 recombinases, while GATA-3
notably blocks PU.1 and IL-7Ralpha expression, and PU.1 reduces expression of
HES-1 and c-Myb. A first-draft assembly of the regulatory targets of these two
factors is presented as a provisional gene network. The target genes identified
here provide insight into the basis of the effects of GATA-3 or PU.1
overexpression and into the regulatory changes that distinguish the developmental
time windows for these effects.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12027437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2002;266:23-39.

Checkpoints in the regulation of T helper 1 responses.

Heath VL(1), Kurata H, Lee HJ, Arai N, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, DNAX Research Institute, 901 California Avenue,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

PMID: 12014201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Curr Biol. 2002 Apr 30;12(9):R322-4.

Asthma: T-bet--a master controller?

Robinson DS(1), Lloyd CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, National Heart and Lung Institute, Biomedical Sciences 
Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
d.s.robinson@ic.ac.uk

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 are important reciprocal determinants
of Th1 and Th2 T helper cell differentiation. Recent evidence suggests that these
factors may affect airway immunopathology in asthma.

PMCID: PMC3807785
PMID: 12007433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Clin Exp Allergy. 2002 Jan;32(1):97-106.

Reciprocal patterns of allergen-induced GATA-3 expression in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from atopics vs. non-atopics.

Macaubas C(1), Lee PT, Smallacombe TB, Holt BJ, Wee C, Sly PD, Holt PG.

Author information: 
(1)TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health
Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

BACKGROUND: T helper (Th)2 cytokines are considered to play a central role in the
induction and expression of allergic disease. However, the relative importance of
individual cytokines is unclear, and overall disease pathogenesis appears to
involve the coordinate activities of a range of Th2 cytokines acting in sequence 
or in parallel. The present study examines an alternative approach to the study
of cytokine gene function in atopy, focusing instead upon T cell transcription
factors (TFs) which play a role in the regulation of multiple cytokine genes.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the allergen-induced expression of the TF GATA-3 and
c-Maf in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and in cytokine-driven Th
polarization.
METHODS: PBMC from house dust mite (HDM)-atopic and non-atopics were stimulated
in vitro with allergen or anti-CD3/IL-2. TF expression was analysed by
semiquantitative RT-PCR and major findings were validated by real-time PCR. Cell 
separations were performed to analyse the contribution of CD45RO+ cells. CD4+
cord blood cells were Th1 or Th2 polarized in vitro by exogenous cytokines and TF
expression analysed by Northern blot and real-time PCR. Results We demonstrate
for the first time that during differentiation of CD4+ CD45RA+ naïve human T
cells towards Th2 commitment, and during allergen-specific reactivation of
peripheral CD4+ CD45RO+ Th2 memory cells in established atopics, expression of
the Th2-associated TF GATA-3 is rapidly up-regulated, whereas T cells from
non-atopics display equally rapid GATA-3 down-regulation under identical
conditions of allergen stimulation.
CONCLUSION: These findings identify Th2-associated TFs as key determinants of the
atopic phenotype, suggesting their unique potential as therapeutic targets for
disease control.

PMID: 12002746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Cell. 2002 Apr;109 Suppl:S109-20.

Transcription: tantalizing times for T cells.

Ho IC(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, FXB-2, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The T helper lymphocyte is responsible for orchestrating an appropriate immune
response to pathogens. To do so, it has evolved into two specialized subsets that
direct type 1 and type 2 immunity. Here, we discuss the genetic programs that
control lineage commitment of progenitor T helper cells along each of these
pathways.

PMID: 11983157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Int Immunol. 2002 May;14(5):513-23.

Critical role of CD81 in cognate T-B cell interactions leading to Th2 responses.

Deng J(1), Dekruyff RH, Freeman GJ, Umetsu DT, Levy S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical
Center, CA 94305, USA.

We previously demonstrated that CD81-/- mice fail to develop Th2-biased immune
responses and allergen-induced airway hyper-reactivity. Because CD81 is expressed
on both activated T and on B cells, we examined the role of CD81 expression by
each cell type. We established an in vitro system by backcrossing the CD81
deletion to TCR transgenic (Tg) mice and to BCR Tg mice. Here we demonstrate that
CD81 expression by T cells is critical for their induction of IL-4 synthesis by B
cells. CD81-/- TCR Tg T cells were impaired in IL-4 production compared to
CD81+/+ TCR Tg T cells, whereas CD81-/- and CD81+/+ BCR Tg B cells induced
equivalent amounts of IL-4 in CD81+/+ TCR Tg T cells. CD81-/- TCR Tg T cells
expressed reduced levels of ICOS, GATA-3, STAT6 and phosphorylated STAT6 when
activated by antigen-presenting B cells. Taken together, these results indicate
that CD81 expression by T cells greatly enhances cognate T-B cell interactions
and greatly augments intracellular activation pathways leading to Th2
polarization.

PMID: 11978781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2002 Jan;24(1):34-7.

[Expression of transcription factor T-bet/GATA3 in lung cancer patients and its
interference by the traditional Chinese herbal medicine].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei H(1), Tian Z, Xu X, Feng J, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Shandong Academy of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong University
Medical School, Jinan 250062, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relation between the expression of transcription factor
T-bet/GATA3 and Th1/Th2 type cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) from lung cancer patients and their interference by the traditional
Chinese herbal medicine.
METHODS: The gene expression of Th1/Th2 type cytokine IFN gamma, IL-2, IL-4,
IL-6, IL-10, transcription factor T-bet/GATA3 and tumor tissue specific mRNA CEA,
CK19 in PBMC from lung cancer patients were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction RT-PCR. Meanwhile, the change of IFN
gamma, IL-4, T-bet and GATA3 in PBMC before and after being cultured with the
traditional Chinese herbal medicine-Astragulus and Tetramethylpyrazine was also
observed.
RESULTS: Predominant expression of Th2 type cytokines was detected in 42 lung
cancer patients. The positive rates of IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN gamma and IL-2 were
27/42, 24/42, 31/42, 4/42 and 5/42, respectively. But, the positive rates of
transcription factor T-bet and GATA3 were 16/42 and 34/42. Moreover, the
expression intensity of T-bet was lower in the CEA and CK19 positive patients
than the negative ones. On the contrary, the expression intensity of GATA3 was
significantly higher in the same patients.
CONCLUSION: Predominant expression of Th2 type cytokines may be related to lower 
expression of T-bet or higher expression of GATA3. This condition can be
interfered by the traditional Chinese herbal medicine-Astragulus and
Tetramethylpyrazine.

PMID: 11977633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Curr Opin Immunol. 2002 Jun;14(3):366-72.

T helper cell differentiation: on again, off again.

Grogan JL(1), Locksley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, 521
Parnassus Avenue, C-443, San Francisco, CA 94143-0654, USA. jgrogan@itsa.ucsf.edu

Recent studies raise the possibility that T helper (Th) polarization may be
attributable to generalized activation and regulated silencing rather than
regulated activation of target cytokine genes. The binding of transcription
factors GATA-3 or T-bet to specific enhancers does recruit transcription factors 
such as NFAT-1 to IL-4 or IFNgamma promoters, respectively; however, GATA-3 also 
intrinsically suppresses T-bet and vice versa. Silencing of GATA-3/T-bet, which
is influenced by factors such as cytokines, is associated with irreversible Th
polarization. For the first few divisions (perhaps reflecting the situation in
lymph nodes), naive Th cells retain pluripotency; after further cell divisions
(perhaps under the influence of an inflammatory cytokine milieu) they may become 
polarized appropriately to respond to the specific environment.

PMID: 11973136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Immunol. 2002 May 1;168(9):4538-45.

Friend of GATA is expressed in naive Th cells and functions as a repressor of
GATA-3-mediated Th2 cell development.

Kurata H(1), Lee HJ, McClanahan T, Coffman RL, O'Garra A, Arai N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. hirokazu.kurata@dnax.org

The commitment of naive T cells to polarized Th cells requires specific changes
in their transcription factors. Retrovirally overexpressed GATA-3 has been
reported to induce the Th2 cytokine profile in developing Th1 cells. In this
study, we examined the role of the N-terminal finger (Nf) of GATA-3 in Th2 cell
development. The Nf, as well as the C-terminal finger and the transactivation
domain, is critical for the induction of the Th2 phenotype. Using the GATA-3-Nf
as a bait, our yeast two-hybrid screening identified friend of GATA (FOG) in the 
Th2 cell-specific library. Naive T cells express significant levels of FOG mRNA, 
which was rapidly down-regulated upon commitment to both Th1 and Th2 lineages. In
reporter assays, FOG blocked the GATA-3-mediated activation of several cytokine
promoters. Finally, retroviral expression of FOG in developing Th2 cells
suppressed both IL-4 and IL-5 and allowed for IFN-gamma production, which was
accompanied by a significant level of T-bet mRNA expression. Serial deletion
mutation analysis indicated that the N-terminal region, but not the consensus
C-terminal binding protein-binding motif, of FOG is critical for the effects. Our
results clearly indicate that 1) FOG is a repressor of GATA-3 in naive T cells
and 2) the down-regulation of FOG induces Th2 cell differentiation by releasing
GATA-3 from its repression.

PMID: 11971000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Immunol. 2002 May 1;168(9):4268-71.

Cutting edge: Identification of an alternative GATA-3 promoter directing
tissue-specific gene expression in mouse and human.

Asnagli H(1), Afkarian M, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors regulates development of multiple
tissues. Several GATA factors have two promoters directing distinct
tissue-specific expression. Although GATA-3 acts in both neuronal and thymocyte
development, no alternative promoter usage has been reported. We examined various
cell types and tissues for potential alternative GATA-3 transcripts and
identified an alternative transcript directed by a promoter located 10 kb
upstream of the recognized promoter. Sequences within this promoter and
alternative first exon are highly conserved between mouse and human genomes. This
new promoter is expressed selectively in the brain but is essentially
undetectable in the thymus. In contrast, the recognized promoter is selectively
expressed in the thymus but not in the brain. We also observed a gradual increase
in expression from this new promoter during Th2 development. These results
indicate that similar to other GATA factors, the GATA-3 gene can be controlled by
two promoters that may direct lineage- and tissue-specific expression.

PMID: 11970965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Feb;2(1):69-73.

DNA therapy for asthma.

Kline JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Newton Road, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. joel-kline@uiowa.edu

Asthma therapy, like other therapies, has been moving towards a molecular basis
for several years. This year, there have been several preclinical studies
published which utilize attributes or facets of DNA to address asthma
therapeutics. These include antisense oligonucleotides (against the nuclear
transcription factor GATA-3 and the mast cell chemotactic agent, stem cell
factor), gene transfer (of interleukin-18, both by plasmid and viral vectors),
and CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (which suppress Th2 and stimulate Th1 responses).
No clinical experience has yet been reported for any of these areas of research
in asthma, but clinical trials are ongoing utilizing CpG oligonucleotides.

PMID: 11964753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 15;168(8):3915-22.

Identification of a candidate regulatory region in the human CD8 gene complex by 
colocalization of DNase I hypersensitive sites and matrix attachment regions
which bind SATB1 and GATA-3.

Kieffer LJ(1), Greally JM, Landres I, Nag S, Nakajima Y, Kohwi-Shigematsu T,
Kavathas PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Department of Genetics and Section of
Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

To locate elements regulating the human CD8 gene complex, we mapped nuclear
matrix attachment regions (MARs) and DNase I hypersensitive (HS) sites over a
100-kb region that included the CD8B gene, the intergenic region, and the CD8A
gene. MARs facilitate long-range chromatin remodeling required for enhancer
activity and have been found closely linked to several lymphoid enhancers. Within
the human CD8 gene complex, we identified six DNase HS clusters, four strong
MARs, and several weaker MARs. Three of the strong MARs were closely linked to
two tissue-specific DNase HS clusters (III and IV) at the 3' end of the CD8B
gene. To further establish the importance of this region, we obtained 19 kb of
sequence and screened for potential binding sites for the MAR-binding protein,
SATB1, and for GATA-3, both of which are critical for T cell development. By gel 
shift analysis we identified two strong SATB1 binding sites, located 4.5 kb
apart, in strong MARs. We also detected strong GATA-3 binding to an
oligonucleotide containing two GATA-3 motifs located at an HS site in cluster IV.
This clustering of DNase HS sites and MARs capable of binding SATB1 and GATA-3 at
the 3' end of the CD8B gene suggests that this region is an epigenetic regulator 
of CD8 expression.

PMID: 11937547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Inflamm Res. 2002 Feb;51(2):80-2.

Signaling and cell death in lymphocytes.

Flavell RA(1), Dong C, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8011, USA. richard.flavell@yale.edu

Erratum in
    Inflamm Res. 2012 Oct;61(10):1167.

After activation, CD4 helper T (Th) cells differentiate into Th1 or Th2 effector 
cells. These two subsets produce distinct profiles of cytokines and regulate
different immune responses. Here we discuss transcription factors and signaling
pathways that are selectively expressed or activated in Th1 and Th2 cells to
regulate cytokine gene expression, cell proliferation and apoptosis.

PMID: 11926317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Br J Haematol. 2002 Apr;117(1):59-69.

Co-expression of CD30 ligand and interleukin 4 (IL-4) receptors by acute myeloid 
leukaemia blasts is associated with the expansion of IL-4-producing CD30+ normal 
T cells.

Rossi FM(1), Degan M, Mazzocco FT, Di Francia R, Aldinucci D, Poletto D, Vellenga
E, Pinto A, Gattei V.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Haematology Research Unit, Centro di Riferimento
Oncologico, I.R.C.C.S., Aviano (PN), Italy.

CD30 ligand (CD30L), but not its cognate receptor CD30, is frequently expressed
on acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) blasts. In the present study, we found that
leukaemic blasts presenting surface CD30L displayed a characteristic
cytokine-receptor pattern that makes them ideal targets for those cytokines
usually produced by Th2-type cell subsets. In particular, even though a broad
distribution of Th2 cytokine receptors by AML blasts was shown, we demonstrated
the almost exclusive expression of interleukin 4 (IL-4) receptor (R), in the
absence of its cognate cytokine, by CD30L+ AML. Furthermore, a number of
Th2-associated markers, including CD30, IL-4 and GATA-3, were expressed by
residual T cells derived from CD30L+ AML but not from CD30L- AML, in which the
presence of the Th1-associated marker LAG-3 was documented in some cases. The
production of IL-4 in the absence of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) was also
detected in CD3+/CD30+ T cells from CD30L+ AML. These results, along with the
shift toward IL-4-producing specific T-cell clones observed in CD30L+ AML samples
by enzyme-linked Immunospot (ELISpot) assay, were consistent with the hypothesis 
of a Th2 polarization taking place in T cells from CD30L+ AML. The notion that
IL-4 was able to enhance in vitro proliferation of CD30L+/IL-4R+ purified
leukaemic blasts suggests that the selective interaction of IL-4-producing CD30+ 
T cells with CD30L+ leukaemic progenitors may have a role in the progression of
this particular AML subset.

PMID: 11918534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4391-6. Epub 2002 Mar 26.

Endothelial cells derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Levenberg S(1), Golub JS, Amit M, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Langer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells have the potential to differentiate into various cell 
types and, thus, may be useful as a source of cells for transplantation or tissue
engineering. We describe here the differentiation steps of human embryonic stem
cells into endothelial cells forming vascular-like structures. The human
embryonic-derived endothelial cells were isolated by using platelet endothelial
cell-adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM1) antibodies, their behavior was characterized in
vitro and in vivo, and their potential in tissue engineering was examined. We
show that the isolated embryonic PECAM1+ cells, grown in culture, display
characteristics similar to vessel endothelium. The cells express endothelial cell
markers in a pattern similar to human umbilical vein endothelial cells, their
junctions are correctly organized, and they have high metabolism of acetylated
low-density lipoprotein. In addition, the cells are able to differentiate and
form tube-like structures when cultured on matrigel. In vivo, when transplanted
into SCID mice, the cells appeared to form microvessels containing mouse blood
cells. With further studies, these cells could provide a source of human
endothelial cells that could be beneficial for potential applications such as
engineering new blood vessels, endothelial cell transplantation into the heart
for myocardial regeneration, and induction of angiogenesis for treatment of
regional ischemia.

PMCID: PMC123658
PMID: 11917100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 24;277(21):18313-21. Epub 2002 Mar 13.

Interleukin-13 gene expression is regulated by GATA-3 in T cells: role of a
critical association of a GATA and two GATG motifs.

Lavenu-Bombled C(1), Trainor CD, Makeh I, Romeo PH, Max-Audit I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochen (INSERM, CNRS, Université Paris V), Département d'Hematologie,
Maternite Port-Royal, 123 Bd de Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

Using a transgenic approach, we studied the role of GATA-3 in T cells. As
previously shown, enforced GATA-3 expression in transgenic mice inhibits Th1
differentiation of CD4 T cells, but unexpectedly, both type 1 (interferon gamma) 
and type 2 (interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13) cytokine genes were activated in the
transgenic CD8 T cells. Because IL-13 gene expression was highly enhanced in vivo
by GATA-3 expression, we studied the human and the mouse IL-13 gene promoters and
found an evolutionary-conserved association of a consensus GATA binding site and 
two GATG motifs. We showed that efficient GATA-3 binding to this regulatory
sequence required these three motifs and that the affinity of the GATA zinc
fingers for this association was five times higher than for the consensus GATA
binding site alone. Transfections in a T cell line or transactivation by GATA-3
showed that the combination of the three sites was required for full
transcriptional activity of the IL-13 gene promoter. Finally we showed that this 
association of binding sites causes a very high sensitivity of the IL-13 gene
promoter to small variations in the level of GATA-3 protein. Altogether, these
results indicate an important role of GATA-3 in CD8 cytokine gene expression and 
demonstrate that a critical network of GATA binding sites highly modulates GATA-3
activity.

PMID: 11893731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:427-62. Epub 2001 Oct 4.

Chromatin structure and gene regulation in the immune system.

Smale ST(1), Fisher AG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Microbiology, Immunology,
and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095-1662, USA. steves@hhmi.ucla.edu

The development of the immune system and the host response to microbial infection
rely on the activation and silencing of numerous, differentially expressed genes.
Since the mid-1980s, a primary goal has been to identify transcription factors
that regulate specific genes and specific immunological processes. More recently,
there has been a growing appreciation of the role of chromatin structure in gene 
regulation. Before most activators of a gene access their binding sites, a
transition from a condensed to a decondensed chromatin structure appears to take 
place. The activation of transcription is then accompanied by the remodeling of
specific nucleosomes. Conversely, the acquisition of a more condensed chromatin
structure is often associated with gene silencing. Chromatin structure is a
particularly significant contributor to gene regulation because it is likely to
be a major determinant of cell identity and cell memory. That is, the propagation
of decondensed chromatin at specific loci through DNA replication and cell
division helps a cell remember which genes are expressed constitutively in that
cell type or are poised for expression upon exposure to a stimulus. Here we
review recent progress toward understanding the role of chromatin in the immune
system. The interleukin-4 gene serves as a primary model for exploring the events
involved in the acquisition and heritable maintenance of a decondensed chromatin 
structure. Studies of the interleukin-12 p40 and interferon-beta genes are then
reviewed for insight into the mechanisms by which the remodeling of specific
nucleosomes in the vicinity of a promoter can contribute to rapid activation
following cell stimulation. Finally, basic principles of gene silencing are
discussed.

PMID: 11861609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Clin Invest. 2002 Feb;109(4):431-5.

T helper subset development: roles of instruction, selection, and transcription.

Farrar JD(1), Asnagli H, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PMCID: PMC150883
PMID: 11854312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 15;168(4):1566-71.

T-Bet expression and failure of GATA-3 cross-regulation lead to default
production of IFN-gamma by gammadelta T cells.

Yin Z(1), Chen C, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Ray A, Craft J.

Author information: 
(1)Sections of. Rheumatology and Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department
of Medicine, and Section of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

gammadelta T cells predominantly produce IFN-gamma upon activation. To determine 
the basis for default production of IFN-gamma by gammadelta T cells, we analyzed 
the transcription factors T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-3. T-bet,
absent in naive cells, was induced upon TCR signaling, with IFN-gamma production.
T-bet also regulated IL-4 synthesis, as gammadelta cells isolated from
T-bet-deficient mice displayed enhanced IL-4 levels with reduced IFN-gamma
production. Notably, T-bet expression after TCR signaling in gammadelta cells was
not down-regulated by IL-4, in conjunction with a higher ratio of T-bet:GATA-3
expression than that found in CD4(+) T cells. Indeed, overexpression of GATA-3
failed to inhibit IFN-gamma secretion in gammadelta cells to the degree seen in
CD4(+) T cells. These results indicate that T-bet enhances IFN-gamma secretion
and suppresses IL-4 secretion in gammadelta cells, and that GATA-3 fails to
counterbalance T-bet-mediated IFN-gamma production, accounting for the default
synthesis of IFN-gamma by these T lymphocytes.

PMID: 11823483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Comp Neurol. 2002 Jan 21;442(4):378-91.

Expression of the transcription factors GATA3 and Pax2 during development of the 
mammalian inner ear.

Lawoko-Kerali G(1), Rivolta MN, Holley M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology, Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors GATA3 and Pax2 are expressed throughout development of 
the mouse inner ear. We have used antibodies to study their temporal and spatial 
expression patterns from embryonic days E8-E16.5. The two factors show reciprocal
relationships in the regional patterning of the early otocyst and cellular
patterning within the sensory epithelia. GATA3 is expressed in the whole otic
placode at E8. In the otocyst at E9.5-10.5, the distribution is lateral and
complementary to the medial expression pattern of Pax2. Only Pax2 is expressed in
the endolymphatic duct, but both factors are expressed in the cochlea. At
E11.5-13.5, GATA3 is expressed strongly in the cochlea, but in the dorsal,
vestibular region it is downregulated. In all sensory epithelia, downregulation
coincides with sensory innervation. Pax2 is expressed in all sensory and some
nonsensory epithelia, but within sensory epithelia at E16.5 it is restricted to
hair cells. GATA3 is expressed throughout key periods of cell proliferation, fate
determination, and differentiation and is not specifically associated with any of
these processes. Expression persists most strongly in the main components of the 
developing auditory system. These include the auditory sensory epithelium, the
afferent and efferent nerves, and the mesenchymal and ectodermal cells in regions
that form key parts of the middle and outer ear. GATA3 is thus expressed in
functionally distinct groups of cells that integrate to form a complete sensory
system. The results suggest that both factors may be involved in tissue
compartmentalisation, morphogenesis, and cell signalling.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11793341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):L302-9.

Ragweed-induced expression of GATA-3, IL-4, and IL-5 by eosinophils in the lungs 
of allergic C57BL/6J mice.

Justice JP(1), Borchers MT, Lee JJ, Rowan WH, Shibata Y, Van Scott MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27858, USA.

Allergen-induced recruitment of T lymphocytes and eosinophils to the airways is
associated with increased expression of the transcription factor GATA-3. In this 
study, the relationship between airway inflammation and GATA-3 expression in the 
lungs was investigated using ragweed-sensitized C57BL/6J mice. Intratracheal
ragweed challenge increased both the number of GATA-3-expressing cells in the
perivascular and peribronchial regions and the amount of expression per cell.
Interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-5 levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were
upregulated in parallel with GATA-3 expression. GATA-3 mRNA and protein
colocalized to eosinophils. Eosinophils isolated from the lungs and stimulated
with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and/or A-23187 released IL-5. The release
was inhibited by actinomycin D, which indicates that de novo synthesis of the
cytokine was involved. Western blot analysis of proteins from isolated
eosinophils demonstrated expression of the p50 subunit of nuclear factor-kappaB, 
a transcription factor that is implicated in control of GATA-3 expression. These 
data provide evidence that allergen challenge increases GATA-3 and
proinflammatory cytokine expression by pulmonary eosinophils, which could provide
positive feedback for the inflammatory response.

PMID: 11792635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Biol. 2002 Jan 8;12(1):35-45.

Physical and functional interaction between GATA-3 and Smad3 allows TGF-beta
regulation of GATA target genes.

Blokzijl A(1), ten Dijke P, Ibáñez CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institute, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Members of the GATA family of zinc finger transcription factors are
genetically controlled "master" regulators of development in the hematopoietic
and nervous systems. Whether GATA factors also serve to integrate epigenetic
signals on target promoters is, however, unknown. The transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily is a large group of phylogenetically conserved
secreted factors controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, migration, and 
survival in multiple tissues.
RESULTS: GATA-3, a key regulator of T helper cell development, was found to
directly interact with Smad3, an intracellular signal transducer of TGF-beta.
Complex formation required a central region in GATA-3 and the N-terminal domain
of Smad3. GATA-3 mediated recruitment of Smad3 to GATA binding sites
independently of Smad3 binding to DNA, and the two factors cooperated
synergistically to regulate transcription from the IL-5 promoter in a
TGF-beta-dependent manner. Treatment of T helper cells with TGF-beta promoted the
formation of an endogenous Smad3/GATA-3 nuclear complex and stimulated production
of the Th2 cytokine IL-10 in a Smad3- and GATA-3-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Although Smad proteins are known to interact with a number of
general transcription factors, these are insufficient to explain the
tissue-specific biology of TGF-beta proteins. Through its interaction with Smad3,
GATA-3 is able to integrate a genetic program of cell differentiation with an
extracellular signal, providing a molecular framework for the effects of TGF-beta
on the development and function of specific subsets of immune cells and possibly 
other cell types.

PMID: 11790301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 1;238(1):64-78.

Hemangioblast commitment in the avian allantois: cellular and molecular aspects.

Caprioli A(1), Minko K, Drevon C, Eichmann A, Dieterlen-Lièvre F, Jaffredo T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49 bis av. de la Belle Gabrielle, Nogent s/Marne Cedex, 94736, France.

We recently identified the allantois as a site producing hemopoietic and
endothelial cells capable of colonizing the bone marrow of an engrafted host.
Here, we report a detailed investigation of some early cytological and molecular 
processes occurring in the allantoic bud, which are probably involved in the
production of angioblasts and hemopoietic cells. We show that the allantois
undergoes a program characterized by the prominent expression of several
"hemangioblastic" genes in the mesoderm accompanied by other gene patterns in the
associated endoderm. VEGF-R2, at least from stage HH17 onward, is expressed and
is shortly followed by transcription factors GATA-2, SCL/tal-1, and GATA-1. Blood
island-like structures differentiate that contain both CD45(+) cells and cells
accumulating hemoglobin; these structures look exactly like blood islands in the 
yolk sac. This hemopoietic process takes place before the establishment of a
vascular network connecting the allantois to the embryo. As far as the endoderm
is concerned, GATA-3 mRNA is found in the region where allantois will
differentiate before the posterior instestinal portal becomes anatomically
distinct. Shortly before the bud grows out, GATA-2 was expressed in the endoderm 
and, at the same time, the hemangioblastic program became initiated in the
mesoderm. GATA-3 is detected at least until E8 and GATA-2 until E3 the latest
stage examined for this factor. Using in vitro cultures, we show that allantoic
buds, dissected out before the establishment of circulation between the bud and
the rest of the embryo, produced erythrocytes of the definitive lineage.
Moreover, using heterospecific grafts between chick and quail embryos, we
demonstrate that the allantoic vascular network develops from intrinsic
progenitors. Taken together, these results extend our earlier findings about the 
commitment of mesoderm to the endothelial and hemopoietic lineages in the
allantois. The detection of a prominent GATA-3 expression restricted to the
endoderm of the preallantoic region and allantoic bud, followed by that of
GATA-2, is an interesting and novel information, in the context of organ
formation and endoderm specification in the emergence of hemopoietic cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11783994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;495:15-24.

Molecular characterization of gut T cell precursors in euthymic and athymic mice.

Lambolez F(1), Rocha B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.345, Institut Necker, 156 rue de Vaugirard, 75730 Paris, France.

PMID: 11774559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3585-92. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Defects of the heart, eye, and megakaryocytes in peroxisome proliferator
activator receptor-binding protein (PBP) null embryos implicate GATA family of
transcription factors.

Crawford SE(1), Qi C, Misra P, Stellmach V, Rao MS, Engel JD, Zhu Y, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP) is an
important coactivator for PPARgamma and other nuclear receptors. It has been
identified as an integral component of a multiprotein thyroid hormone
receptor-associated protein/vitamin D(3) receptor-interacting
protein/activator-recruited cofactor complexes required for transcriptional
activity. Here, we show that PBP is critical for the development of placenta and 
for the normal embryonic development of the heart, eye, vascular, and
hematopoietic systems. The primary functional cause of embryonic lethality at
embryonic day11.5 observed with PBP null mutation was cardiac failure because of 
noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium and resultant ventricular dilatation.
There was a paucity of retinal pigment, defective lens formation, excessive
systemic angiogenesis, a deficiency in the number of megakaryocytes, and an
arrest in erythrocytic differentiation. Some of these defects involve PPARgamma
and retinoid-sensitive sites, whereas others have not been recognized in the
PPAR-signaling pathway. Phenotypic changes in four organ systems observed in PBP 
null mice overlapped with those in mice deficient in members of GATA, a family of
transcription factors known to regulate differentiation of megakaryocytes,
erythrocytes, and adipocytes. We demonstrate that PBP interacts with all five
GATA factors analyzed, GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, GATA-4, and GATA-6, and show that 
the binding of GATA-1, GATA-4, and GATA-6 to PBP is not dependent on the nuclear 
receptor recognition sequence motif LXXLL (where L is leucine and X is any amino 
acid) in PBP. Coexpression of PBP with GATA-3 markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity of GATA-3 in nonhematopoietic cells. These observations identify the
GATA family of transcription factors as a new interacting partner of PBP and
demonstrate that PBP is essential for normal development of vital organ systems.

PMID: 11724781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Exp Med. 2001 Nov 19;194(10):1461-71.

Friend of GATA-1 represses GATA-3-dependent activity in CD4+ T cells.

Zhou M(1), Ouyang W, Gong Q, Katz SG, White JM, Orkin SH, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The development of naive CD4+ T cells into a T helper (Th) 2 subset capable of
producing interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13 involves a signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)6-dependent induction of GATA-3 expression,
followed by Stat6-independent GATA-3 autoactivation. The friend of GATA (FOG)-1
protein regulates GATA transcription factor activity in several stages of
hematopoietic development including erythrocyte and megakaryocyte
differentiation, but whether FOG-1 regulates GATA-3 in T cells is uncertain. We
show that FOG-1 can repress GATA-3-dependent activation of the IL-5 promoter in T
cells. Also, FOG-1 overexpression during primary activation of naive T cells
inhibited Th2 development in CD4+ T cells. FOG-1 fully repressed GATA-3-dependent
Th2 development and GATA-3 autoactivation, but not Stat6-dependent induction of
GATA-3. FOG-1 overexpression repressed development of Th2 cells from naive T
cells, but did not reverse the phenotype of fully committed Th2 cells. Thus,
FOG-1 may be one factor capable of regulating the Th2 development.

PMCID: PMC2193678
PMID: 11714753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nat Immunol. 2001 Dec;2(12):1183-8.

Mutation of Tec family kinases alters T helper cell differentiation.

Schaeffer EM(1), Yap GS, Lewis CM, Czar MJ, McVicar DW, Cheever AW, Sher A,
Schwartzberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The Tec kinases Rlk and Itk are critical for full T cell receptor (TCR)-induced
activation of phospholipase C-gamma and mitogen-activated protein kinase. We show
here that the mutation of Rlk and Itk impaired activation of the transcription
factors NFAT and AP-1 and production of both T helper type 1 (TH1) and TH2
cytokines. Consistent with these biochemical defects, Itk-/- mice did not
generate effective TH2 responses when challenged with Schistosoma mansoni eggs.
Paradoxically, the more severely impaired Rlk-/-Itk-/- mice were able to mount a 
TH2 response and produced TH2 cytokines in response to this challenge. In
addition, Rlk-/-Itk-/- cells showed impaired TCR-induced repression of the
TH2-inducing transcription factor GATA-3, suggesting a potential mechanism for
TH2 development in these hyporesponsive cells. Thus, mutations that affect Tec
kinases lead to complex alterations in CD4+ TH cell differentiation.

PMID: 11702066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Curr Biol. 2001 Oct 30;11(21):1695-9.

Cell cycle controlling the silencing and functioning of mammalian activators.

Mullen AC(1), Hutchins AS, Villarino AV, Lee HW, High FA, Cereb N, Yang SY, Hua
X, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Naïve CD4(+) helper T (T(H)) cells respond to stimulation by terminally
differentiating into two mature classes, T(H)1 cells, which express interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma), and T(H)2 cells, which express interleukin 4 (IL-4). The
transcriptional activators T-bet and Gata-3 mediate commitment to the T(H)1 and
T(H)2 fates, respectively, including chromatin remodeling of signature genes. The
cytokine IL-12 fosters growth of committed T(H)1 cells, while IL-4 fosters growth
of committed T(H)2 cells. IL-12 and IL-4 also play critical roles in commitment
by promoting transcriptional silencing of Gata-3 and T-bet, respectively. We now 
show that both T-bet and Gata-3 are induced in a cell cycle-independent manner in
bipotent progenitor cells. In contrast, both lineage-restricted gene induction by
the activator proteins and heritable silencing of the transcription of each
activator, the hallmarks of terminal differentiation, are cell cycle dependent.
We found that cells that cannot cycle remain uncommitted and bipotent in response
to the most polarizing signals for maturation. These results provide mechanistic 
insight into a mammalian model of terminal differentiation by illustrating that
cell cycle-coupled epigenetic effects, as originally described in yeast, may
represent an evolutionarily conserved strategy for organizing signaling and cell 
fate.

PMID: 11696328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2001 Nov;16(11):2130-2.

GATA3 and kidney development: why case reports are still important.

Van Esch H, Bilous RW.

PMID: 11682654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 1;167(9):4974-80.

1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin d3 has a direct effect on naive CD4(+) T cells to
enhance the development of Th2 cells.

Boonstra A(1), Barrat FJ, Crain C, Heath VL, Savelkoul HF, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
andre.boonstra@dnax.org

1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (vitD3) is an immunoregulatory hormone with
beneficial effects on Th1 mediated autoimmune diseases. Although the inhibitory
effects of vitD3 on macrophages and dendritic cells are well documented, any
direct effects of vitD3 on Th cell development are not clearly defined. Using
CD4(+)Mel14(+) T cells derived from mice on a BALB/c and a C57BL/6 genetic
background we examined the effect of vitD3 on Th cell development. We
demonstrated that vitD3 affects Th cell polarization by inhibiting Th1 (IFN-gamma
production) and augmenting Th2 cell development (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10
production). These effects were observed in cultures driven with splenic APC and 
Ag, as well as with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 alone, indicating that CD4(+) cells
can also be direct targets for vitD3. The enhanced Th2 development by vitD3 was
found in both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. An increased expression of the
Th2-specific transcription factors GATA-3 and c-maf correlated with the increased
production of Th2 cytokines after vitD3 treatment. The vitD3-induced effects were
largely mediated via IL-4, because neutralization of IL-4 almost completely
abrogated the augmented Th2 cell development after vitD3 treatment. These
findings suggest that vitD3 acts directly on Th cells and can, in the absence of 
APC, enhance the development of a Th2 phenotype and augment the expression of the
transcription factors c-maf and GATA-3. Our findings suggest that the beneficial 
effects of vitD3 in autoimmune diseases and transplantation operate through
prevention of strong Th1 responses via the action on the APC, while
simultaneously directly acting on the T cell to enhance Th2 cell development.

PMID: 11673504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 15;167(8):4468-75.

Enforced expression of GATA-3 severely reduces human thymic cellularity.

Taghon T(1), De Smedt M, Stolz F, Cnockaert M, Plum J, Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Following bone marrow transplantation, patients often suffer from immune
incompetence by reduced or late T cell development. Moreover, adult bone marrow
stem cells have a lower capacity to generate T cells compared with fetal liver-
and umbilical cord blood-derived progenitors. Therefore, enhancing
thymic-dependent T cell generation might hold great therapeutic potential. GATA-3
is a transcription factor that is essential in T cell development. In this study 
we examined the therapeutic potential of GATA-3 to enhance T cell generation by
overexpressing GATA-3 in T cell progenitors followed by fetal thymic organ
culture (FTOC). We observed that early during FTOC, there was an enhanced
differentiation toward the double positive stage of T cell development. From day 
10 of FTOC, however, overexpression of GATA-3 induced a severe reduction in
thymic cellularity, which probably correlates with the absence of a functional
TCR-beta chain. We further show that the frequency of apoptosis was increased in 
GATA-3-transduced thymocytes. Despite the absence of a functional TCR-beta chain,
GATA-3 transduced progenitors were able to differentiate into CD8beta(+) double
positive thymocytes. This study shows that a strictly regulated expression of
GATA-3 is essential for normal T cell development and this puts severe
restrictions on the potential therapeutic use of continuously overexpressed
GATA-3.

PMID: 11591773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 15;167(8):4414-20.

The cell type-specific expression of the murine IL-13 gene is regulated by
GATA-3.

Kishikawa H(1), Sun J, Choi A, Miaw SC, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

IL-13, a Th2 cell-specific cytokine, is a major effector molecule mediating
several pathological features of allergic asthma. However, the transcriptional
regulation of the IL-13 gene remains unclear. Here we demonstrate, by using
intracellular cytokine staining, that IL-13 is not always coexpressed with other 
Th2 cytokines in normal Th cells on a single cell basis. In addition, we
identified and cloned a minimal inducible and cell type-specific promoter of the 
murine IL-13 gene. The cell type specificity of the minimal IL-13 promoter is
mediated by a functionally critical GATA-3 site that binds endogenous GATA-3
proteins, whereas the induction by PMA/ionomycin is mediated by distinct
cis-acting elements. Furthermore, by expressing GATA-3 in wild-type and c-maf
transgenic Th1 cells, we demonstrate that the expression of IL-13 is regulated by
a mechanism distinct from that regulating the expression of IL-4, and that the
expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine genes does not have to be mutually exclusive
in effector Th cells.

PMID: 11591766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Eur Respir J. 2001 Sep;18(3):466-73.

Expression of GATA family of transcription factors in T-cells, monocytes and
bronchial biopsies.

Caramori G(1), Lim S, Ito K, Tomita K, Oates T, Jazrawi E, Chung KF, Barnes PJ,
Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
School of Medicine, London, UK.

GATA-binding proteins are a subfamily of zinc finger transcription factors with
six members (GATA-1-6) that interact with the GATA deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
sequence. This sequence is found in the regulatory regions of many genes
including those encoding T-helper 2 (Th2)-like cytokines, receptors, adhesion
molecules and enzymes, which may be important in the pathogenesis of bronchial
asthma. The expression of GATA-3, 4 and -6 was investigated in peripheral blood
T-lymphocytes and monocytes and bronchial biopsies from 11 normal subjects and 10
steroid-naive asthmatic patients. Using Western blot analysis, T-cells from
asthmatic subjects expressed 5 times the level of GATA-3 compared to that in
normals. Confocal microscopy indicated that GATA-3 expression was both nuclear
and cytoplasmic. GATA DNA binding complex containing GATA-3 was elevated in Th2
cells as determined by electrophorectic mobility shift assay. In contrast,
monocytes from normal and asthmatic subjects expressed GATA-4 and -6 in equal
amounts, but no GATA-3 was found. Using immunohistochemistry in bronchial
biopsies, epithelial cells expressed high levels of GATA-3, GATA-4 and GATA-6
proteins. Comparison of Western blots of bronchial biopsies showed no significant
differences between normal and asthmatic subjects. In conclusion, the increased
expression of GATA-3 in asthmatic T-cells may underlie augmented T-helper 2-like 
cytokines in this disease. However, the unaltered GATA-3 expression in epithelial
cells suggests a distinct role for GATA-3 in these cells unrelated to T-helper
2-like cytokine release. Finally, no evidence was found for an increased
expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in asthma.

PMID: 11589343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2001 Sep;25(3):326-34.

Temporal-spatial analysis of the immune response in a murine model of
ovalbumin-induced airways inflammation.

Gajewska BU(1), Swirski FK, Alvarez D, Ritz SA, Goncharova S, Cundall M, Snider
DP, Coyle AJ, Gutierrez-Ramos JC, Stämpfli MR, Jordana M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Centre for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The objective of this study was to define phenotypic changes of
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and T cells in a murine model of antigen-induced 
airways inflammation that involves intraperitoneal sensitization with ovalbumin
(OVA)/adjuvant followed by antigen aerosolization. We investigated the APC and
T-cell compartments both after sensitization (primary immune response) and after 
challenge (secondary immune response) at the thoracic lymph nodes (initiation
site) and the lung (effector site). Our findings document a major cellular
expansion in the lymph nodes after both sensitization and challenge. After
sensitization, this expansion was comprised mainly of B cells, a considerable
proportion of which expressed B7.2. At this time, T cells were markedly expanded 
and activated as assessed by CD69 expression; further, although GATA-3 and signal
transducer and activator of transcription-6 were expressed at this time point,
expression of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels
were marginal. However, in vitro stimulation of lymph-node cells with OVA led to 
cytokine production. In contrast, 24 h after challenge, but not after
sensitization, there was a major expansion of dendritic cells and macrophages in 
the lungs. This expansion was associated with enhanced expression of both B7.1
and B7.2. We also observed expansion of activated CD3(+)/CD4(+) T cells
expressing the T helper-2-associated marker T1/ST2 in the lung, most notably 5 d 
after challenge. Further, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, but not interferon-gamma mRNA
were expressed at high levels 3 h after challenge. This study helps to elucidate 
the "geography" of immune responses generated in a conventional murine model of
allergic airways inflammation.

PMID: 11588010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 21;276(51):48502-9. Epub 2001 Sep 28.

GATA-3 has dual regulatory functions in human interleukin-5 transcription.

Schwenger GT(1), Fournier R, Kok CC, Mordvinov VA, Yeoman D, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Curtin University of Technology, and the
Western Australian Institute of Medical Research Level 5, Medical Research
Foundation Building, Rear 50 Murray Street, Perth 6000, Western Australia.
gretchen@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is a T-cell cytokine involved in Type 2 diseases and is
commonly described as being coordinately regulated with other Type 2 cytokines,
such as IL-4 and IL-13. Considering the unique control of eosinophilia by IL-5,
such coordinate regulation would be surprising. In fact, the biological
specificity of eosinophilia and its control by IL-5 suggests a unique and
independent control of IL-5 regulation. In this report we show the binding of
GATA-3 to three sites in the human IL-5 promoter in the human T-cell line PER117.
The previously identified -70 site and another site at position -152 are shown to
positively regulate IL-5 transcription. More importantly, the site located at
-400 acts as a powerful repressor of IL-5 transcription with mutagenesis of this 
site allowing a high level expression of IL-5 without the activation of other
factors normally required for IL-5 expression. Whereas GATA-3 has been proposed
to be involved in the regulation of the IL-4/IL-5/IL-13 locus, we show here that 
it has another function in controlling IL-5 transcription that supports the
observed unique biological function of this cytokine.

PMID: 11579103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2001 Aug;58(9):1296-300.

Transcription factor GATA3 and the human HDR syndrome.

Van Esch H(1), Devriendt K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Recently, a member of the GATA-binding family of transcription factors was shown 
to be involved in the human hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal 
anomalies (HDR) syndrome. Deletion-mapping studies and subsequent mutation
analysis revealed that haploinsufficiency for GATA3 is the underlying mechanism
of the HDR syndrome. Here we discuss the clinical characteristics of the HDR
syndrome and present an overview of the role of GATA3 and related GATA-binding
transcription factors during vertebrate embryonic development and their
involvement in human disease.

PMID: 11577985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Sep;108(3):340-8.

Dexamethasone inhibits the binding of nuclear factors to the IL-5 promoter in
human CD4 T cells.

Quan A(1), McCall MN, Sewell WA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology, St Vincent's Hospital and University of New South
Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: IL-5 is produced by the T(H)2 subset of CD4(+) T lymphocytes and is
necessary for the eosinophilia typical of allergic conditions. Glucocorticoids
such as dexamethasone are highly effective inhibitors of eosinophilic
inflammation, and one of their effects is inhibition of IL-5 gene expression.
OBJECTIVE: We wished to examine the effect of dexamethasone on the binding of
nuclear factors from primary human CD4(+) T lymphocytes to the RE-I and RE-II
positively acting regulatory elements of the IL-5 promoter.
METHODS: CD4(+) T cells, purified from PBMCs by magnetic bead separation, were
activated with anti-CD3 antibody and phorbol myristate acetate. Nuclear extracts 
were tested in electrophoretic mobility shift assays with probes based on RE-I
and RE-II.
RESULTS: In extracts from activated cells, the RE-II region of the promoter
formed a complex that was shown by supershift assay to contain NFATc. This
complex was abolished by treatment of the cells with dexamethasone before
activation and was weak or absent in unactivated cells. By contrast, binding to
the RE-I region and to the GATA-3 site within RE-I was observed in resting cells 
and was not affected by activation or treatment with dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: Dexamethasone inhibits the inducible binding of factors to the RE-II 
region but does not affect the constitutive binding to the RE-I region.
Characterization of such molecular effects of glucocorticoids could enable the
development of specific inhibitors of IL-5 expression that lack the side effects 
of glucocorticoids.

PMID: 11544451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Immunity. 2001 Aug;15(2):275-87.

Regulation of Th2 cell differentiation by mel-18, a mammalian polycomb group
gene.

Kimura M(1), Koseki Y, Yamashita M, Watanabe N, Shimizu C, Katsumoto T, Kitamura 
T, Taniguchi M, Koseki H, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Immunology and Department of Molecular Immunology, Chiba
University, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) gene products regulate homeobox gene expression in
Drosophila and vertebrates and also cell cycle progression of immature
lymphocytes. In a gene-disrupted mouse for polycomb group gene mel-18, mature
peripheral T cells exhibited normal anti-TCR-induced proliferation; however, the 
production of Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) was significantly reduced,
whereas production of IFNgamma was modestly enhanced. Th2 cell differentiation
was impaired, and the defect was associated with decreased levels in
demethylation of the IL-4 gene. Significantly, reduced GATA3 induction was
demonstrated. In vivo antigen-induced IgG1 production and Nippostrongylus
brasiliensis-induced eosinophilia were significantly affected, reflecting the
deficit in Th2 cell differentiation. Thus, the PcG gene products play a critical 
role in the control of Th2 cell differentiation and Th2-dependent immune
responses.

PMID: 11520462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Exp Hematol. 2001 Aug;29(8):971-80.

Enforced expression of the GATA-3 transcription factor affects cell fate
decisions in hematopoiesis.

Chen D(1), Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Systemix, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., USA. dchen@genencor.com

OBJECTIVE: Three GATA family transcription factors are involved in various
aspects of hematopoiesis. Their lineage-restricted expression correlates well
with their function in selective lineage commitment and differentiation. We
focused on the role of GATA-3 to determine whether an intrinsic variation among
different GATA proteins, in addition to the distinct expression pattern,
determines lineage specification.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using a retroviral vector, we introduced the GATA-3 gene
into primary murine hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and examined their development
in in vitro suspension culture and colony-forming assays as well as in vivo
competitive repopulation studies.
RESULTS: Although GATA-3 expression normally is restricted to lymphoid precursor 
and committed T cells, overexpression of GATA-3 in HSC results in cessation of
cell expansion followed by selective induction of megakaryocytic and erythroid
differentiation and inhibition of myeloid and lymphoid precursor development in
liquid suspension culture and in vitro colony-forming assays. Competitive
repopulation studies show that transplanted GATA-3-expressing HSC/progenitor
cells give one wave of erythrocyte development but fail to expand in the bone
marrow or to reconstitute other lineages.
CONCLUSIONS: The selective megakaryocytic/erythroid differentiation in HSC with
enforced GATA-3 expression suggests a functional redundancy among GATA proteins
and indicates that the specific lineage fate determination by individual GATA
proteins is largely regulated at the level of expression in a lineage and
developmental-stage restricted fashion, whereas the identity of the GATA factor
may not be as important.

PMID: 11495703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):724-32.

Enforced expression of GATA-3 in transgenic mice inhibits Th1 differentiation and
induces the formation of a T1/ST2-expressing Th2-committed T cell compartment in 
vivo.

Nawijn MC(1), Dingjan GM, Ferreira R, Lambrecht BN, Karis A, Grosveld F,
Savelkoul H, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is essential for early T cell development and
differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells into Th2 effector cells. To study the
function of GATA-3 during T cell-mediated immune responses in vivo, we
investigated CD2-GATA3-transgenic mice in which GATA-3 expression is driven by
the CD2 locus control region. Both in the CD4(+) and the CD8(+) T cell population
the proportion of cells exhibiting a CD44(high)CD45RB(low)CD62L(low)
Ag-experienced phenotype was increased. In CD2-GATA3-transgenic mice, large
fractions of peripheral CD4(+) T cells expressed the IL-1 receptor family member 
T1/ST2, indicative of advanced Th2 commitment. Upon in vitro T cell stimulation, 
the ability to produce IL-2 and IFN-gamma was decreased. Moreover, CD4(+) T cells
manifested rapid secretion of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10,
reminiscent of Th2 memory cells. In contrast to wild-type CD4(+) cells, which
lost GATA-3 expression when cultured under Th1-polarizing conditions,
CD2-GATA3-transgenic CD4(+) cells maintained expression of GATA-3 protein. Under 
Th1 conditions, cellular proliferation of CD2-GATA3-transgenic CD4(+) cells was
severely hampered, IFN-gamma production was decreased and Th2 cytokine production
was increased. Enforced GATA-3 expression inhibited Th1-mediated in vivo
responses, such as Ag-specific IgG2a production or a delayed-type
hypersensitivity response to keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Collectively, these
observations indicate that enforced GATA-3 expression selectively inhibits Th1
differentiation and induces Th2 differentiation. The increased functional
capacity to secrete Th2 cytokines, along with the increased expression of surface
markers for Ag-experienced Th2-committed cells, would argue for a role of GATA-3 
in Th2 memory formation.

PMID: 11441076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):715-23.

Enforced expression of GATA-3 during T cell development inhibits maturation of
CD8 single-positive cells and induces thymic lymphoma in transgenic mice.

Nawijn MC(1), Ferreira R, Dingjan GM, Kahre O, Drabek D, Karis A, Grosveld F,
Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-3 is of critical importance for early T
cell development and commitment of Th2 cells. To study the role of GATA-3 in
early T cell development, we analyzed and modified GATA-3 expression in vivo. In 
mice carrying a targeted insertion of a lacZ reporter on one allele, we found
that GATA-3 transcription in CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive thymocytes correlated
with the onset of positive selection events, i.e., TCRalphabeta up-regulation and
CD69 expression. LacZ expression remained high ( approximately 80% of cells)
during maturation of CD4 single-positive (SP) cells in the thymus, but in
developing CD8 SP cells the fraction of lacZ-expressing cells decreased to <20%. 
We modified this pattern by enforced GATA-3 expression driven by the CD2 locus
control region, which provides transcription of GATA-3 throughout T cell
development. In two independent CD2-GATA3-transgenic lines, approximately 50% of 
the mice developed thymic lymphoblastoid tumors that were CD4(+)CD8(+/low) and
mostly CD3(+). In tumor-free CD2-GATA3-transgenic mice, the total numbers of CD8 
SP cells in the thymus were within normal ranges, but their maturation was
hampered, as indicated by increased apoptosis of CD8 SP cells and a selective
deficiency of mature CD69(low)HSA(low) CD8 SP cells. In the spleen and lymph
nodes, the numbers of CD8(+) T cells were significantly reduced. These findings
indicate that GATA-3 supports development of the CD4 lineage and inhibits
maturation of CD8 SP cells in the thymus.

PMID: 11441075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nat Immunol. 2001 Jul;2(7):573-4.

ICOS costimulation: It's not just for TH2 cells anymore.

Sperling AI(1), Bluestone JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, and
the Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
asperlin@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2001 Jul;2(7):605-11.
    Nat Immunol. 2001 Jul;2(7):597-604.
    Nat Immunol. 2001 Jul;2(7):591-6.

A current paradigm has ICOS participating in TH2 costimulation. New data
indicates ICOS regulates not only TH2 cells, but also TH1s.

PMID: 11429535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 Jun;21(6):917-22.

Function of GATA transcription factors in induction of endothelial vascular cell 
adhesion molecule-1 by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Umetani M(1), Mataki C, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M, Hamakubo T, Kodama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. umetani-tky@umin.ac.jp

Endothelial vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) is expressed in response
to cytokine stimulation and plays a critical role in inflammatory reactions.
Previously, we developed a novel VCAM-1 inhibitor that acts through a mechanism
independent of nuclear factor-kappaB activity. It suppresses the binding activity
of GATA proteins in cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells, which may be related
to the anti-VCAM-1 induction effect of this drug. In this study, we investigated 
the role of GATA proteins in the induction of VCAM-1 by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) in human endothelial cells. The mRNA expression of
GATA-6 was increased, whereas GATA-3 mRNA was decreased by TNF-alpha stimulation.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that TNF-alpha stimulation increased 
the DNA binding of GATA-6 but decreased that of GATA-3. Experiments using protein
overexpression or antisense oligonucleotides revealed that GATA-6 potently acts
as a positive regulator of VCAM-1 gene transcription. In contrast, overexpression
of GATA-3 was able to suppress TNF-alpha-induced VCAM-1 expression. Our results
provide evidence of the importance of GATA proteins in the induction of VCAM-1 by
TNF-alpha in vascular endothelial cells. The switch from GATA-3 to GATA-6 is
taken to be an important transcriptional control event in TNF-alpha induction of 
VCAM-1.

PMID: 11397697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Immunol. 2001 Jun 15;166(12):7276-81.

Stat6 is necessary and sufficient for IL-4's role in Th2 differentiation and cell
expansion.

Zhu J(1), Guo L, Watson CJ, Hu-Li J, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-4 plays a critical role in the differentiation of TCR-stimulated naive CD4 T
cells to the Th2 phenotype. In response to IL-4, the IL-4R activates a set of
phosphotyrosine binding domain-containing proteins, including insulin receptor
substrate 1/2, Shc, and IL-4R interacting protein, as well as Stat6. Stat6 has
been shown to be required for Th2 differentiation. To determine the roles of the 
phosphotyrosine binding adaptors in Th2 differentiation, we prepared a retrovirus
containing a mutant of the human (h)IL-4R alpha-chain, Y497F, which is unable to 
recruit these adaptors. The mutant hIL-4Ralpha, as well as the wild-type (WT)
hIL-4Ralpha, was introduced into naive CD4 T cells. Upon hIL-4 stimulation, Y497F
worked as well as the WT hIL-4Ralpha in driving Th2 differentiation, as measured 
by Gata3 up-regulation and IL-4 production. Furthermore, IL-4-driven cell
expansion was also normal in the cells infected with Y497F, although cells
infected with Y497F were not capable of phosphorylating insulin receptor
substrate 2. These results suggest that the signal pathway mediated by Y497 is
dispensable for both IL-4-driven Th2 differentiation and cell expansion. Both WT 
and Y497F hIL-4Ralpha lose the ability to drive Th2 differentiation and cell
expansion in Stat6-knockout CD4 T cells. A constitutively activated form of Stat6
introduced into CD4 T cells resulted in both Th2 differentiation and enhanced
cell expansion. Thus, activated Stat6 is necessary and sufficient to mediate both
IL-4-driven Th2 differentiation and cell expansion in CD4 T cells.

PMID: 11390477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Exp Med. 2001 Jun 4;193(11):1247-60.

Treatment of allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by
antisense-induced local blockade of GATA-3 expression.

Finotto S(1), De Sanctis GT, Lehr HA, Herz U, Buerke M, Schipp M, Bartsch B,
Atreya R, Schmitt E, Galle PR, Renz H, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, University of Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany.
sfinotto@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Recent studies in transgenic mice have revealed that expression of a dominant
negative form of the transcription factor GATA-3 in T cells can prevent T helper 
cell type 2 (Th2)-mediated allergic airway inflammation in mice. However, it
remains unclear whether GATA-3 plays a role in the effector phase of allergic
airway inflammation and whether antagonizing the expression and/or function of
GATA-3 can be used for the therapy of allergic airway inflammation and
hyperresponsiveness. Here, we analyzed the effects of locally antagonizing GATA-3
function in a murine model of asthma. We could suppress GATA-3 expression in
interleukin (IL)-4-producing T cells in vitro and in vivo by an antisense
phosphorothioate oligonucleotide overlapping the translation start site of
GATA-3, whereas nonsense control oligonucleotides were virtually inactive. In a
murine model of asthma associated with allergic pulmonary inflammation and
hyperresponsiveness in ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized mice, local intranasal
administration of fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled GATA-3 antisense
oligonucleotides led to DNA uptake in lung cells associated with a reduction of
intracellular GATA-3 expression. Such intrapulmonary blockade of GATA-3
expression caused an abrogation of signs of lung inflammation including
infiltration of eosinophils and Th2 cytokine production. Furthermore, treatment
with antisense but not nonsense oligonucleotides induced a significant reduction 
of airway hyperresponsiveness in OVA-sensitized mice to levels comparable to
saline-treated control mice, as assessed by both enhanced pause (PenH) responses 
and pulmonary resistance determined by body plethysmography. These data indicate 
a critical role for GATA-3 in the effector phase of a murine asthma model and
suggest that local delivery of GATA-3 antisense oligonucleotides may be a novel
approach for the treatment of airway hyperresponsiveness such as in asthma. This 
approach has the potential advantage of suppressing the expression of various
proinflammatory Th2 cytokines simultaneously rather than suppressing the activity
of a single cytokine.

PMCID: PMC2193377
PMID: 11390432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Med Genet. 2001 Jun;38(6):374-80.

GATA3 abnormalities and the phenotypic spectrum of HDR syndrome.

Muroya K(1), Hasegawa T, Ito Y, Nagai T, Isotani H, Iwata Y, Yamamoto K, Fujimoto
S, Seishu S, Fukushima Y, Hasegawa Y, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. komur@mx6.ttcn.ne.jp

We report on GATA3 analysis and the phenotypic spectrum in nine Japanese families
with the HDR syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal
dysplasia) (MIM 146255). Fluorescence in situ hybridisation and microsatellite
analyses showed heterozygous gross deletions including GATA3 in four families.
Sequence analysis showed heterozygous novel mutations in three families: a
missense mutation within the first zinc finger domain at exon 4 (T823A, W275R),
an unusual mutation at exon 4 (900insAA plus 901insCCT or C901AACCCT) resulting
in a premature stop at codon 357 with loss of the second zinc finger domain, and 
a nonsense mutation at exon 6 (C1099T, R367X). No GATA3 abnormalities were
identified in the remaining two families. The triad of HDR syndrome was variably 
manifested by patients with GATA3 abnormalities. The results suggest that HDR
syndrome is primarily caused by GATA3 haploinsufficiency and is associated with a
wide phenotypic spectrum.

PMCID: PMC1734904
PMID: 11389161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Jun;31(6):1696-705.

A conserved sequence block in the murine and human T cell receptor Jalpha loci
interacts with developmentally regulated nucleoprotein complexes in vitro and
associates with GATA-3 and octamer-binding factors in vivo.

Chen ML(1), Kuo CL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, College of Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

A highly conserved sequence block (CSB) located in the mouse and human T cell
receptor (TCR) Jalpha loci is recognized by tissue-specific factors and
up-regulates TCR alpha enhancer activity. In this study, the properties of
CSB-interacting factors were further explored to decipher the function of this
cis-acting element. Thymocytes corresponding to different developmental stages
were found capable of forming differential CSB-nucleoprotein complexes.
Pronounced changes in the CSB-complex-forming activity were observed during the
transition from double-negative to double-positive thymocytes. Furthermore, we
showed that transcription factors Oct-1, Oct-2 and GATA-3 interacted with CSB
both in vitro, as evidenced by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and in
vivo, as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in mouse thymus.
Importantly, we also demonstrated that GATA-3 associated in vivo with TCR alpha
enhancer, the activity of which is known to be required in regulating chromatin
accessibility to the V(D)J recombinase. Thus, CSB may temporally regulate local
chromatin structure and help to spread TCR alpha enhancer activity over the
entire 70-kb Jalpha locus by forming developmentally regulated CSB-nucleoprotein 
complexes and by interacting with other cis-regulatory element-nucleoprotein
complexes present within the TCR alpha / delta locus.

PMID: 11385613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Dev Biol. 1999 Jun 15;210(2):305-21.

Expression and genetic interaction of transcription factors GATA-2 and GATA-3
during development of the mouse central nervous system.

Nardelli J(1), Thiesson D, Fujiwara Y, Tsai FY, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Cytosquelette et Développement, CNRS URA 2115, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, 105
Boulevard de l'Hôpital, Paris Cedex, 75 634, France. nardelli@idf.ext.jussieu.fr

Here we examine the expression of transcription factors GATA-2 and GATA-3 during 
early stages of embryonic development in the central nervous system (CNS) of the 
mouse. GATA-2 is expressed as early as 9 dpc in the hindbrain, in ventral
rhombomere 4, and transiently in ventral rhombomere 2 (r2). From 9.5 to 11.5 dpc,
activation of the gene spreads to many sites of early neuronal differentiation,
such as the olfactory bulbs, the pretectum, and the oculomotor nucleus in the
midbrain, a thin stripe of cells lining the floor plate from the mesencephalon to
the cervical spinal cord and a ventral column of cells spanning the neural tube
from rostral hindbrain and including motor neuron as well as ventral interneuron 
precursors. GATA-3 is expressed in a pattern very similar to that of GATA-2.
Distinguishing features are the lack of expression in r2 at 9 dpc and a slight
delay in its activation. In addition, GATA-2 is activated in both the ventricular
and the subventricular zones of the neural tube, whereas GATA-3 is restricted
mainly to the subventricular zone. Expression analyses performed on GATA-2 -/-
mouse embryos between E9.5 and 10.5 dpc established that: (i) the expression of
GATA-3 in the developing CNS of the mouse embryo is dependent on the presence of 
GATA-2 and (ii) loss of GATA-2 leads to severe defects in neurogenesis, which
strongly suggests that GATA-2 is involved, as in hematopoiesis, in the
maintenance of the pool of ventral neuronal progenitors.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10357893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Clin Immunol. 1999 May;91(2):134-44.

GATA-3 significantly downregulates IFN-gamma production from developing Th1 cells
in addition to inducing IL-4 and IL-5 levels.

Ferber IA(1), Lee HJ, Zonin F, Heath V, Mui A, Arai N, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

IL-12 and IL-4 are dominant factors driving the development of Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively, by their activation of Stat-4 and Stat-6 signaling molecules.
Activation of Stat factors, although specific, is a rapid event; however,
differentiation of Th cells takes place over several days. Thus, it is unlikely
that the expression of effector cytokines is mediated solely by Stat factors.
Recently there have been indications that link other molecular factors to Th
subset development. The transcription factor GATA-3 is selectively expressed in
Th2 cells and has been shown to induce the expression of Th2 cytokines in
developing Th1 cells. Using retroviral infection of naive T cells to introduce
GATA-3 cDNA, we measured its direct effects on the development of Th1 cytokine
production. We now show that ectopic expression of GATA-3 in developing Th1 cells
significantly inhibits IFN-gamma, as well as enhancing IL-4 and IL-5 production. 
Furthermore, GATA-3 inhibits production of IFN-gamma by developing Th1 cells in
the complete absence of IL-4. Thus, antagonism of Th1 development by GATA-3 may
facilitate rapid divergence of Th subsets toward a Th2 phenotype in concert with 
other factors.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10227805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12910-6.

Regulation of the human interleukin-5 promoter by Ets transcription factors. Ets1
and Ets2, but not Elf-1, cooperate with GATA3 and HTLV-I Tax1.

Blumenthal SG(1), Aichele G, Wirth T, Czernilofsky AP, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5), expressed primarily by type-2 T helper (Th2) cells, plays
an important role in the development of allergic diseases, such as allergic
asthma. Studying the regulation of IL-5 gene expression by Ets transcription
factors, we found that Ets1 and Ets2, but not Elf-1, were able to activate the
human IL-5 promoter in Jurkat T-cells. This required the presence of either
phorbol 12-myristate acetate (PMA) plus ionomycin or PMA plus the viral protein
HTLV-I Tax1. By mutation studies, it could be shown that Ets1 and Ets2 exerted
their effects on the IL-5 promoter through a GGAA motif within the Cle0 element. 
In myeloid Kasumi cells, Ets1 and Ets2 failed to stimulate IL-5 promoter
activity, unless the T-cell specific transcription factor GATA3 was added. These 
results show, for the first time, that Ets1 and Ets2 are able to cooperate with
GATA3. Both ionomycin and Tax1 increased the combined effect of GATA3 with Ets1
and Ets2 in the presence of PMA. The data further demonstrate that, in addition
to Ets1, Ets2 is also able to functionally cooperate with Tax1. The synergism of 
GATA3 with either Ets1 or Ets2 may play an important role in calcium- or
Tax1-dependent regulation of IL-5 expression in Th2 cells or in HTLV-I
transformed adult T-cell leukemia cells, respectively.

PMID: 10212281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Int J Cancer. 1999 Apr 20;84(2):122-8.

GATA-3 is expressed in association with estrogen receptor in breast cancer.

Hoch RV(1), Thompson DA, Baker RJ, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, CA, USA.

To better understand the molecular basis for the hormone-responsive phenotype in 
breast cancer, we have used a human cDNA array to compare patterns of gene
expression between breast carcinoma cell lines discordant for estrogen receptor
(ER) expression. These experiments indicated abundant expression of the
transcription factor GATA-3 in the ER-positive cell lines MCF7 and T-47D, with
minimal or no expression in the ER-negative cells lines MDA-MB-231 and HBL-100.
Northern blot analysis of a panel of human breast carcinoma cell lines
demonstrated a correlation between ER and GATA-3 expression. Studies of MCF7
cells grown in the absence or presence beta-estradiol indicated that GATA-3
expression was not responsive to estradiol. Protein immunoprecipitation and gel
shift analysis confirmed the presence of functional GATA-3 protein in MCF7 but
not in HBL-100 nuclear extracts. A panel of 47 primary breast cancers was
characterized for expression of ER and GATA-3 using immunoperoxidase assay. In
primary tumors, a statistically significant correlation between ER and GATA-3
expression was established (p < 0.0001, chi2). Our results indicate that GATA-3, 
in association with ER, is likely to regulate genes critical to the
hormone-responsive breast cancer phenotype.

PMID: 10096242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Mar 15;27(6):1517-23.

Combining SSH and cDNA microarrays for rapid identification of differentially
expressed genes.

Yang GP(1), Ross DT, Kuang WW, Brown PO, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-5414, USA.

Comparing patterns of gene expression in cell lines and tissues has important
applications in a variety of biological systems. In this study we have examined
whether the emerging technology of cDNA microarrays will allow a high throughput 
analysis of expression of cDNA clones generated by suppression subtractive
hybridization (SSH). A set of cDNA clones including 332 SSH inserts amplified by 
PCR was arrayed using robotic printing. The cDNA arrays were hybridized with
fluorescent labeled probes prepared from RNA from ER-positive (MCF7 and T47D) and
ER-negative (MDA-MB-231 and HBL-100) breast cancer cell lines. Ten clones were
identified that were over-expressed by at least a factor of five in the
ER-positive cell lines. Northern blot analysis confirmed over-expression of these
10 cDNAs. Sequence analysis identified four of these clones as cytokeratin 19,
GATA-3, CD24 and glutathione-S-transferase mu-3. Of the remaining six cDNA
clones, four clones matched EST sequences from two different genes and two clones
were novel sequences. Flow cytometry and immunofluorescence confirmed that CD24
protein was over-expressed in the ER-positive cell lines. We conclude that SSH
and microarray technology can be successfully applied to identify differentially 
expressed genes. This approach allowed the identification of differentially
expressed genes without the need to obtain previously cloned cDNAs.

PMCID: PMC148347
PMID: 10037815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 5;274(10):6567-78.

T-cell expression of the human GATA-3 gene is regulated by a non-lineage-specific
silencer.

Grégoire JM(1), Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.474, Hôpital Henri Mondor, 94010 Créteil, France.

The GATA-3 transcription factor is required for development of the T-cell lineage
and Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T-cells. We have mapped the
DNase-I-hypersensitive (HS) regions of the human GATA-3 gene in T-cells and
non-T-cells and studied their transcriptional activities. HS I-III, located 5'
from the transcriptional initiation site, were found in hematopoietic and
non-hematopoietic cells, whereas HS IV-VII, located 3' from the transcriptional
start site, were exclusively observed in T-cells. Among these hypersensitive
sites, two transcriptional control elements were found, one in the first intron
of the GATA-3 gene and the other between 8.3 and 5.9 kilobases 5' from the GATA-3
transcriptional initiation site. The first intron acted as a strong
transcriptional activator in a position-dependent manner and with no cell-type
specificity. The upstream regulatory element could confer T-cell specificity to
the GATA-3 promoter activity, and analysis of this region revealed a 707-base
pair silencer that drastically inhibited GATA-3 promoter activity in non-T-cells.
Two CAGGTG E-boxes, located at the 5'- and 3'-ends of the silencer, were
necessary for this silencer activity. The 3'-CAGGTG E-box could bind USF
proteins, the ubiquitous repressor ZEB, or the basic helix-loop-helix proteins
E2A and HEB, and we showed that a competition between ZEB and E2A/HEB proteins is
involved in the silencer activity.

PMID: 10037751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999 Feb;103(2 Pt 1):215-22.

Gene expression of the GATA-3 transcription factor is increased in atopic asthma.

Nakamura Y(1), Ghaffar O, Olivenstein R, Taha RA, Soussi-Gounni A, Zhang DH, Ray 
A, Hamid Q.

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories and the Department of Medicine, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: High expression of IL-5 by T cells in the airways of asthmatic
individuals is believed to play a fundamental role in the eosinophilia associated
with this disease. Recently, the transcription factor GATA-3 was shown to be
critical for IL-5 gene expression in TH2 cells in vitro.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to examine the expression of GATA-3 mRNA and its
colocalization within the airways of asthmatic and nonasthmatic individuals.
METHODS: We investigated the association between GATA-3 gene expression, airway
inflammatory cells, and IL-5 gene expression in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and 
bronchial biopsy specimens from atopic asthmatic subjects (n = 10) and normal
control subjects (n = 10).
RESULTS: We report that GATA-3 mRNA expression is significantly increased in the 
airways of asthmatic subjects compared with those of normal control subjects (P
<.001). Numbers of cells expressing GATA-3 transcripts correlated significantly
with reduced airway caliber (P <.05) and airways hyperresponsiveness (P <.05) in 
asthmatic subjects. Colocalization studies showed that the majority
(approximately 60% to 90%) of GATA-3 mRNA+ cells in asthmatic airways were CD3(+)
T cells, with smaller contributions from major basic protein+ eosinophils and
tryptase+ mast cells. The density of GATA-3 mRNA+ cells correlated significantly 
with the numbers of cells expressing IL-5 mRNA (P <.001, r = 0.879 for
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; P <. 05, r = 0.721 for biopsy specimens).
Furthermore, double in situ hybridization demonstrated that approximately 76% of 
GATA-3 mRNA+ cells coexpressed IL-5 mRNA and that 91% of IL-5 mRNA+ cells
coexpressed GATA-3 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study provide the first evidence of increased
GATA-3 gene expression in association with IL-5 mRNA+ cells in asthmatic airways.
These findings support a causal association between augmented GATA-3 expression
and dysregulated IL-5 expression in atopic asthma.

PMID: 9949310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1558-68.

Localization of distant urogenital system-, central nervous system-, and
endocardium-specific transcriptional regulatory elements in the GATA-3 locus.

Lakshmanan G(1), Lieuw KH, Lim KC, Gu Y, Grosveld F, Engel JD, Karis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

We found previously that neither a 6-kbp promoter fragment nor even a 120-kbp
yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) containing the whole GATA-3 gene was sufficient
to recapitulate its full transcription pattern during embryonic development in
transgenic mice. In an attempt to further identify tissue-specific regulatory
elements modulating the dynamic embryonic pattern of the GATA-3 gene, we have
examined the expression of two much larger (540- and 625-kbp) GATA-3 YACs in
transgenic animals. A lacZ reporter gene was first inserted into both large
GATA-3 YACs. The transgenic YAC patterns were then compared to those of embryos
bearing the identical lacZ insertion in the chromosomal GATA-3 locus (creating
GATA-3/lacZ "knock-ins"). We found that most of the YAC expression sites and
tissues are directly reflective of the endogenous pattern, and detailed
examination of the integrated YAC transgenes allowed the general localization of 
a number of very distant transcriptional regulatory elements (putative central
nervous system-, endocardium-, and urogenital system-specific enhancers).
Remarkably, even the 625-kbp GATA-3 YAC, containing approximately 450 kbp and 150
kbp of 5' and 3' flanking sequences, respectively, does not contain the full
transcriptional regulatory potential of the endogenous locus and is clearly
missing regulatory elements that confer tissue-specific expression to GATA-3 in a
subset of neural crest-derived cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC116084
PMID: 9891089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Dev Biol. 1998 Dec 15;204(2):451-63.

Partial rescue of GATA-3 by yeast artificial chromosome transgenes.

Lakshmanan G(1), Lieuw KH, Grosveld F, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, 60208, USA.

GATA-3 is essential for murine embryonic development, but elucidating the genetic
controls over the complex temporal and tissue-specific transcriptional regulatory
pattern of this transcription factor gene has been problematic. Here we report
the isolation and characterization of two yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs)
bearing the murine GATA-3 gene. Ordered deletions of both YACs show that they
define a 1-megabase pair contig spanning the GATA-3 locus. We found that a 120-kb
YAC transgene, including 35 kb of 5' as well as 60 kb of 3' flanking sequence,
confers normal GATA-3 expression at sites not revealed previously through
analysis of plasmid transgenic lines. However, even this 120-kb YAC does not
contain sufficient information to recapitulate the complete GATA-3 expression
program during embryogenesis. While not complete in its regulatory capacity, the 
YAC transgene is nonetheless able to complement several homozygous GATA-3 mutant 
phenotypes and thereby prolong embryonic life.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Transgenic Res. 1998 Jul;7(4):229-38.

Loss of LKLF function results in embryonic lethality in mice.

Wani MA(1), Means RT Jr, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, College of
Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

Lung Kruppel-like factor (LKLF) is a member of the Kruppel-like family of zinc
finger transcription factors and is closely related to erythroid kruppel-like
factor (EKLF), which is necessary for beta-globin gene expression. While EKLF is 
expressed exclusively in erythroid cells, LKLF is expressed temporally during
early embryonic development and predominantly in the adult mouse lung. To
understand the role this novel transcription factor plays in development as well 
as tissue differentiation and function, animals lacking LKLF were produced using 
gene targeting technology. Mice lacking LKLF die in utero between day 11.5 and
13.5 of embryonic life and exhibit retarded growth, craniofacial abnormalities,
abdominal bleeding and signs of anaemia. Although the yolk sac erythropoiesis is 
normal in mutant embryos, in vitro fetal liver cultures of these embryos fail to 
give rise to erythroid cells. Expression of other erythroid specific genes such
as EKLF, GATA1 and GATA3 is unaltered in these animals. These findings
demonstrate the LKLF function is indispensable during normal embryonic
development, and although both LKLF and EKLF recognize common DNA motifs, they do
not substitute for each other.

PMID: 9859212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Immunity. 1998 Nov;9(5):745-55.

Inhibition of Th1 development mediated by GATA-3 through an IL-4-independent
mechanism.

Ouyang W(1), Ranganath SH, Weindel K, Bhattacharya D, Murphy TL, Sha WC, Murphy
KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

Recently, the transcription factor GATA-3 was shown to be selectively expressed
in Th2 but not Th1 cells and to augment Th2-specific cytokines. Here, we show
that loss of GATA-3 expression by developing Th1 cells requires IL-12 signaling
through Stat4 and does not simply result from an absence of IL-4. Moreover, we
demonstrate a novel role for GATA-3 in directly repressing Th1 development
distinct from its positive actions on Th2-specific cytokines. GATA-3 inhibits Th1
cytokines by a cell-intrinsic mechanism that is not dependent on IL-4 and that
may involve repression of IL-12 signaling. Thus, GATA-3 expression and IL-12
signaling are mutually antagonistic, which facilitates rapid dominance of one
pathway during early Th development, producing a stable divergence in cytokine
profiles.

PMID: 9846495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Radiat Res. 1998 Dec;150(6):663-72.

BIGEL analysis of gene expression in HL60 cells exposed to X rays or 60 Hz
magnetic fields.

Balcer-Kubiczek EK(1), Zhang XF, Han LH, Harrison GH, Davis CC, Zhou XJ, Ioffe V,
McCready WA, Abraham JM, Meltzer SJ.

Collaborators: Balcer-Kubiczek EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine; Veterans Affairs
Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

We screened a panel of 1,920 randomly selected cDNAs to discover genes that are
differentially expressed in HL60 cells exposed to 60 Hz magnetic fields (2 mT) or
X rays (5 Gy) compared to unexposed cells. Identification of these clones was
accomplished using our two-gel cDNA library screening method (BIGEL). Eighteen
cDNAs differentially expressed in X-irradiated compared to control HL60 cells
were recovered from a panel of 1,920 clones. Differential expression in
experimental compared to control cells was confirmed independently by Northern
blotting of paired total RNA samples hybridized to each of the 18 clone-specific 
cDNA probes. DNA sequencing revealed that 15 of the 18 cDNA clones produced
matches with the database for genes related to cell growth, protein synthesis,
energy metabolism, oxidative stress or apoptosis (including MYC, neuroleukin,
copper zinc-dependent superoxide dismutase, TC4 RAS-like protein, peptide
elongation factor 1alpha, BNIP3, GATA3, NF45, cytochrome c oxidase II and
triosephosphate isomerase mRNAs). In contrast, BIGEL analysis of the same 1,920
cDNAs revealed no differences greater than 1.5-fold in expression levels in
magnetic-field compared to sham-exposed cells. Magnetic-field-exposed and control
samples were analyzed further for the presence of mRNA encoding X-ray-responsive 
genes by hybridization of the 18 specific cDNA probes to RNA from exposed and
control HL60 cells. Our results suggest that differential gene expression is
induced in approximately 1% of a random pool of cDNAs by ionizing radiation but
not by 60 Hz magnetic fields under the present experimental conditions.

PMID: 9840186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):6939-50.

TAL1 and LIM-only proteins synergistically induce retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2
expression in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia by acting as cofactors for
GATA3.

Ono Y(1), Fukuhara N, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, Settsu-shi, Osaka 566-0022, Japan.

Previously, we have shown that TAL1 and the LIM-only protein gene (LMO) are
regularly coactivated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). This
observation is likely to relate to the findings that TAL1 and LMO are highly
synergistic in T-cell tumorigenesis in double-transgenic mice. To understand the 
molecular mechanisms of functional synergy between TAL1 and LMO in tumorigenesis 
and transcriptional regulation, we tried to identify downstream target genes
regulated by TAL1 and LMO by a subtractive PCR method. One of the isolated genes,
that for retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (RALDH2), was regularly expressed in most 
of the T-ALL cell lines that coexpressed TAL1 and LMO. Exogenously transfected
TAL1 and LMO, but not either alone, induced RALDH2 expression in a T-ALL cell
line, HPB-ALL, not expressing endogeneous TAL1 or LMO. The RALDH2 transcripts in 
T-ALL were, however, mostly initiated within the second intron. Promoter analysis
revealed that a GATA site in a cryptic promoter in the second intron was
essential and sufficient for the TAL1- and LMO-dependent transcriptional
activation, and GATA3 binds to this site. In addition, forced expression of GATA3
potentiated the induction of RALDH2 by TAL1 and LMO, and these three factors
formed a complex in vivo. Furthermore, a TAL1 mutant not binding to DNA also
activated the transcription of RALDH2 in the presence of LMO and GATA3.
Collectively, we have identified the RALDH2 gene as a first example of direct
transcriptional target genes regulated by TAL1 and LMO in T-ALL. In this case,
TAL1 and LMO act as cofactors for GATA3 to activate the transcription of RALDH2.

PMCID: PMC109277
PMID: 9819382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. FEBS Lett. 1998 Oct 9;436(3):390-4.

GATA-3 represses gp91phox gene expression in eosinophil-committed HL-60-C15
cells.

Sadat MA(1), Kumatori A, Suzuki S, Yamaguchi Y, Tsuji Y, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Sakamoto,
Japan. f1106@cc.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

To study the regulatory mechanism of gp91phox gene expression in eosinophils, we 
transiently transfected eosinophil-committed HL-60-C15 cells with gp91phox
promoter constructs, and identified a negative element from bp -267 to -246 of
the gp91phox gene, the deletion of which caused an 83% increase in promoter
activity. Electrophoresis mobility shift assays demonstrated GATA-3 binds to the 
GATA consensus site from bp -256 to -250. An 81% increment in promoter activity
was obtained when a mutation was introduced in the GATA-3 binding site of the bp 
-267 to +12 construct, which is comparable to that of the bp -245 to +12
construct. We therefore conclude that GATA-3 specifically binding to the GATA
site negatively regulates the expression of the gene in HL-60-C15 cells.

PMID: 9801155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4591-8.

A mouse carrying genetic defect in the choice between T and B lymphocytes.

Tokoro Y(1), Sugawara T, Yaginuma H, Nakauchi H, Terhorst C, Wang B, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Japan.

Transgenic mice with human CD3epsilon gene have been shown to exhibit early
arrest of T cell development in the thymus. The present study shows that, instead
of T cells, B cells are generated in the thymus of a line, tg epsilon26, of the
human CD3epsilon transgenic mice. The accumulation of mature B cells in the
thymus was found only in tg epsilon26 mice, not in other human CD3epsilon
transgenic mouse lines or other T cell-deficient mice, including CD3-epsilon
knockout mice and TCR-beta/TCR-delta double knockout mice. Hanging drop-mediated 
transfer into 2-deoxyguanosine-treated thymus lobes showed that lymphoid
progenitor cells rather than thymus stromal cells were responsible for abnormal B
cell development in tg epsilon26 thymus, and that tg epsilon26 fetal liver cells 
were destined to become B cells in normal thymus even in the presence of normal
progenitor cells undergoing T cell development. These results indicate that
lymphoid progenitor cells in tg epsilon26 mice are genetically defective in
thymic choice between T cells and B cells, generating B cells even in normal
thymus environment. Interestingly, tg epsilon26 thymocytes expressed GATA-3 and
TCF-1, but not LEF-1 and PEBP-2alpha, among T cell-specific transcription factors
that are involved in early T cell development, indicating that GATA-3 and TCF-1
expressed during thymocyte development do not necessarily determine the cell fate
into T cell lineage. Thus, tg epsilon26 mice provide a novel mouse model in that 
lineage choice between T and B lymphocytes is genetically defective.

PMID: 9794386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 15;161(8):3822-6.

GATA-3-dependent enhancer activity in IL-4 gene regulation.

Ranganath S(1), Ouyang W, Bhattarcharya D, Sha WC, Grupe A, Peltz G, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Previously, we analyzed the proximal IL-4 promoter in directing Th2-specific
activity. An 800-base pair proximal promoter conferred some Th2-selective
expression in transgenic mice. However, this region directed extremely low
reporter mRNA levels relative to endogenous IL-4 mRNA, suggesting that full gene 
activity requires additional enhancer elements. Here, we analyzed large genomic
IL-4 regions for enhancer activity and interaction with transcription factors.
The proximal IL-4 promoter is only moderately augmented by GATA-3, but certain
genomic regions significantly enhanced GATA-3 promoter transactivation. Some
enhancing regions contained consensus, GATA sites that bound Th2-specific
complexes. However, retroviral transduction of GATA-3 into developing T cells
induced IL-5 to full Th2 levels, but only partially restored IL-4 production.
Thus, we propose that GATA-3 is permissive, but not sufficient, for full IL-4
enhancement and may act through GATA elements surrounding the IL-13/IL-4 gene
locus.

PMID: 9780146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 15;161(8):3817-21.

Differential responsiveness of the IL-5 and IL-4 genes to transcription factor
GATA-3.

Zhang DH(1), Yang L, Ray A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 are often coordinately produced by Th2 cells as in
asthma. However, it is unclear whether similar molecular mechanisms underlie
transcription of the two genes. We have previously shown that the transcription
factor GATA-3 is expressed in Th2 but not Th1 cells and is crucial for activation
of the IL-5 promoter by different stimuli. In a different study, GATA-3 was shown
to be sufficient for the expression of IL-4 and other Th2 cytokine genes. Here,
we show that ectopic expression of GATA-3 is sufficient to drive IL-5 but not
IL-4 gene expression. Also, in Th2 cells, antisense GATA-3 RNA inhibits IL-5 but 
not IL-4 promoter activation. The induction of IL-5 gene expression by GATA-3
involves high affinity binding of GATA-3 to an inverted GATA repeat in the IL-5
promoter.

PMID: 9780145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Sep;42(6):763-74.

Evidence for non-axial A/P patterning in the nonneural ectoderm of Xenopus and
zebrafish pregastrula embryos.

Read EM(1), Rodaway AR, Neave B, Brandon N, Holder N, Patient RK, Walmsley ME.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, King's College London, The Randall
Institute, United Kingdom.

Recent studies in early Xenopus and zebrafish embryos have demonstrated that
posteriorizing, non-axial signals arising from outside the organizer (or shield) 
contribute to A/P patterning of the neural axis, in contradiction to the
classical Spemann model in which such signals were proposed to be solely
organizer derived. Our studies on the early expression of the transcription
factors GATA-2 and 3 in both Xenopus and zebrafish nonneural ectoderm lend
support to the existence of such non-axial signaling in the A/P axis. Thus we
find that the earliest expression of GATA-2 and 3 is located in nonneural
ectoderm and is strongly patterned in a graded manner along the A/P axis, being
high anteriorly and absent from the most posterior regions. This results by early
neurula stages in three broad zones: an anterior region which is positive for
both GATA-2 and 3, a middle region which is positive for GATA-2 alone and a
posterior region in which neither gene is expressed. These regions correspond to 
head, trunk and tail ectoderm and may represent the beginnings of functional
segmentation of nonneural ectoderm, as suggested in the concept of the
'ectomere'. We find that A/P patterning of GATA expression in nonneural ectoderm 
may occur as early as late blastula/early gastrula stages. We investigate which
posteriorizing signals might contribute to such distinct non axial ectodermal
patterning in the A/P axis and provide evidence that both FGF and a Wnt family
member contribute towards the final A/P pattern of GATA expression in nonneural
ectoderm.

PMID: 9727832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 1;161(3):1399-405.

A developmental stage-specific promoter directs germline transcription of D beta 
J beta gene segments in precursor T lymphocytes.

Sikes ML(1), Gomez RJ, Song J, Oltz EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The tissue- and stage-specific assembly of Ag receptor genes is regulated by
transcriptional control elements positioned within Ig and TCR loci. To further
understand the role of cis-acting elements in these regulatory mechanisms, we
have characterized a transcriptional promoter that drives germline expression of 
TCR beta gene segments in vivo. The activity of this promoter, termed PD beta, is
restricted to a highly conserved 400-bp region located directly upstream from D
beta 1-coding sequences. Maximal PD beta activity requires a TATA element
situated within the D beta 1 recombination signal sequences and consensus binding
sites for the ubiquitous SP1 and the T cell-specific GATA-3 transcription
factors. When linked to active enhancer elements, PD beta directs transcription
in most cell types; however, the TCR beta enhancer (E beta) stimulates PD beta
function specifically in precursor T lymphocytes. These findings suggest that PD 
beta/E beta interactions may contribute to differential regulation of regions
within the TCR beta locus during thymocyte development.

PMID: 9686603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Immunol. 1998 Jul 15;161(2):791-804.

Regulatory elements in the promoter of a murine TCRD V gene segment.

Kienker LJ(1), Ghosh MR, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Harold C. Simmons Arthritis Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 75235, USA.

TCRD V segments rearrange in an ordered fashion during human and murine thymic
development. Recombination requires the accessibility of substrate gene segments,
and transcriptional enhancers and promoters have been shown to regulate the
accessible chromatin configuration. We therefore investigated the regulation of
TCRD V rearrangements by characterizing the promoter of the first TCRD V segment 
to be rearranged, DV101S1, under the influence of its own enhancer. Sequences
required for full promoter activity were identified by transient transfections of
normal and mutated promoters into a human gammadelta lymphoma, and necessary
elements fall between -86 and +66 nt, relative to the major transcription start
site. They include a cAMP responsive element (CRE) at -62, an Ets site at -39, a 
TATA box at -26, the major transcriptional start site sequence (-8 to -5 and -2
to +11), and a downstream sequence (+12 to +33). Gel shift analyses and in vitro 
DNase I footprinting showed that nuclear proteins bind to the functionally
relevant CRE, Ets, +1 to +10 sequence, and the +17 to +21 sequence. Nuclear
proteins also bind to an E box at -52, and GATA-3 binds to a GATA motif at -5, as
shown by Ab ablation-supershift experiments, but mutations that abrogated protein
binding to these sites failed to affect DV101S1 promoter activity. We conclude
that not all protein-binding sites within the DV101S1 minimal promoter are
important for enhancer driven TCRD gene transcription. Further, the possibility
remains that the GATA and E box sites function in enhancer independent DV101S1
germline transcription.

PMID: 9670956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Curr Biol. 1998 May 21;8(11):669-72.

Differences between IL-4R alpha-deficient and IL-4-deficient mice reveal a role
for IL-13 in the regulation of Th2 responses.

Barner M(1), Mohrs M, Brombacher F, Kopf M.

Author information: 
(1)Basel Institute for Immunology, Switzerland.

Allergens and infections with parasitic helminths preferentially induced Th2
immune responses associated with elevated levels of serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
and expansion of eosinophils and mast cells. Interleukin-4 (IL-4) is a key
cytokine in the differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into Th2 cells, which
produce a panel of cytokines including IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, and IL-13
[1] and have been shown to trigger recovery from gastrointestinal nematodes [2]. 
Nonetheless, mice deficient for IL-4 have been shown to develop residual Th2
responses [3-5] and can expel the nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis [6],
suggesting that there is a functional equivalent of IL-4 in these processes.
IL-13 is a cytokine that shares some, but not all, biological activities with
IL-4 [7,8]. There is now compelling evidence that IL-4 and IL-13 share receptor
components, including IL-4R alpha and IL-13R alpha 1 [9]. In order to dissect the
roles of IL-4 and IL-13 in the regulation of Th2 cells and in the response to
nematode infections, we looked for differences between mice deficient for either 
the IL-4 gene or the IL-4R alpha gene. Unlike IL-4, IL-4R alpha was required for 
control of N. brasiliensis, and Th2 development during infection--as
characterized by cytokine production, GATA-3 and surface CD30 expression--was
more severely affected in IL-4R alpha-/- mice than in IL-4-/- mice. Injection of 
recombinant IL-13 induced worm expulsion in otherwise incompetent RAG2-/- mice.
Our results suggest that IL-13 regulates Th2 responses to nematode infection and 
requires IL-4R alpha.

PMID: 9635196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Virol. 1998 Jul;72(7):5579-88.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors bind to the U3 region of
Cas-Br-E and graffi retroviruses and transactivate their expression.

Barat C(1), Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département de Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3P8.

Cas-Br-E and Graffi are two murine viruses that induce myeloid leukemia in mice: 
while Cas-Br-E induces mostly non-T, non-B leukemia composed of very immature
cells, Graffi causes exclusively a granulocytic leukemia (E. Rassart, J. Houde,
C. Denicourt, M. Ru, C. Barat, E. Edouard, L. Poliquin, and D. Bergeron, Curr.
Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 211:201-210, 1995). In an attempt to understand the
basis of the myeloid specificity of these two retroviruses, we used DNase I
footprinting analysis and gel mobility shift assays to identify a number of
protein binding sites within the Cas-Br-E and Graffi U3 regions. Two protected
regions include potential GATA binding sites. Methylation interference analysis
with different hematopoietic nuclear extracts showed the importance of the G
residues in these GATA sites, and supershift assays clearly identified the
binding factors as GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Transient assays with long
terminal repeat (LTR)-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs showed that
these three GATA family members are indeed able to transactivate Cas-Br-E and
Graffi LTRs. Thus, the availability and relative abundance of the various members
of the GATA family of transcription factors in a given cell type could influence 
the transcriptional tissue specificity of murine leukemia viruses and hence their
disease specificity.

PMCID: PMC110213
PMID: 9621016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Biol. 1998 Apr 15;196(2):218-27.

Knock-in mutation of transcription factor GATA-3 into the GATA-1 locus: partial
rescue of GATA-1 loss of function in erythroid cells.

Tsai FY(1), Browne CP, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Transcription factors of the GATA-family are essential for proper development of 
diverse tissues or cell types. GATA-1 is required for differentiation of two
hematopoietic lineages (red blood cells and megakaryocytes), whereas GATA-3 is
essential for T-cell development. Functional studies suggest that many properties
of the GATA-family of proteins are shared and largely interchangeable. To test
whether the function of GATA-1 in erythroid differentiation can be replaced by
another GATA-factor, we generated a knock-in mutation of the GATA-1 locus in
which GATA-3 cDNA was introduced by gene targeting. Mutant embryos (designated
G1G3ki), though embryonic lethal, exhibit partial rescue, characterized by
increased survival of erythroid precursor cells and improved hemoglobin
production. The basis for the incomplete extent of rescue is likely to be
complex, but may be accounted for, in part, by insufficient accumulation of
GATA-3 protein (compared with the normal level of GATA-1). Our findings suggest
that GATA-3 protein is functional when expressed in an erythroid environment and 
is competent to act on at least a subset of erythroid-expressed target genes in
vivo.

PMID: 9576834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 17;95(4):1641-6.

Blood-borne seeding by hematopoietic and endothelial precursors from the
allantois.

Caprioli A(1), Jaffredo T, Gautier R, Dubourg C, Dieterlen-Lièvre F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie cellulaire et moléculaire du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique et du Collège de France 49bis, av. de la Belle Gabrielle, 
94736 Nogent s/Marne cedex, France. caprioli@infobiogen.fr

Until now the allantois has not been considered as a hematopoietic organ. Here we
report experimental evidence demonstrating the in situ emergence of both
hematopoietic and endothelial precursors in the avian allantoic bud. When the
prevascularized allantoic bud from a quail embryo was grafted in the coelom of a 
chicken host, hematopoietic and endothelial cells later were found in the bone
marrow of the host. Because the graft was located at a distance from the limb
bud, these cells could reach the bone marrow only by the circulatory pathway.
This blood-borne seeding may be accomplished by distinct hematopoietic and
endothelial precursors, or by hemangioblasts, the postulated common precursors of
these two lineages; we consider the latter interpretation more likely. We also
show by reverse transcription-PCR that the allantois region expresses very early 
the GATA genes involved in hematopoiesis and some beta-globin chain genes.

PMCID: PMC19130
PMID: 9465069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Immunol. 1998 Mar 1;160(5):2343-52.

Characterization of cis-regulatory elements and nuclear factors conferring
Th2-specific expression of the IL-5 gene: a role for a GATA-binding protein.

Lee HJ(1), O'Garra A, Arai K, Arai N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Expression of the IL-5 gene is restricted to the Th2 subset of helper T cells. We
have previously defined four cis-regulatory elements of the IL-5 promoter
responding to PMA and cAMP in EL-4 cells. We now report that the 1.2-kb region of
the IL-5 promoter directs expression of the IL-5 gene in a Th2 clone but not a
Th1 clone, indicating that transcription from the IL-5 promoter is Th2 specific. 
For the functioning of the IL-5 promoter in a Th2 clone, IL-5C and IL-5CLE0 were 
critical. IL-5CLE0 interacted with both constitutive and inducible nuclear
factors (designated NFIL-5CLE0), which existed in both Th1 and Th2 clones,
whereas IL-5C interacted with a constitutive nuclear factor (designated NFIL-5C),
which was found only in Th2 but not in Th1 clones. Th2 specificity of NFIL-5C was
also confirmed using in vitro-differentiated Th1 and Th2 cells derived from
TCR-transgenic mice. The sequence for NFIL-5C binding bears homology with
GATA-binding sites. The NFIL-5C complex was supershifted by an anti-GATA-3 Ab and
inhibited by an oligonucleotide containing GATA-binding sites. We showed
preferential expression of GATA-3 in Th2 cells. Finally, we demonstrated that in 
vitro-translated GATA-3 bound to IL-5C and overexpression of GATA-3 augmented
stimulation-dependent IL-5 promoter activity in EL-4 cells. Taken together, our
results provide evidence that GATA-related factors may be involved in
Th2-specific expression of the IL-5 gene.

PMID: 9498775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Anal Biochem. 1997 Nov 1;253(1):70-7.

Analysis of interactions between huGATA-3 transcription factor and three GATA
regulatory elements of HIV-1 long terminal repeat, by surface plasmon resonance.

Galio L(1), Briquet S, Cot S, Guillet JG, Vaquero C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 0415, ICGM, 22, rue Méchain, Paris, 75 014, France.

Relative affinities of transcriptional regulatory elements for their respective
factor have been essentially studied by bandshift analysis. Here we report a
real-time study of factor/DNA interactions using a surface plasmon resonance
approach and further characterization of recovered proteins involved in this
interaction. For this purpose, human GATA-3, either recombinant or in nuclear
extracts, and three natural GATA elements of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat
(sites 1, 2, and 3) were chosen, in which only site 2 is a noncanonical GATA
site. Direct analysis of sensorgrams, with recombinant huGATA-3, allowed the
comparison of association and dissociation profiles of the three DNA regions and 
their ranking according to their relative affinities. This result, confirmed by
competitions with each GATA site, demonstrated the higher relative affinity (at
least sevenfold) of site 3. Interactions between the canonical and unique GATA
site 3 and nuclear extracts were also studied in real time and provided
information on its association and dissociation rates for native huGATA-3.
Finally, recovered protein was identified as genuine huGATA-3 by SDS-PAGE,
Western blotting, and bandshift assays.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9356144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 22;272(34):21597-603.

Transcription factor GATA-3 is differentially expressed in murine Th1 and Th2
cells and controls Th2-specific expression of the interleukin-5 gene.

Zhang DH(1), Cohn L, Ray P, Bottomly K, Ray A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5), which is produced by CD4(+) T helper 2 (Th2) cells, but not
by Th1 cells, plays a key role in the development of eosinophilia in asthma.
Despite increasing evidence that the outcome of many diseases is determined by
the ratio of the two subsets of CD4(+) T helper cells, Th1 and Th2, the molecular
basis for Th1- and Th2-specific gene expression remains to be elucidated. We
previously established a critical role for the transcription factor GATA-3 in
IL-5 promoter activation in EL-4 cells, which express both Th1- and Th2-type
cytokines. Our studies reported here demonstrate that GATA-3 is critical for
expression of the IL-5 gene in bona fide Th2 cells. Whereas mutations in the
GATA-3 site abolished antigen- or cAMP-stimulated IL-5 promoter activation in Th2
cells, ectopic expression of GATA-3 in Th1 cells or in a non-lymphoid,
non-IL-5-producing cell line activated the IL-5 promoter. During the
differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells isolated from T cell receptor transgenic 
mice, GATA-3 gene expression was up-regulated in developing Th2 cells, but was
down-regulated in Th1 cells, and antigen- or cAMP-activated Th2 cells (but not
Th1 cells) expressed the GATA-3 protein. Thus, GATA-3 may play an important role 
in the balance between Th1 and Th2 subsets in immune responses. Inhibition of
GATA-3 activity has therapeutic potential in the treatment of asthma and other
hypereosinophilic diseases.

PMID: 9261181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 1;188(1):1-16.

Temporal and spatial control of murine GATA-3 transcription by promoter-proximal 
regulatory elements.

Lieuw KH(1), Li Gl, Zhou Y, Grosveld F, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3500, USA.

GATA-3 is expressed in a temporally dynamic manner and fulfills vital functions
during vertebrate fetal development. Homozygous mGATA-3 mutant embryos die at
midgestation, thus complicating the analysis of its contribution to the
development of specific cell fates in the many tissues where it is expressed
during embryogenesis. We show here that the elements controlling GATA-3
regulation can be precisely refined, using transgenic mice, to discrete
cis-acting domains: within 6 kb surrounding the transcriptional initiation site, 
separate sequences were found to control the expression of mGATA-3 in early
muscle masses, in a subset of PNS neurons, in the genital tubercle, and in the
branchial arches. The branchial arch regulatory element is particularly robust
and was refined to a discrete enhancer sequence lying between nt -2832 and -2462 
from the transcription initiation site. The enhancer contains potential binding
sites for many well-characterized transcription factors, suggesting that mGATA-3 
transcriptional activity may be regulated by these proteins (or related family
members) in the mesenchyme of the arches that contribute to formation of the jaw.
These studies show that discrete regulatory elements required for the elaboration
of complex developmental programs can be individually localized, suggesting that 
the developmentally transient expression of individual transcription factors
collaboratively contributes to the temporal and spatial pattern of cellular
differentiation leading to the formation of adult anatomy.

PMID: 9245507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3417-25.

The proximal promoter region of the gene encoding human 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 contains GATA, AP-2, and Sp1 response elements: analysis of 
promoter function in choriocarcinoma cells.

Piao YS(1), Peltoketo H, Vihko P, Vihko R.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Oulu,
Finland.

The 5'-flanking region from -78 to +9 in the HSD17B1 gene serves as a promoter,
and an HSD17B1 silencer element is located in position -113 to -78. In the
present studies, we have characterized three regulatory elements in the proximal 
5'-flanking regions of the gene, using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and 
reporter gene analysis. First, nuclear factors recognized by antibodies against
Sp1 and Sp3 were found to bind the Sp1 motif in the region from -52 to -43.
Mutation of the Sp1-binding site decreased the promoter activity to 30% in JEG-3 
cells and to 60% in JAR cells, suggesting that binding to the Sp1 motif has a
substantial role in the complete functioning of the HSD17B1 promoter. Second, the
binding of AP-2 to its motif in the region from -62 to -53 led to reduced binding
of Sp1 and Sp3, and furthermore, mutation of the AP-2 element increased promoter 
activity to 260% in JEG-3 cells. The data thus implied that AP-2 can repress the 
function of the HSD17B1 promoter by preventing binding to the Sp1 motif. Finally,
GATA factors, GATA-3 in particular, were demonstrated to bind their cognate
sequence in the HSD17B1 silencer region, and mutations introduced into the
GATA-binding site increased transcriptional activity to the level seen in
constructs not containing the silencer element. Thus, GATA-3 seems to prevent
transcription in the constructs, and hence, the GATA motif also may operate as a 
negative control element for HSD17B1 transcription.

PMID: 9231796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell. 1997 May 16;89(4):587-96.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene
expression in CD4 T cells.

Zheng W(1), Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8011, USA.

CD4 T cells potentiate the inflammatory or humoral immune response through the
action of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. The molecular basis of the
differentiation of these cells from naive T cell precursors is, however, unclear.
We found that GATA-3 was selectively expressed in Th2 cells. GATA-3 is expressed 
at a high level in naive, freshly activated T cells and Th2 lineage cells, but
subsides to a minimal level in Th1 lineage cells as naive cells commit to their
Th subset. Antisense GATA-3 inhibited the expression of all Th2 cytokine genes in
the Th2 clone D10. GATA-3 directly activated an IL-4 promoter-luciferase reporter
gene in M12 cells. In transgenic mice, elevated GATA-3 in CD4 T cells caused Th2 
cytokine gene expression in developing Th1 cells. Thus, GATA-3 is necessary and
sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression.

PMID: 9160750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. EMBO J. 1997 May 15;16(10):2874-82.

The N-terminal fingers of chicken GATA-2 and GATA-3 are independent
sequence-specific DNA binding domains.

Pedone PV(1), Omichinski JG, Nony P, Trainor C, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM,
Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, USA.

The GATA family of vertebrate DNA binding regulatory proteins are expressed in
diverse tissues and at different times of development. However, the DNA binding
regions of these proteins possess considerable homology and recognize a rather
similar range of DNA sequence motifs. DNA binding is mediated through two
domains, each containing a zinc finger. Previous results have led to the
conclusion that although in some cases the N-terminal finger can contribute to
specificity and strength of binding, it does not bind independently, whereas the 
C-terminal finger is both necessary and sufficient for binding. Here we show that
although this is true for the N-terminal finger of GATA-1, those of GATA-2 and
GATA-3 are capable of strong independent binding with a preference for the motif 
GATC. Binding requires the presence of two basic regions located on either side
of the N-terminal finger. The absence of one of these near the GATA-1 N-terminal 
finger probably accounts for its inability to bind. The combination of a single
finger and two basic regions is a new variant of a motif that has been previously
found in the binding domains of other finger proteins. Our results suggest that
the DNA binding properties of the N-terminal finger may help distinguish GATA-2
and GATA-3 from GATA-1 and the other GATA family members in their selective
regulatory roles in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1169895
PMID: 9184231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:501-2.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human IL-5
gene promoter in IL-5 producing cells which express multiple GATA-binding
proteins.

Yamagata T, Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region, within the human IL-5
gene promoter, that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of these family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
PMA/A23187 stimulation are necessary for the IL-5 promoter activation. The
requirement of another regulatory element called CLE0, which lies downstream of
the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells express mRNA of three
GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3 and hGATA-4, and each of them has a
potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/ A) motif. However, using ATL-16T 
nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only GATA-binding protein
that forms specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA site. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells expressing
GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding affinity to the 
-70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the transactivation
ability was compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the highest activity. These
results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the transcriptional
regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple members of the
GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMID: 9209438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Hematol. 1997 Apr;65(3):239-49.

Expression of GATA transcription factors in myelogenous and lymphoblastic
leukemia cells.

Minegishi N(1), Morita S, Minegishi M, Tsuchiya S, Konno T, Hayashi N, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan.

In the hematopoietic lineage, the transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 show
restricted and largely overlapping expression profiles, but GATA-2 is uniquely
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors. GATA-3 is found exclusively in T
cells of hematopoietic lineage. To clarify whether these expression profiles are 
preserved or changed during the development of malignancies, we analyzed the
expression of GATA factors in the blasts from leukemic children. A total of 18
myelogenous leukemia and 24 lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cases were investigated.
In the majority of the former cases, GATA-2 mRNA expression and the expression of
CD34 and c-kit antigens on leukemic cells were demonstrated. In contrast, GATA-2 
mRNA and c-kit antigen could not be detected in CD34-positive cells from ALL
patients. GATA-3 mRNA was expressed in all T-ALL cases, but not in any precursor 
B-ALL. These findings suggest that down-regulation of GATA-2 and expression of
GATA-3 are important events for the commitment of cells to lymphoid and T cell
lineage, respectively. The expression profiles of GATA factors in leukemic cells 
are generally consistent with those in their normal counterparts, and thus
provide a useful tool to determine the lineage commitment of unclassified
leukemia.

PMID: 9114595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 6;232(1):65-8.

Regulation of aquaporin-2 gene transcription by GATA-3. off.

Uchida S(1), Matsumura Y, Rai T, Sasaki S, Marumo F.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Japan. suchida.med2@med.tmd.ac.jp

To evaluate the functional role of GATA motifs in the 5'-flanking region of a
kidney-specific AQP-2 water channel gene, we sought to isolate a GATA factor(s)
expressed in collecting ducts and determined the role on the AQP-2 promoter. Two 
cDNAs encoding GATA factors were isolated from rat kidney, whose sequences were
highly homologous with human GATA-2 and -3. Reverse-transcription PCR using
dissected nephron segments revealed that rat GATA-3 but not GATA-2 was expressed 
in collecting ducts, thus indicating that GATA-3 could interact with GATA motifs 
in the AQP-2 promoter. Transactivation experiments utilizing the rat GATA-3
expression vector indicated that rat GATA-3 increased the AQP-2 promoter activity
about fourfold. These results indicated that GATA motifs in the 5'-flanking
region of the hAQP-2 gene were functional cis-elements and that GATA-3 in
collecting ducts may be one of the important regulators of AQP-2 expression in
vivo.

PMID: 9125153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1430-9.

Negative regulation of the erythropoietin gene expression by the GATA
transcription factors.

Imagawa S(1), Yamamoto M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi-ken, Japan.

We examined regulation of the human erythropoietin (Epo) gene through the GATA
sequence in the Epo promoter and showed that Hep3B and HepG2 cells express human 
GATA-2 (hGATA-2) mRNA and protein. Nuclear extracts of QT6 cells transfected with
hGATA-1, 2, or 3 transcription factors showed specific binding to the GATA
element in the human Epo gene promoter by gel mobility shift assay. Transient
transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, or 3 showed that each of these
transcription factors significantly decreased the level of expression of Epo mRNA
as assessed by a competitive polymerase chain reaction. Transient transfection of
Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 and an Epo-reporter gene (growth hormone [GH])
construct showed significant inhibition of the Epo promoter. Antisense
oligonucleotide for hGATA-2 transcription factor significantly increased the Epo 
protein in Hep3B cells under 1% O2 for 24 hours incubation. Furthermore,
transient transfection of Hep3B cells with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 and an Epo-reporter 
gene (luciferase) construct also showed significant inhibition of the Epo
promoter. However, transfection of the mutated GATA sequence of the
Epo-luciferase gene with hGATA-1, 2, and 3 interfere with the inhibition of the
Epo promoter. We conclude that the hGATA-1, 2, and 3 transcription factors
specifically bind to the GATA element in the human Epo gene promoter and
negatively regulate Epo gene expression.

PMID: 9028967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4576-81.

Transcriptional activity of TAL1 in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
requires RBTN1 or -2 and induces TALLA1, a highly specific tumor marker of T-ALL.

Ono Y(1), Fukuhara N, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, 2-5-1 Mishima, Settsu-shi, Osaka 566, 
Japan.

TAL1, which is frequently activated in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), encodes lineage-specific basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins that
bind specifically to E-box DNA motif upon dimerization with ubiquitous basic
helix-loop-helix proteins E47 or E12. RBTN1 and RBTN2, also frequently activated 
in T-ALL, encode proteins only with tandem cysteine-rich LIM domains. We found
that aberrant expression of TAL1 detected in 11 out of 14 T-ALL cell lines was
invariably accompanied by that of either RBTN1 or RBTN2. Forced expression of
TAL1 together with RBTN1 or RBTN2, but not TAL1 alone, strongly induced
artificial reporter genes in a TAL1/RBTN-negative T-ALL cell line, HPB-ALL. Such 
collaborative transcriptional activity of TAL1 and RBTN was not, however,
observed in non-T cell lines, suggesting further involvement of some T
cell-specific cofactors. In this context, we carried out preliminary evaluation
of a potential role of the T cell-specific GATA-binding protein, GATA3, in the
transcriptional activity of TAL1 and RBTN. We also showed that coexpression of
TAL1 and RBTN1 in HPB-ALL strongly induced TALLA1, a highly specific T-ALL marker
whose positivity correlated 100% with ectopic expression of TAL1 among various
T-ALL cell lines. Collectively, ectopic TAL1 and RBTN1 or -2, together with some 
endogenous T cell-specific cofactors like GATA3, constitute a highly
collaborative set of transcription factors whose aberrant activity in T cells may
lead to leukemogenesis by modulating expression of downstream genes such as
TALLA1.

PMID: 9020185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 1997 Feb;124(4):907-14.

GATA-2 and GATA-3 regulate trophoblast-specific gene expression in vivo.

Ma GT(1), Roth ME, Groskopf JC, Tsai FY, Orkin SH, Grosveld F, Engel JD, Linzer
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208,
USA.

We previously demonstrated that the zinc finger transcription factors GATA-2 and 
GATA-3 are expressed in trophoblast giant cells and that they regulate
transcription from the mouse placental lactogen I gene promoter in a transfected 
trophoblast cell line. We present evidence here that both of these factors
regulate transcription of the placental lactogen I gene, as well as the related
proliferin gene, in trophoblast giant cells in vivo. Placentas lacking GATA-3
accumulate placental lactogen I and proliferin mRNAs to a level 50% below that
reached in the wild-type placenta. Mutation of the GATA-2 gene had a similar
effect on placental lactogen I expression, but led to a markedly greater
reduction (5- to 6-fold) in proliferin gene expression. Placentas lacking GATA-2 
secrete significantly less angiogenic activity than wild-type placentas as
measured in an endothelial cell migration assay, consistent with a reduction in
expression of the angiogenic hormone proliferin. Furthermore, within the same
uterus the decidual tissue adjacent to mutant placentas displays markedly reduced
neovascularization compared to the decidual tissue next to wild-type placentas.
These results indicate that GATA-2 and GATA-3 are important in vivo regulators of
trophoblast-specific gene expression and placental function, and reveal a
difference in the effect of these two factors in regulating the synthesis of
related placental hormones.

PMID: 9043071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil. 1997;191(1):105-11.

[Genetic control of hematopoiesis].

[Article in French]

Roméo PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, France.

Commitment and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells are associated with
the progressive restriction of cellular proliferation and the progressive
expression of a subset of genes encoding the markers of mature cells. These two
processes are genetically regulated and, in this paper, I review the expression
and function of the GATA family of transcription factors as an example of this
genetic regulation. GATA cis-acting elements are found in most of the regulatory 
regions of T-lymphoid, erythrocytic and megakaryocytic restricted genes. These
GATA motifs are recognized by the members of a family of transcriptional
regulators: the GATA family. Three members of this family, GATA-1, 2 and 3 are
expressed in hematopoietic cells. They are necessary for the erythrocytic and
megakaryocytic lineages (GATA-1), for the T-lymphoid lineage (GATA-3), and for
the proliferation of uncommitted hematopoietic precursors (GATA-2). GATA-1
displays at least four functions: activation of the erythrocytic and
megakaryocytic specific genes, regulation of the epsilon-->gamma globin switch
and control of the cell cycle. These two last functions will be discussed to show
the multiple facets of GATA-1 in the genetic regulation of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9181132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):474-8.

Transcription factor GATA-3 is required for development of the T-cell lineage.

Ting CN(1), Olson MC, Barton KP, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Medicine and Pathology, University of Chicago, Illinois
60637, USA.

THE zinc-finger transcription factor GATA-3 is expressed in haematopoietic cells 
and in the developing kidney and nervous system. Within the haematopoietic
lineages, expression of GATA-3 is restricted to thymocytes and T cells.
Functionally important GATA-3 binding sites have been identified in multiple
T-cell-specific genes. Mice containing homozygous null mutations of the GATA-3
gene die on embryonic day 12, precluding a detailed assessment of the role of
GATA-3 in haematopoietic development. Here we have used murine embryonic stem
(ES) cells containing homozygous mutations in the GATA-3 gene (GATA-3(-/-)) in
conjunction with the RAG-2(-/-) (ref. 10) and C57BL/6 complementation systems to 
study the role of GATA-3 in mammalian haematopoiesis. Our results show that
GATA-3(-/-) ES cells can contribute to the development of the mature erythroid,
myelomonocytic and B-cell lineages, but fail to give rise to thymocytes or mature
peripheral T cells. The differentiation of GATA-3(-/-) T cells is blocked at or
before the earliest double-negative (CD4-/CD8-) stage of thymocyte development,
such that the GATA-3(-/-) ES cells are unable to contribute measurably to the
double-negative thymocyte population. These findings suggest that GATA-3 is an
essential and specific regulator of early thymocyte development.

PMID: 8945476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Exp Med. 1996 Sep 1;184(3):1137-47.

Involvement of transcription factors TCF-1 and GATA-3 in the initiation of the
earliest step of T cell development in the thymus.

Hattori N(1), Kawamoto H, Fujimoto S, Kuno K, Katsura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Flow cytometric and immunocytochemical analyses of murine fetal thymus (FT) cells
with antibodies to various surface markers and transcription factors reveal that 
the synthesis of TCF-1 and GATA-3 protein begins simultaneously in a fraction of 
the most immature population of FT cells, which have the phenotype of
CD4-CD8-CD44+CD25-. No TCF-1-producing cells is found in the fetal liver (FL). In
CD44+CD25- FT cells, the production of TCF-1 is immediately followed by
intracellular expression of CD3 epsilon. It is also found that the T cell
development from FL, but not FT, progenitors in the FT organ culture system is
severely inhibited by the addition of antisense oligonucleotides for either TCF-1
or GATA-3. These results strongly suggest that TCF-1 and GATA-3 play essential
roles in the initiation of the earliest steps of T cell development in the
thymus.

PMCID: PMC2192786
PMID: 9064330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Lab Invest. 1996 Feb;74(2):395-405.

Absence of T-cell- and B-cell-specific transcription factors TCF-1, GATA-3, and
BSAP in Hodgkin's Reed-Sternberg cells.

Hsu PL(1), Xie SS, Hsu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock 72205, USA.

Based on the presence of T cell receptor-beta (TcR-beta) gene rearrangements in
L428 and HDLM-1 cells, the expression of CD2 in HDLM-1 cells, and the presence of
immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) gene rearrangement in KM-H2 cells, some
researchers have concluded that these long-term cell lines derived from patients 
with Hodgkin's disease are lymphoid in nature. The information obtained from
these cell lines has also been used in arguments for a lymphoid origin of H-RS
cells in tissue despite the frequent absence of lymphoid markers and Ig/TcR gene 
rearrangements in these cells. We questioned whether one can use the limited
expression of lymphoid markers or the limited gene rearrangement to conclude that
H-RS cells have a lymphoid origin, because these markers may be aberrant in tumor
cells. In this study, we examined the expression of two T-cell-specific
transcription factors (TCF-1 and GATA-3) and one B-cell-specific transcription
factor (BSAP) in cultured H-RS cells by using a gel mobility shift assay. The
sensitivity and specificity of this assay for determination of cell lineage have 
been established in a large number of cultured human and murine cell lines. All
three types of H-RS cell lines were consistently negative for BSAP, TCF-1, and
GATA-3. The absence of GATA-3 was confirmed in H-RS cells in tissues by an in
situ hybridization technique. Virtually all B-cell lines, with the exception of
some myeloma cell lines, are positive for BSAP, which is the transcription factor
for promoters for several B-cell markers, including VpreB1, lambda 5, CD19, and
CD20. All T-cell lines tested were positive for TCF-1 and GATA-3, which are the
transcription factors for promoters for several T-cell-restricted markers,
including CD2, CD3, TcR, and lck. The absence of BSAP, TCF-1, and GATA-3 clearly 
indicates an underlying difference between H-RS cells and lymphoid cells.

PMID: 8780159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 15;15(2):319-33.

GATA transcription factors associate with a novel class of nuclear bodies in
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes.

Elefanty AG(1), Antoniou M, Custodio N, Carmo-Fonseca M, Grosveld FG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, UK.

The nuclear distribution of GATA transcription factors in murine haemopoietic
cells was examined by indirect immunofluorescence. Specific bright foci of GATA-1
fluorescence were observed in erythroleukaemia cells and primary murine
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes, in addition to diffuse nucleoplasmic
localization. These foci, which were preferentially found adjacent to nucleoli or
at the nuclear periphery, did not represent sites of active transcription or
binding of GATA-1 to consensus sites in the beta-globin loci. Immunoelectron
microscopy demonstrated the presence of intensely labelled structures likely to
represent the GATA-1 foci seen by immunofluorescence. The GATA-1 nuclear bodies
differed from previously described nuclear structures and there was no
co-localization with nuclear antigens involved in RNA processing or other
ubiquitous (Spl, c-Jun and TBP) or haemopoietic (NF-E2) transcription factors.
Interestingly, GATA-2 and GATA-3 proteins also localized to the same nuclear
bodies in cell lines co-expressing GATA-1 and -2 or GATA-1 and -3 gene products. 
This pattern of distribution is, thus far, unique to the GATA transcription
factors and suggests a protein-protein interaction with other components of the
nuclear bodies via the GATA zinc finger domain.

PMCID: PMC449947
PMID: 8617207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem J. 1996 Jan 1;313 ( Pt 1):245-51.

PEST motifs are not required for rapid calpain-mediated proteolysis of c-fos
protein.

Carillo S(1), Pariat M, Steff Am, Jariel-Encontre I, Poulat F, Berta P,
Piechaczyk M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier/UMR 9942, France.

Cytoplasmic degradation of c-fos protein is extremely rapid. Under certain
conditions, it is a multi-step process initiated by calcium-dependent and
ATP-independent proteases called calpains. PEST motifs are peptide regions rich
in proline, glutamic acid/aspartic acid and serine/threonine residues, commonly
assumed to constitute built-in signals for rapid recognition by intracellular
proteases and particularly by calpains. Using a cell-free degradation assay and
site-directed mutagenesis, we report here that the three PEST motifs of c-fos are
not required for rapid cleavage by calpains. Testing the susceptibility of PEST
motif-bearing and non-bearing transcription factors including GATA1, GATA3, Myo
D, c-erbA, Tal-1 and Sry, demonstrates that PEST sequences are neither necessary 
nor sufficient for specifying degradation of other proteins by calpains. This
conclusion is strengthened by the observation that certain proteins, reportedly
known to be cleavable by calpains, are devoid of PEST motifs.

PMCID: PMC1216890
PMID: 8546691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 13;270(41):24548-55.

Activation of the interleukin-5 promoter by cAMP in murine EL-4 cells requires
the GATA-3 and CLE0 elements.

Siegel MD(1), Zhang DH, Ray P, Ray A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) plays a central role in the growth and differentiation of
eosinophils and contributes to several disease states including asthma.
Accumulating evidence suggests a role for cAMP as an immunomodulator; agents that
increase intracellular cAMP levels have been shown to inhibit production of
cytokines predominantly produced by T helper (Th) 1 cells such as IL-2 and
interferon gamma (IFN-gamma). In contrast, the production of IL-5, predominantly 
produced by Th2 cells, is actually enhanced by these agents. In this report, we
have performed transient transfection experiments with IL-5 promoter-reporter
gene constructs, DNase I footprinting assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays to investigate the key regulatory regions necessary for activation of the 
IL-5 promoter by dibutyryl cAMP and phorbol esters in the mouse thymoma line
EL-4. Taken together, our data demonstrate the critical importance of two
sequences within the IL-5 5'-flanking region for activation by these agents in
EL-4 cells: one, a highly conserved 15-base pair element present in genes
expressed by Th2 cells, called the conserved lymphokine element 0 (CLE0; located 
between -53 and -39 in the IL-5 promoter), and the other, two overlapping binding
sites for the transcription factor GATA-3 (but not GATA-4) between -70 and -59.
Taken together, our data suggest that activation via the unique sequence
combination GATA/CLE0 results in selective expression of the IL-5 gene in
response to elevated levels of intracellular cAMP.

PMID: 7592673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Gene. 1995 Oct 3;163(2):331-2.

Sequence of the 5' regulatory domain of the gene encoding the rat beta
2-adrenergic receptor.

Jiang L(1), Kunos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298, USA.

Restriction mapping and sequence analysis of the gene encoding the rat beta 2
adrenergic receptor (beta 2AR) revealed an error affecting most of the
5'-flanking domain, located between -192 and -2245 bp in the only published
sequence of this gene [Buckland et al., Nucleic Acids Res. 18 (1990) 682]. The
correct sequence lacks a TATA box, contains 67% G + C residues in the first 500
nucleotides upstream from the start codon, and contains putative glucocorticoid, 
thyroid hormone and cAMP-response elements.

PMID: 7590294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Gene. 1995 Oct 3;163(2):329-30.

Identification and cloning of the G3B cDNA encoding a 3' segment of a protein
binding to GATA-3.

Shapiro VS(1), Lee P, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley
94720-3200, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-3 contributes to the expression of several genes
critical for T-cell function and development, including the T-cell receptor alpha
and beta chains. We report here the isolation of a human cDNA clone which encodes
a 3' segment of a novel protein with three zinc fingers. This protein, which we
termed G3B, can interact with GATA-3 in vitro. Its mRNA is expressed in T and B
cells. Thus, G3B may represent a potential regulator of GATA-3 function.

PMID: 7590293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Sep 1;232(2):620-6.

A new approach to isolate genomic control regions. Application to the GATA
transcription factor family.

Joulin V(1), Richard-Foy H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 33, Bicêtre,
France.

We have designed a new strategy to isolate unknown DNA regions interacting with
one or several related regulatory proteins. It involves trapping such DNAs by
their cognate binding proteins followed by PCR amplification, as described
previously [Kinzler, K. & Vogelstein, B. (1989) Nucleic Acids Res. 17,
3645-3653]. To overcome the inability of such a procedure to discriminate between
functional and non-functional binding sites as well as to specifically trap short
DNA motifs from the whole higher eukaryotic genome, we have used as starting
material DNA isolated from transcriptionally competent chromatin fractions,
instead of total genomic DNA. To test our strategy, we selected human DNA
sequences that bind members of the GATA family, known to recognize similar WGATAR
motifs. These proteins are expressed in different cell types in which they
regulate the transcription of different sets of genes; thus, transcriptionally
active chromatin containing GATA motifs should differ according to the cell type.
We have trapped and analyzed DNA fragments isolated from an active chromatin
fraction, from erythroid cells and lymphoid cells, using GATA-1 and GATA-3
proteins, respectively. We show that regulatory GATA sequences known to be in
open chromatin in erythroid cells (typified by the HSIII fragment of the
beta-globin locus control region) or in lymphoid cells (typified by a fragment of
the CD2 locus control region) are dramatically enriched in a cell-specific
manner, demonstrating the potency of the method. The sequences of the erythroid
or lymphoid DNA fragments isolated through the procedure described here were
determined and display subset-site preference for GATA-1 and GATA-3.

PMID: 7556215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

Gotta have GATA.

Simon MC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

PMID: 7550322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

Targeted disruption of the GATA3 gene causes severe abnormalities in the nervous 
system and in fetal liver haematopoiesis.

Pandolfi PP(1), Roth ME, Karis A, Leonard MW, Dzierzak E, Grosveld FG, Engel JD, 
Lindenbaum MH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Haematology, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

GATA-3 is one member of a growing family of related transcription factors which
share a strongly conserved expression pattern in all vertebrate organisms. In
order to elucidate GATA-3 function using a direct genetic approach, we have
disrupted the murine gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.
Mice heterozygous for the GATA3 mutation are fertile and appear in all respects
to be normal, whereas homozygous mutant embryos die between days 11 and 12
postcoitum (p.c.) and display massive internal bleeding, marked growth
retardation, severe deformities of the brain and spinal cord, and gross
aberrations in fetal liver haematopoiesis.

PMID: 7550312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4225-31.

Cooperative interaction of GATA-2 and AP1 regulates transcription of the
endothelin-1 gene.

Kawana M(1), Lee ME, Quertermous EE, Quertermous T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a 21-amino-acid vasoactive peptide initially characterized
as a product of endothelial cells. Reporter gene transfection experiments have
indicated that a GATA site and an AP1 site are essential for ET-1 promoter
function in endothelial cells, and GATA-2 appears to be the active GATA factor
which regulates ET-1 expression. To look for interactions between AP1 and GATA-2,
transactivation experiments were performed with expression vectors encoding
c-Jun, c-Fos, and GATA-2. Cooperativity between the AP1 complex and GATA-2 was
observed as a synergistic increase in transcriptional activity of the ET-1
reporter plasmid. In addition, AP1 was able to potentiate the action of GATA-2 on
reporter constructs lacking a functional AP1 site. In a similar fashion, GATA-2
was able to potentiate the action of AP1 despite deletion of the GATA site.
Experiments with GATA-1 and GATA-3 expression vectors provided evidence that this
capacity to interact with AP1 may be a characteristic of all GATA family members.
Biochemical evidence for AP1-GATA interaction was provided by immunoprecipitation
experiments. A GATA-2-specific antiserum was shown to immunoprecipitate in
vitro-synthesized Jun and Fos protein from reticulocyte lysate. Also, antisera
directed against Jun and Fos were able to immunoprecipitate from nuclear extracts
a GATA-binding protein, indicating the association of AP1 and GATA proteins in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC230661
PMID: 7623817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3830-9.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human
interleukin-5 gene promoter in interleukin-5-producing cells which express
multiple GATA-binding proteins.

Yamagata T(1), Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Honda H, Hirano N, Mano H, Yazaki Y,
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo University, Japan.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B-cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region within the human IL-5 
gene promoter that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of this family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-A23187 stimulation are necessary for IL-5
promoter activation. The requirement for another regulatory element called CLE0, 
which lies downstream of the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells 
express mRNAs of three GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3, and hGATA-4, and 
each of them has a potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/A) motif.
However, using ATL-16T nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only
GATA-binding protein that forms a specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA 
site. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells
expressing GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding
affinity for the -70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the
transactivation abilities were compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the
highest activity. These results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple
members of the GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMCID: PMC230622
PMID: 7791790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Kidney Int. 1995 Jun;47(6):1597-603.

The GATA-3 gene is expressed during human kidney embryogenesis.

Labastie MC(1), Catala M, Gregoire JM, Peault B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

GATA-3 is a transcription factor involved in the differentiation of T lymphocytes
and additionally expressed in several chicken and mouse embryonic tissues. Using 
in situ hybridization, we found that the human GATA-3 gene is selectively
expressed in the developing kidney. GATA-3 mRNA is first detected in the Wolffian
duct from the time of its emergence in the embryonic intermediate mesoderm and
further expressed in the collecting ducts of the mesonephros until its
involution. In the metanephros, GATA-3 is expressed in the ureteric bud where it 
is constitutively transcribed, throughout development, along the branching
process that gives rise to the whole collecting system of the definitive kidney. 
Besides the Wolffian duct and derivatives, we also report the expression of
GATA-3 gene in the glomerular mesangium and adjacent endocapillary cells, in both
meso- and metanephros. This early and specific expression of the GATA-3 gene
suggests a role for this transcription factor in the differentiation of the human
kidney.

PMID: 7643528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Immunol. 1995 Jun;32(8):583-93.

A Xenopus lymphoid tumor cell line with complete Ig genes rearrangements and
T-cell characteristics.

Du Pasquier L(1), Courtet M, Robert J.

Author information: 
(1)Basel Institute for Immunology, Switzerland.

The first lymphoid cell line derived from an amphibian (Xenopus) thymic tumor
shows an extreme form of lineage infidelity. Although it has rearranged in-frame 
the two alleles of the heavy chain, deleted one light chain locus, and rearranged
abortively the two alleles of the second light chain locus, the cell line does
not produce immunoglobulin molecules or message. It expresses a variety of T-cell
characteristic markers such as Xenopus pan T-cell markers, CD8 equivalent and
GATA3 transcription factor. It does not express any major histocompatibility
complex class I or class II molecules. It resembles some rare types of mammalian 
leukemias.

PMID: 7609735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mech Dev. 1995 Jun;51(2-3):169-82.

Expression of zebrafish GATA 3 (gta3) during gastrulation and neurulation
suggests a role in the specification of cell fate.

Neave B(1), Rodaway A, Wilson SW, Patient R, Holder N.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College,
London, UK.

In order to understand the role of the transcription factor GATA 3 in vertebrate 
development, we have examined its expression and some aspects of its regulation
during gastrulation and neurulation in the zebrafish. The complete coding
sequence of the cDNA encoding the zebrafish GATA 3 homologue, termed gta3, is
described. Analysis of expression patterns by in situ hybridisation shows the
gene to be expressed during gastrulation in the ventral region of the embryo
which includes tissue fated to form the non-neural ectoderm. By the end of
gastrulation, there is a clear border to the gta3 expression domain that is close
to the edge of the neural plate. Subsequently, gta3 expresses in the pronephric
duct and in defined regions of the central nervous system which include specific 
cells in each segment of the spinal cord and nuclei in the brain. Double
labelling embryos with a probe for gta3 and antibodies which identify
differentiated neurons suggest that gta3 is dynamically expressed during the
early differentiation phase of a subset of neurons but not in the terminal phase.
Analysis of gta3 expression in dorsalised embryos and in cyc and spt mutant
embryos indicates that the neural expression of the gene is subject to control by
signals from the mesoderm, including both the notochord and the somites, which
influence the segmental organisation of expression in the spinal cord.

PMID: 7547465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 16;10(4):631-9.

Regulation of lineage restricted haemopoietic transcription factors in cell
hybrids.

Murrell AM(1), Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 encode lineage restricted haemopoietic
transcription factors. We have previously shown that SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2 are
expressed in multipotent progenitors prior to lineage commitment, but are
down-regulated during granulocyte/monocyte differentiation. The phenomenon of
gene extinction in cell hybrids may reveal negative regulatory mechanisms
operating during normal differentiation. We have therefore analysed the
regulation of SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 in cell hybrids formed by the fusion
of cell lines representing different haemopoietic lineages. Expression of GATA-3 
was extinguished in both human and murine erythroid x T cell hybrids, an
observation which suggests that erythroid cells contain factors capable of
repressing GATA-3 expression. By contrast expression of SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2
was not extinguished in erythroid x T or in erythroid x B cell hybrids. These
data suggest that T cells and B cells do not contain trans-acting factors capable
of down-regulating expression of SCL, GATA-1 or GATA-2, and therefore raise the
possibility that a 'hit and run' mechanism may repress these genes during normal 
haemopoiesis. HpaII sites within the SCL promoter were unmethylated in erythroid 
cells but methylated in T cells. Erythroid x T and erythroid x B cell hybrids
contained both methylated and unmethylated SCL promoters, thus implicating a
heritable cis-acting mechanism in the regulation of the SCL gene in lymphoid cell
lines. These results provide the first analysis of SCL and GATA gene regulation
in stable cell hybrids.

PMID: 7862440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):626-33.

Rescue of GATA-1-deficient embryonic stem cells by heterologous GATA-binding
proteins.

Blobel GA(1), Simon MC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Totipotent murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro to
form embryoid bodies (EBs) containing hematopoietic cells of multiple lineages,
including erythroid cells. In vitro erythroid development parallels that which is
observed in vivo. ES cells in which the gene for the erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1 has been disrupted fail to produce mature erythroid cells either in
vivo or in vitro. With the EB in vitro differentiation assay, constructs
expressing heterologous GATA-binding proteins were tested for their abilities to 
correct the developmental defect of GATA-1-deficient ES cells. The results
presented here show that the highly divergent chicken GATA-1 can rescue GATA-1
deficiency to an extent similar to that of murine GATA-1 (mGATA-1), as determined
by size and morphology of EBs, presence of red cells, and globin gene expression.
Furthermore, GATA-3 and GATA-4, which are normally expressed in different
tissues, and a protein consisting of the zinc fingers of GATA-1 fused to the
herpes simplex virus VP16 transcription activation domain were able to compensate
for the GATA-1 defect. Chimeric molecules in which both zinc fingers of mGATA-1
were replaced with the zinc fingers of human GATA-3 or with the single finger of 
the fungal GATA factor areA, as well as a construct bearing the zinc finger
region alone, displayed rescue activity. These results suggest that neither the
transcription activation domains of mGATA-1 nor its zinc fingers impart erythroid
cell specificity for its action in vivo. Rather, it appears that specificity is
mediated through the cis-acting control regions which determine spatial and
temporal expression of the GATA-1 gene. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that
the zinc finger region may have a biological function in addition to mediating
DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC231919
PMID: 7823931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 27;270(4):1515-20.

GATA-3 dominant negative mutant. Functional redundancy of the T cell receptor
alpha and beta enhancers.

Smith VM(1), Lee PP, Szychowski S, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720-3200.

The GATA family of transcription factors regulates a wide variety of genes,
including those involved in differentiation of erythrocytes and T lymphocytes. We
report here the creation of a dominant negative mutant of GATA-3, KRR, which
effectively blocks wild-type GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 transactivation when
co-expressed in transient assays. KRR was generated by site-directed mutagenesis 
while investigating a putative activation domain of GATA-3, located between its
two zinc fingers. The GATA-3 KRR mutation does not affect expression, nuclear
translocation, or the ability to bind to a consensus GATA sequence. KRR can
suppress the activity of the minimal T cell receptor (TCR) alpha and beta
enhancers by 12- and 3.4-fold, respectively. However, KRR did not have a
significant effect on the activity of larger TCR-alpha and -beta enhancer
fragments. Thus, functional redundancy in the TCR-alpha and -beta enhancers can
compensate for the loss of GATA-3 activity.

PMID: 7829479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Development. 1994 Nov;120(11):3257-66.

GATA factor activity is required for the trophoblast-specific transcriptional
regulation of the mouse placental lactogen I gene.

Ng YK(1), George KM, Engel JD, Linzer DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The molecular determinants governing tissue-specific gene expression in the
placenta are at present only poorly defined, particularly with respect to the
regulation of specific hormone genes whose products are vital to embryonic
development and the maintenance of a nurturing maternal environment. In
continuing our analysis of the trophoblast-specific expression of the mouse
placental lactogen I gene, we now demonstrate that the transcription factors
GATA-2 and GATA-3 regulate the activity of this gene promoter. These factors are 
expressed in placental trophoblast cells, with peak levels of the GATA-2, GATA-3 
and placental lactogen I mRNAs each accumulating at midgestation. Analysis of a
region of the placental lactogen I gene promoter, previously shown to be
sufficient for directing trophoblast-specific transcription, revealed the
presence of three consensus binding sites for GATA-2 or GATA-3. Both GATA-2 and
GATA-3 bind to these sites in vitro and mutation of these sites results in a
significant decrease in promoter activity as assayed by transient transfection
into the choriocarcinoma-derived cell line Rcho-1, which expresses endogenous
GATA-2 and GATA-3. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA factors in Rcho-1 cells
stimulates transcription from a co-transfected placental lactogen I gene
promoter. Most significantly, expression of GATA-2 or GATA-3 was found to induce 
transcription from this promoter in transfected non-trophoblast (fibroblast)
cells. These data indicate that GATA factors are both limiting and required
transcriptional regulatory molecules in placental trophoblasts, and that the
tissue specificity of the placental lactogen I gene is determined, at least in
part, by GATA-2 and/or GATA-3.

PMID: 7720565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 1994 Sep;120(9):2673-86.

Embryonic expression and cloning of the murine GATA-3 gene.

George KM(1), Leonard MW, Roth ME, Lieuw KH, Kioussis D, Grosveld F, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Il 60208-3500.

We describe the embryonic expression pattern as well as the cloning and initial
transcriptional regulatory analysis of the murine (m) GATA-3 gene. In situ
hybridization shows that mGATA-3 mRNA accumulation is temporally and spatially
regulated during early development: although found most abundantly in the
placenta prior to 10 days of embryogenesis, mGATA-3 expression becomes restricted
to specific cells within the embryonic central nervous system (in the
mesencephalon, diencephalon, pons and inner ear) later in gestation. GATA-3 also 
shows a restricted expression pattern in the peripheral nervous system, including
terminally differentiating cells in the cranial and sympathetic ganglia. In
addition to this distinct pattern in the nervous system, mGATA-3 is also
expressed in the embryonic kidney and the thymic rudiment, and further analysis
showed that it is expressed throughout T lymphocyte differentiation. To begin to 
investigate how this complex gene expression pattern is elicited, cloning and
transcriptional regulatory analyses of the mGATA-3 gene were initiated. At least 
two regulatory elements (one positive and one negative) appear to be required for
appropriate tissue-restricted regulation after transfection of mGATA-3-directed
reporter genes into cells that naturally express GATA-3 (T lymphocytes and
neuroblastoma cells). Furthermore, this same region of the locus confers
developmentally appropriate expression in transgenic mice, but only in a subset
of the tissues that naturally express the gene.

PMID: 7956841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Seikagaku. 1994 Aug;66(8):1138-42.

[Structure and function of GATA transcription factors; possible roles in cell
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Muraosa Y(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai.

PMID: 7963854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5592-602.

GATA-binding proteins regulate the human gonadotropin alpha-subunit gene in the
placenta and pituitary gland.

Steger DJ(1), Hecht JH, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0674.

The human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene is expressed in two quite
dissimilar tissues, the placenta and anterior pituitary. Tissue-specific
expression is determined by combinations of elements, some of which are common
and others of which are specific to each tissue. In the placenta, a composite
enhancer confers specific expression. It contains four protein-binding sites: two
cyclic AMP (cAMP) response elements that bind CREB, a trophoblast-specific
element that binds TSEB, and a sequence motif, AGATAA, that matches the consensus
binding site for a family of transcription factors termed the GATA-binding
proteins. In pituitary gonadotropes, the cAMP response elements remain important 
for expression, TSEB is absent, and elements further upstream participate in
tissue-specific expression. Here we establish a regulatory role for the GATA
element in both the placenta and pituitary by demonstrating that a mutation of
this element decreases alpha-subunit gene expression 15-fold in JEG-3 human
placental cells and 2.5-fold in alpha T3-1 mouse pituitary gonadotropes. In JEG-3
cells, human GATA-2 (hGATA-2) and hGATA-3 are highly expressed and both proteins 
bind to the alpha-subunit gene GATA element. In alpha T3-1 cells, the GATA motif 
is bound by mouse GATA-2 (mGATA-2) and an mGATA-4-related protein. Cotransfection
of hGATA-2 or hGATA-3 into alpha T3-1 cells activates the alpha-subunit gene
threefold. These studies establish a role for the GATA-binding proteins in
placental and pituitary alpha-subunit gene expression, significantly expanding
the known target genes of GATA-2, GATA-3, and perhaps GATA-4.

PMCID: PMC359078
PMID: 7518566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jun;14(6):4286-94.

GATA elements are necessary for the activity and tissue specificity of the T-cell
receptor beta-chain transcriptional enhancer.

Henderson AJ(1), McDougall S, Leiden J, Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032.

Three high-affinity binding sites for the GATA family of transcriptional
regulators have been identified within the T-cell receptor beta-chain (TCR beta) 
transcriptional enhancer, and their functional significance has been determined
in an effort to understand the T-cell specificity of the enhancer more fully. One
site, TE4, is important for activity of the enhancer in T cells. Neither site TE1
nor site TE2 can functionally replace a mutated TE4 site in T cells; however, the
same protein, probably GATA-3, binds all three sites, as judged by
electrophoretic mobility shift, oligonucleotide competition, and proteolytic
clipping assays. These data suggest that additional proteins are critical for the
ability of GATA-3 to activate the TCR beta enhancer. In fibroblasts, the GATA
sequence at site TE1 appears to bind a negative regulator. Since this is not true
in B cells, B cells and fibroblasts appear to have different mechanisms for
negative regulation of the TCR beta enhancer.

PMCID: PMC358795
PMID: 8196665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genes Dev. 1994 May 15;8(10):1184-97.

Novel insights into erythroid development revealed through in vitro
differentiation of GATA-1 embryonic stem cells.

Weiss MJ(1), Keller G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells lacking the transcription factor GATA-1 do not
produce mature red blood cells either in vivo or in vitro. To define the
consequences of GATA-1 loss more precisely, we used an in vitro ES cell
differentiation assay that permits enumeration of primitive (EryP) and definitive
(EryD) erythroid precursors and recovery of pure erythroid colonies. In contrast 
to normal ES cells, GATA-1- ES cells fail to generate EryP precursors. EryD
precursors, however, are normal in number but undergo developmental arrest and
death at the proerythroblast stage. Contrary to initial expectations, arrested
GATA-1(-)-definitive proerythroblasts express GATA target genes at normal levels.
Transcripts of the related factor GATA-2 are remarkably elevated in GATA-1-
proerythroblasts. These findings imply substantial interchangeability of GATA
factors in vivo and suggest that GATA-1 normally serves to repress GATA-2 during 
erythropoiesis. The approach used here is a paradigm for the phenotypic analysis 
of targeted mutations affecting hematopoietic development.

PMID: 7926723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genomics. 1994 May 1;21(1):1-6.

Structure and expression of the human GATA3 gene.

Labastie MC(1), Bories D, Chabret C, Grégoire JM, Chrétien S, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

GATA3, a member of the GATA family that is abundantly expressed in the
T-lymphocyte lineage, is thought to participate in T-cell receptor gene
activation through binding to enhancers. To understand GATA3 gene regulation, we 
cloned the human gene and the 5' end of the mouse GATA3 gene. We show that the
human GATA3 gene contains six exons distributed over 17 kb of DNA. The two human 
GATA3 zinc fingers are encoded by two separate exons highly conserved with those 
of GATA1, but no other structural homologies between these two genes can be
found. The human and mouse GATA3 transcription units start at a major initiation 
site. The promoter sequence analysis of these two genes revealed that they are
embedded within a CpG island and share structural features often found in the
promoters of housekeeping genes. Finally, we show that a DNA fragment containing 
the human GATA3 transcription unit, 3 kb upstream from the initiation site and 4 
kb downstream from the polyadenylation site, displays T-cell specificity.

PMID: 8088776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Apr;23(1-2):100-10.

Temporal and spatial changes in GATA transcription factor expression are
coincident with development of the chicken optic tectum.

Kornhauser JM(1), Leonard MW, Yamamoto M, LaVail JH, Mayo KE, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The molecular mechanisms specifying patterns of gene expression in the vertebrate
brain, which in turn determine the developmental fates of specific neurons, are
yet to be clearly defined. Individual members of a recently identified family of 
transcriptional regulatory proteins, the GATA factors, are required for the
differentiation of certain hematopoietic cell lineages. We show here that two of 
the members of this gene family, GATA-2 and GATA-3, are expressed within discrete
cell populations of the chicken optic tectum during embryogenesis, and that they 
have highly restricted patterns of expression in the developing chicken brain.
Furthermore, the induction of GATA factor expression within specific cell layers 
parallels the well established spatial (rostral to caudal) and temporal pattern
of optic tectum development. The observation that both the timing of appearance
and the localization of expression of GATA-2 and GATA-3 are correlated with optic
tectum development suggest that these transcription factors may be associated
with the initiation of gene transcription required for the determination of
specific neuronal fates within visual areas of the vertebrate brain.

PMID: 8028475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):2201-12.

Human GATA-3 trans-activation, DNA-binding, and nuclear localization activities
are organized into distinct structural domains.

Yang Z(1), Gu L, Romeo PH, Bories D, Motohashi H, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3500.

GATA-3 is a zinc finger transcription factor which is expressed in a highly
restricted and strongly conserved tissue distribution pattern in vertebrate
organisms, specifically, in a subset of hematopoietic cells, in cells within the 
central and peripheral nervous systems, in the kidney, and in placental
trophoblasts. Tissue-specific cellular genes regulated by GATA-3 have been
identified in T lymphocytes and the placenta, while GATA-3-regulated genes in the
nervous system and kidney have not yet been defined. We prepared monoclonal
antibodies with which we could dissect the biochemical and functional properties 
of human GATA-3. The results of these experiments show some anticipated
phenotypes, for example, the definition of discrete domains required for specific
DNA-binding site recognition (amino acids 303 to 348) and trans activation (amino
acids 30 to 74). The signaling sequence for nuclear localization of human GATA-3 
is a property conferred by sequences within and surrounding the amino finger
(amino acids 249 to 311) of the protein, thereby assigning a function to this
domain and thus explaining the curious observation that this zinc finger is
dispensable for DNA binding by the GATA family of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC358580
PMID: 8114750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 1993 Oct;119(2):519-31.

Expression of the chicken GATA factor family during early erythroid development
and differentiation.

Leonard MW(1), Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The DNA motif WGATAR has been identified within transcriptional regulatory
domains of globin and other erythroid-specific genes and the activator proteins
that bind to this regulatory element, the GATA factors, belong to a multi-gene
family that is expressed in chicken erythroid cells. Here we show that, as in
chickens, multiple members of the GATA factor family are expressed in human and
murine erythroid cells. During the early stages of chicken embryogenesis (well
before blood island formation), each of the GATA family members is transcribed
with a unique temporal and spatial pattern. In the primitive erythroid lineage,
transcription of the embryonic epsilon-globin gene parallels GATA-1 expression
while the switch to beta-globin transcription in definitive erythroid cells is
directly preceded by a pronounced increase in GATA-3 accumulation. The timing and
pattern of expression of these different mRNAs during avian erythroid development
and differentiation suggests that temporally regulated changes in GATA factor
expression are required for vertebrate hematopoiesis.

PMID: 8287800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Exp Med. 1993 Sep 1;178(3):941-9.

Functional GATA-3 binding sites within murine CD8 alpha upstream regulatory
sequences.

Landry DB(1), Engel JD, Sen R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Sciences Center, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 
02254.

Genes encoding the accessory molecules CD8 and CD4 are activated early in
thymocyte development, generating CD4+8+ double positive intermediates, which
give rise to two functionally distinct mature T cell subsets that express either 
CD4 or CD8. The mechanisms that govern the activation or suppression of the CD8
gene are likely to be central to the T cell development program. To identify the 
key regulatory factors, we have initiated an analysis of the transcriptional
regulation of the murine CD8 alpha gene. We have identified three CD8+
cell-specific DNAase I hypersensitive sites (HSS) located upstream of the murine 
CD8 alpha gene. In vitro mobility shift analysis of the -4.0-kb HSS region has
revealed multiple binding sites for the T cell-restricted transcription factor
GATA-3. In vitro translated murine GATA-3 binds specifically to both CD8 GATA
sites, and coexpression of this factor in transient transfection assays
transactivates a reporter construct containing these sequences. These results
provide the first evidence for the role of a T cell-restricted factor in the
regulation of either CD8 or CD4 genes.

PMCID: PMC2191176
PMID: 8350061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 1993 Sep 1;82(5):1493-501.

Megakaryocytic differentiation induced in 416B myeloid cells by GATA-2 and GATA-3
transgenes or 5-azacytidine is tightly coupled to GATA-1 expression.

Visvader J(1), Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.

The GATA 'zinc-finger' transcription factors are thought to have important roles 
in the control of hematopoiesis. GATA-1 and GATA-2 are found in the erythroid,
mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages, and GATA-3 in T lymphocytes. GATA-1 is
required for erythroid development and has recently been shown by gene transfer
to direct megakaryocytic differentiation of the primitive myeloid cell line 416B.
Here we show that enforced expression in 416B cells of either the GATA-2 or
GATA-3 gene also induces megakaryocytic differentiation, as assessed by cellular 
morphology, acetylcholinesterase activity, polyploid DNA content, and loss of
Mac-1 expression. No erythroid or mast cell differentiation was found.
Unexpectedly, the level of endogenous GATA-1 mRNA had increased 20- to 30-fold
among the transfectants, whereas that of GATA-2 mRNA was unaltered and endogenous
GATA-3 transcripts remained undetectable. This finding suggests that GATA-2 and
GATA-3 lie upstream of GATA-1 in a regulatory hierarchy and that, in 416B cells, 
GATA-1 may mediate the phenotypic changes induced by GATA-2 or GATA-3.
Furthermore, 416B cells treated with the DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
underwent megakaryocytic differentiation accompanied by a marked increase in the 
level of GATA-1 mRNA but not that of GATA-2 or GATA-3. These results strongly
implicate GATA factors in megakaryocytic differentiation and suggest that, at
least for 416B cells, GATA-1 is a dominant regulator of maturation along this
lineage.

PMID: 7689871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4011-22.

DNA-binding specificities of the GATA transcription factor family.

Ko LJ(1), Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3500.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors, which are related by a high 
degree of amino acid sequence identity within their zinc finger DNA-binding
domains, each show distinct but overlapping patterns of tissue-restricted
expression. Although GATA-1, -2, and -3 have been shown to recognize a consensus 
sequence derived from regulatory elements in erythroid cell-specific genes,
WGATAR (in which W indicates A/T and R indicates A/G), the potential for more
subtle differences in the binding preferences of each factor has not been
previously addressed. By employing a binding selection and polymerase chain
reaction amplification scheme with randomized oligonucleotides, we have
determined the binding-site specificities of bacterially expressed chicken
GATA-1, -2, and -3 transcription factors. Whereas all three GATA factors bind an 
AGATAA erythroid consensus motif with high affinity, a second, alternative
consensus DNA sequence, AGATCTTA, is also recognized well by GATA-2 and GATA-3
but only poorly by GATA-1. These studies suggest that all three GATA factors are 
capable of mediating transcriptional effects via a common erythroid consensus
DNA-binding motif. Furthermore, GATA-2 and GATA-3, because of their distinct
expression patterns and broader DNA recognition properties, may be involved in
additional regulatory processes beyond those of GATA-1. The definition of an
alternative GATA-2-GATA-3 consensus sequence may facilitate the identification of
new target genes in the further elucidation of the roles that these transcription
factors play during development.

PMCID: PMC359950
PMID: 8321208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):3999-4010.

DNA-binding specificity of GATA family transcription factors.

Merika M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

GATA-binding proteins constitute a family of transcription factors that recognize
a target site conforming to the consensus WGATAR (W = A or T and R = A or G).
Here we have used the method of polymerase chain reaction-mediated random site
selection to assess in an unbiased manner the DNA-binding specificity of GATA
proteins. Contrary to our expectations, we show that GATA proteins bind a variety
of motifs that deviate from the previously assigned consensus. Many of the
nonconsensus sequences bind protein with high affinity, equivalent to that of
conventional GATA motifs. By using the selected sequences as probes in the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we demonstrate overlapping, but distinct,
sequence preferences for GATA family members, specified by their respective
DNA-binding domains. Furthermore, we provide additional evidence for interaction 
of amino and carboxy fingers of GATA-1 in defining its binding site. By
performing cotransfection experiments, we also show that transactivation
parallels DNA binding. A chimeric protein containing the finger domain of areA
and the activation domains of GATA-1 is capable of activating transcription in
mammalian cells through GATA motifs. Our findings suggest a mechanism by which
GATA proteins might selectively regulate gene expression in cells in which they
are coexpressed.

PMCID: PMC359949
PMID: 8321207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jun 25;21(12):2831-6.

Human T cell transcription factor GATA-3 stimulates HIV-1 expression.

Yang Z(1), Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

A family of transcriptional activating proteins, the GATA factors, has been shown
to bind to a consensus motif through a highly conserved C4 zinc finger DNA
binding domain. One member of this multigene family, GATA-3, is most abundantly
expressed in T lymphocytes, a cellular target for human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) infection and replication. In vitro DNase I footprinting analysis 
revealed six hGATA-3 binding sites in the U3 region (the transcriptional
regulatory domain) of the HIV-1 LTR. Cotransfection of an hGATA-3 expression
plasmid with a reporter plasmid whose transcription is directed by the HIV-1 LTR 
resulted in 6- to 10-fold stimulation of LTR-mediated transcription, whereas site
specific mutation of these GATA sites resulted in virtual abrogation of the
activation by hGATA-3. Further, deletion of the hGATA-3 transcriptional
activation domain abolished GATA-dependent HIV-1 trans-activation, showing that
the stimulation of viral transcription observed is a direct effect of
cotransfected hGATA-3. Introduction of the HIV-1 plasmids in which the GATA sites
have been mutated into human T lymphocytes also caused a significant reduction in
LTR-mediated transcription at both the basal level and in (PHA- plus PMA-)
stimulated T cells. These observations suggest that in addition to its normal
role in T lymphocyte gene regulation, hGATA-3 may also play a significant role in
HIV-1 transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC309663
PMID: 8332492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Blood. 1993 Jun 15;81(12):3234-41.

Expression of mRNA for the GATA-binding proteins in human eosinophils and
basophils: potential role in gene transcription.

Zon LI(1), Yamaguchi Y, Yee K, Albee EA, Kimura A, Bennett JC, Orkin SH, Ackerman
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

The expression of the hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and
GATA-3 was studied in eosinophils and basophils. Eosinophils express mRNA for
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Basophils express GATA-2 and GATA-3. Treatment of
HL-60 eosinophilic sublines with either interleukin-5 or butyric acid increased
the expression of GATA-1 mRNA concomitant with the expression of
eosinophil-specific genes, whereas levels of GATA-2 mRNA remained relatively
constant. The presence of mRNA for these proteins in eosinophils and basophils
suggests that gene transcription in these lineages may be regulated by
GATA-binding proteins.

PMID: 8507862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Dev. 1993 Jun;7(6):1097-109.

Ectopic expression of a conditional GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera arrests
erythroid differentiation in a hormone-dependent manner.

Briegel K(1), Lim KC, Plank C, Beug H, Engel JD, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.

The GATA factors are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins in
eukaryotes that share extensive homology in their DNA-binding domains. One
enigmatic aspect of GATA factor expression is that several GATA proteins, which
ostensibly share the same DNA-binding site specificity, are coexpressed in
erythroid cells. To elucidate the roles of individual GATA factors in
erythropoiesis, conditional alleles of GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were prepared
by fusing each of the factors to the hormone-binding domain of the human estrogen
receptor (ER). These GATA/ER chimeric factors were shown to be hormone-inducible 
trans-activating proteins in transient transfection assays. When stably
introduced into primary erythroblasts or conditionally transformed erythroid
progenitors cells, exogenous GATA-2/ER promoted proliferation and inhibited
terminal differentiation in an estrogen-dependent manner. These phenotypic
effects are specifically attributable to the action of ectopically expressed
GATA-2/ER because erythroblasts expressing exogenous GATA-2 are constitutively
arrested in differentiation and because erythroid progenitors expressing either
Gal/ER or GATA-3/ER do not display a hormone-responsive block in differentiation.
Thus, the GATA-2 transcription factor appears to play a role in regulating the
self-renewal capacity of early erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 8504932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Immunol. 1993 May;23(5):1083-7.

Human CD3-CD16+ natural killer cells express the hGATA-3 T cell transcription
factor and an unrearranged 2.3-kb TcR delta transcript.

Biassoni R(1), Verdiani S, Cambiaggi A, Romeo PH, Ferrini S, Moretta L.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Farmacologia, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova,
Italy.

In this study we analyzed the T cell receptor(TcR) delta transcripts expressed by
CD3-CD16+ cells and we investigated whether these cells expressed the hGATA-3 T
cell transcription factor and the recombination-activating gene (RAG)-1. Multiple
TcR delta transcripts deriving from an unrearranged TcR delta gene were detected 
in both polyclonal and clonal CD3-CD16+ natural killer(NK) cell lines. Two
unrearranged TcR delta transcripts had a size similar to that of the functional
TcR delta mRNA (2.3 and 1.3 kb) found in TcR gamma/delta+ T lymphocytes. Sequence
analysis of nine different 2.3-kb cDNA clones obtained from NK-derived polyA+ RNA
confirmed that they corresponded to an unrearranged TcR delta gene. These cDNA
were 2343 bp long and their transcription initiation site was located 814 bp
upstream from the J delta 1 segment. The sequence located upstream of the J delta
1 segment corresponded to the previously reported germ-line sequence. The J delta
1 segment was correctly spliced to C delta; in addition the four C delta exons
were found to be already assembled. Two polyadenylation sites were present in the
fourth C delta exon. However, only that located at the 3' end appeared to be
utilized in the 2.3-kb cDNA. The expression of hGATA-3, a T cell-specific factor 
known to be involved in the regulation of the transcription of TcR delta locus,
was analyzed by Northern blot, in cultured NK cell population and clones (but not
in freshly derived cell populations). All NK clones and cell lines studied were
found to express hGATA-3-specific mRNA, suggesting that hGATA-3 may be involved
in the regulation of the unrearranged TcR delta gene expression in NK cells.
Finally, no transcription of the RAG-1 gene could be detected in all NK cell
lines or clones analyzed.

PMID: 8386664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Blood. 1992 Aug 1;80(3):575-81.

GATA-binding transcription factors in hematopoietic cells.

Orkin SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

PMID: 1638017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Immunol. 1992;3(1):1-11.

Expression of GATA-3 during lymphocyte differentiation and mouse embryogenesis.

Oosterwegel M(1), Timmerman J, Leiden J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The GATA family of C4 zinc-finger transcription factors has been implicated in
tissue-specific gene regulation in birds and mammals. One of the members of this 
family, GATA-3, is reportedly expressed specifically in the T-cell lineage, where
it interacts with GATA motifs in the TCR-alpha, TCR-beta, and TCR-delta
enhancers, thereby controlling the T-cell phenotype. To evaluate the
differentiation control properties of GATA-3, we have now documented its
expression pattern during lymphoid differentiation and murine embryogenesis. The 
onset of GATA-3 expression in the lymphoid lineage was studied in a panel of
lymphoid (precursor) cell lines by Northern blot analysis. GATA-3 was uniquely
expressed in T-lineage lymphocytes expressing TCR and CD3 genes; it was absent
from TCR/CD3 mRNA-negative prothymocytes and from all B-lineage cells. In order
to obtain information on the expression of GATA-3 outside the immune system, in
situ hybridization was performed on mouse embryos on day 11.5-14.5 of gestation. 
GATA-3 mRNA was detected in fetal thymus and in erythroid cells. Outside the
haemopoietic system, we detected GATA-3 mRNA throughout the central nervous
system, in kidney, in the epidermis, lens fibers, the inner ear, whisker
follicles, and in the primary palate. These data provide new clues about the
potential role of GATA-3 during mouse development, and will aid the
interpretation of currently ongoing gene knockout experiments.

PMCID: PMC2275906
PMID: 1343100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):22948-53.

GATA-binding transcription factors in mast cells regulate the promoter of the
mast cell carboxypeptidase A gene.

Zon LI(1), Gurish MF, Stevens RL, Mather C, Reynolds DS, Austen KF, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115.

The transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were found to be expressed
in several mouse and rat mast cell lines that contain mast cell carboxypeptidase 
A (MC-CPA) and other proteases in their cytoplasmic granules. GATA-1 mRNA was not
detected in P815 cells, an immature mouse mastocytoma-derived cell line that
lacks electron-dense granules and has low levels of secretory granule proteases. 
Because the 5'-flanking regions of the mouse and human MC-CPA genes contained a
conserved GATA-binding motif 51 base pairs upstream of their translation
initiation sites, the ability of GATA-binding proteins to regulate the promoter
activity of the MC-CPA gene was examined in rat basophilic leukemia cells, mouse 
P815 cells, and transfected mouse P815 cells that expressed GATA-1. In all three 
mast cell lines, the promoter activity of the MC-CPA gene depended on the GATA
binding site. GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 are thus the first DNA-binding proteins 
identified in mast cells which regulate the promoter activity of a gene that
encodes a secretory granule protease.

PMID: 1744088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 1;88(23):10642-6.

Expression of GATA-binding proteins during embryonic development in Xenopus
laevis.

Zon LI(1), Mather C, Burgess S, Bolce ME, Harland RM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.

Proteins that recognize the core sequence GATA are important regulators of
hematopoietic-specific gene transcription. We have characterized cDNAs encoding
the Xenopus laevis homologues of three related transcription factors, designated 
GATA-1, -2, and -3. Comparative sequence analysis reveals strong conservation of 
the zinc-finger DNA-binding domain among all vertebrate GATA-binding proteins.
GATA-2 and GATA-3 polypeptides are homologous throughout their entire sequences, 
whereas GATA-1 sequence is conserved only in the region responsible for DNA
binding. In Xenopus, RNAs encoding GATA-binding proteins are expressed in both
larval and adult erythroid cells. GATA-1, -2, and -3 RNAs are first detectable in
early gastrula (Nieuwkoop developmental stage 11). This is earlier than the
appearance of the early larval alpha T1 globin RNA (stage 15), beta T1 globin RNA
(stage 26), or blood island formation (stage 30). The expression of GATA-1, -2,
and -3 in early development may signal an early commitment of mesoderm to form
hematopoietic tissue.

PMCID: PMC52986
PMID: 1961730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Aug 15;88(16):7284-8.

The human enhancer-binding protein Gata3 binds to several T-cell receptor
regulatory elements.

Marine J(1), Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley
94720.

The tissue-specific developmental regulation of the alpha, beta, gamma and delta 
T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) genes is controlled by the corresponding distinct
enhancers and their enhancer-binding proteins. To find a common TCR regulatory
element, we have studied the ability of the newly described enhancer-binding
protein Gata3 to bind to the sequence motif (A/T)GATA(G/A) shared between
enhancer elements of all four TCR genes. Gata3 was shown in the chicken to be an 
enhancer-binding protein containing a zinc-finger domain. We have isolated a
full-length human Gata3 cDNA and characterized its role in TCR gene regulation.
Northern blot analysis showed that the Gata3 mRNA is present in T-cell, but not
B-cell, macrophage or HeLa cell lines. The in vitro transcribed and translated
Gata3 cDNA product bound specifically to the enhancer elements of at least three 
TCR genes containing the above consensus sequence. This binding specificity was
consistent with the in vivo activity of the TCR enhancer-binding element in
transient transfection assays. Hence, the Gata3 protein, together with other
T-cell-specific enhancer-binding proteins, may form the basis of tissue-specific 
expression of the TCR genes.

PMCID: PMC52279
PMID: 1871134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 May;11(5):2778-84.

Murine and human T-lymphocyte GATA-3 factors mediate transcription through a
cis-regulatory element within the human T-cell receptor delta gene enhancer.

Ko LJ(1), Yamamoto M, Leonard MW, George KM, Ting P, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3500.

A family of transcriptional activators has recently been identified in chickens; 
these transcriptional activators recognize a common consensus motif (WGATAR)
through a conserved C4 zinc finger DNA-binding domain. One of the members of this
multigene family, cGATA-3, is most abundantly expressed in the T-lymphocyte cell 
lineage. Analysis of human and murine GATA-3 factors shows a striking degree of
amino acid sequence identity and similar patterns of tissue specificity of
expression in these three organisms. The murine and human factors are abundantly 
expressed in a variety of human and murine T-cell lines and can activate
transcription through a tissue-specific GATA-binding site identified within the
human T-cell receptor delta gene enhancer. We infer that the murine and human
GATA-3 proteins play a central and highly conserved role in vertebrate
T-cell-specific transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC360054
PMID: 2017177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


