
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 31;11(3):e0152708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152708.

Isolation of a Genomic Region Affecting Most Components of Metabolic Syndrome in 
a Chromosome-16 Congenic Rat Model.

Šedová L(1,)(2), Pravenec M(1,)(3), Krenová D(1), Kazdová L(4), Zídek V(3),
Krupková M(1), Liška F(1), Kren V(1,)(3), Šeda O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University and the General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague,
Czech Republic. (3)Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Metabolism and Diabetes, Institute for
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.

Metabolic syndrome is a highly prevalent human disease with substantial genomic
and environmental components. Previous studies indicate the presence of
significant genetic determinants of several features of metabolic syndrome on rat
chromosome 16 (RNO16) and the syntenic regions of human genome. We derived the
SHR.BN16 congenic strain by introgression of a limited RNO16 region from the
Brown Norway congenic strain (BN-Lx) into the genomic background of the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) strain. We compared the morphometric,
metabolic, and hemodynamic profiles of adult male SHR and SHR.BN16 rats. We also 
compared in silico the DNA sequences for the differential segment in the BN-Lx
and SHR parental strains. SHR.BN16 congenic rats had significantly lower weight, 
decreased concentrations of total triglycerides and cholesterol, and improved
glucose tolerance compared with SHR rats. The concentrations of insulin, free
fatty acids, and adiponectin were comparable between the two strains. SHR.BN16
rats had significantly lower systolic (18-28 mmHg difference) and diastolic
(10-15 mmHg difference) blood pressure throughout the experiment
(repeated-measures ANOVA, P < 0.001). The differential segment spans
approximately 22 Mb of the telomeric part of the short arm of RNO16. The in
silico analyses revealed over 1200 DNA variants between the BN-Lx and SHR genomes
in the SHR.BN16 differential segment, 44 of which lead to missense mutations, and
only eight of which (in Asb14, Il17rd, Itih1, Syt15, Ercc6, RGD1564958, Tmem161a,
and Gatad2a genes) are predicted to be damaging to the protein product.
Furthermore, a number of genes within the RNO16 differential segment associated
with metabolic syndrome components in human studies showed polymorphisms between 
SHR and BN-Lx (including Lpl, Nrg3, Pbx4, Cilp2, and Stab1). Our novel congenic
rat model demonstrates that a limited genomic region on RNO16 in the SHR
significantly affects many of the features of metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 27031336  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Biochem J. 2015 Jun 1;468(2):345-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150030.

The tumour suppressor CHD5 forms a NuRD-type chromatin remodelling complex.

Kolla V(1), Naraparaju K(1), Zhuang T(1), Higashi M(1), Kolla S(1), Blobel GA(2),
Brodeur GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, PA, U.S.A.
(2)†Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, PA, U.S.A.

Eukaryotic gene expression is developmentally regulated, in part by chromatin
remodelling, and its dysregulation has been linked to cancer. CHD5 (chromodomain 
helicase DNA-binding protein 5) is a tumour suppressor gene (TSG) that maps to a 
region of consistent deletion on 1p36.31 in neuroblastomas (NBs) and other tumour
types. CHD5 encodes a protein with chromatin remodelling, helicase and
DNA-binding motifs that is preferentially expressed in neural and testicular
tissues. CHD5 is highly homologous to CHD3 and CHD4, which are the core subunits 
of nucleosome remodelling and deacetylation (NuRD) complexes. To determine if
CHD5 forms a similar complex, we performed studies on nuclear extracts from NBLS,
SY5Y (both with endogenous CHD5 expression), NLF (CHD5 null) and NLF cells stably
transfected with CHD5 cDNA (wild-type and V5-histidine-tagged).
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with either CHD5 antibody or antibody to
V5/histidine-tagged protein. We identified NuRD components both by GST-FOG1
(Friend Of GATA1) pull-down and by IP. We also performed MS/MS analysis to
confirm the presence of CHD5 or other protein components of the NuRD complex, as 
well as to identify other novel proteins. CHD5 was clearly associated with all
canonical NuRD components, including metastasis-associated protein (MTA)1/2, GATA
zinc finger domain containing 2A (GATAD2A), histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2,
retinoblastoma-binding protein (RBBP)4/7 and methyl DNA-binding domain protein
(MBD)2/3, as determined by Western blotting and MS/MS. Our data suggest CHD5
forms a NuRD complex similar to CHD4. However, CHD5-NuRD may also have unique
protein associations that confer functional specificity and may contribute to
normal development and to tumour suppression in NB and other cancers.

PMCID: PMC4487910
PMID: 25825869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Jul;72(13):2491-507. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1880-8. Epub
2015 Mar 22.

Structure and function insights into the NuRD chromatin remodeling complex.

Torchy MP(1), Hamiche A, Klaholz BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Structural Biology, Centre for Integrative Biology
(CBI), Institute of Genetics and of Molecular and Cellular Biology (IGBMC), 1 rue
Laurent Fries, Illkirch, France.

Transcription regulation through chromatin compaction and decompaction is
regulated through various chromatin-remodeling complexes such as nucleosome
remodeling and histone deacetylation (NuRD) complex. NuRD is a 1 MDa
multi-subunit protein complex which comprises many different subunits, among
which histone deacetylases HDAC1/2, ATP-dependent remodeling enzymes CHD3/4,
histone chaperones RbAp46/48, CpG-binding proteins MBD2/3, the GATAD2a (p66a)
and/or GATAD2b (p66ß) and specific DNA-binding proteins MTA1/2/3. Here, we review
the currently known crystal and NMR structures of these subunits, the functional 
data and their relevance for biomedical research considering the implication of
NuRD subunits in cancer and various other diseases. The complexity of this
macromolecular assembly, and its poorly understood mode of interaction with the
nucleosome, the repeating unit of chromatin, illustrate that this complex is a
major challenge for structure-function relationship studies which will be tackled
best by an integrated biology approach.

PMID: 25796366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEBS J. 2015 May;282(9):1774-85. doi: 10.1111/febs.12972. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Towards elucidating the stability, dynamics and architecture of the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase complex by using quantitative interaction proteomics.

Kloet SL(1), Baymaz HI, Makowski M, Groenewold V, Jansen PW, Berendsen M, Niazi
H, Kops GJ, Vermeulen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is an evolutionarily
conserved chromatin-associated protein complex. Although the subunit composition 
of the mammalian complex is fairly well characterized, less is known about the
stability and dynamics of these interactions. Furthermore, detailed information
regarding protein-protein interaction surfaces within the complex is still
largely lacking. Here, we show that the NuRD complex interacts with a number of
substoichiometric zinc finger-containing proteins. Some of these interactions are
salt-sensitive (ZNF512B and SALL4), whereas others (ZMYND8) are not. The
stoichiometry of the core subunits is not affected by high salt concentrations,
indicating that the core complex is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions.
Interestingly, the RBBP4 and RBBP7 proteins are sensitive to high nonionic
detergent concentrations during affinity purification. In a subunit exchange
assay with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-treated
nuclear extracts, RBBP4 and RBBP7 were identified as dynamic core subunits of the
NuRD complex, consistent with their proposed role as histone chaperones. Finally,
using cross-linking MS, we have uncovered novel features of NuRD molecular
architecture that complement our affinity purification-MS/MS data. Altogether,
these findings extend our understanding of MBD3-NuRD structure and
stability.STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: MBD3 physically interacts with ZNF512B,
HDAC1, ZMYND8, GATAD2B, SALL4, GATAD2A, ZNF592, MTA3, ZNF687, CDK2AP1, CHD3,
ZNF532, HDAC2, MTA2, CHD4, MTA1, KPNA2, CHD5, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down (View 
interaction) CDK2AP1 physically interacts with MBD3, MTA3, HDAC2, GATAD2A, CHD4, 
CDK2AP1, MTA2, HDAC1, MTA1, CHD3, GATAD2B, MBD2, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down
(View interaction) MBD3 physically interacts with MTA2, MTA3, RBBP4, RBBP7,
HDAC2, HDAC1, CHD4, CHD3 and MTA1 by cross-linking study (View interaction).

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25123934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):3419-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431346. Epub 2012
Dec 13.

Unique features of the anti-parallel, heterodimeric coiled-coil interaction
between methyl-cytosine binding domain 2 (MBD2) homologues and GATA zinc finger
domain containing 2A (GATAD2A/p66a).

Walavalkar NM(1), Gordon N, Williams DC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Life Sciences Program, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia 23298, USA.

The methyl-cytosine binding domain 2 (MBD2)-nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase
(NuRD) complex recognizes methylated DNA and silences expression of associated
genes through histone deacetylase and nucleosome remodeling functions. Our
previous structural work demonstrated that a coiled-coil interaction between MBD2
and GATA zinc finger domain containing 2A (GATAD2A/p66a) proteins recruits the
chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein (CHD4/Mi2ß) to the NuRD complex and is 
necessary for MBD2-mediated DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing in vivo
(Gnanapragasam, M. N., Scarsdale, J. N., Amaya, M. L., Webb, H. D., Desai, M. A.,
Walavalkar, N. M., Wang, S. Z., Zu Zhu, S., Ginder, G. D., and Williams, D. C.,
Jr. (2011) p66a-MBD2 coiled-coil interaction and recruitment of Mi-2 are critical
for globin gene silencing by the MBD2-NuRD complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 7487-7492). The p66a-MBD2 interaction differs from most coiled-coils studied
to date by forming an anti-parallel heterodimeric complex between two peptides
that are largely monomeric in isolation. To further characterize unique features 
of this complex that drive heterodimeric specificity and high affinity binding,
we carried out biophysical analyses of MBD2 and the related homologues MBD3,
MBD3-like protein 1 (MBD3L1), and MBD3-like protein 2 (MBD3L2) as well as
specific mutations that modify charge-charge interactions and helical propensity 
of the coiled-coil domains. Analytical ultracentrifugation analyses show that the
individual peptides remain monomeric in isolation even at 300 µM in concentration
for MBD2. Circular dichroism analyses demonstrate a direct correlation between
helical content of the coiled-coil domains in isolation and binding affinity for 
p66a. Furthermore, complementary electrostatic surface potentials and inherent
helical content of each peptide are necessary to maintain high-affinity
association. These factors lead to a binding affinity hierarchy of p66a for the
different MBD2 homologues (MBD2 ˜ MBD3 > MBD3L1 ˜ MBD3L2) and suggest a
hierarchical regulatory model in tissue and life cycle stage-specific silencing
by NuRD complexes.

PMCID: PMC3561560
PMID: 23239876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar 9;90(3):410-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.022. Epub
2012 Feb 9.

Large-scale gene-centric meta-analysis across 39 studies identifies type 2
diabetes loci.

Saxena R, Elbers CC, Guo Y, Peter I, Gaunt TR, Mega JL, Lanktree MB, Tare A,
Castillo BA, Li YR, Johnson T, Bruinenberg M, Gilbert-Diamond D, Rajagopalan R,
Voight BF, Balasubramanyam A, Barnard J, Bauer F, Baumert J, Bhangale T, Böhm BO,
Braund PS, Burton PR, Chandrupatla HR, Clarke R, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Crook ED,
Davey-Smith G, Day IN, de Boer A, de Groot MC, Drenos F, Ferguson J, Fox CS,
Furlong CE, Gibson Q, Gieger C, Gilhuijs-Pederson LA, Glessner JT, Goel A, Gong
Y, Grant SF, Grobbee DE, Hastie C, Humphries SE, Kim CE, Kivimaki M, Kleber M,
Meisinger C, Kumari M, Langaee TY, Lawlor DA, Li M, Lobmeyer MT, Maitland-van der
Zee AH, Meijs MF, Molony CM, Morrow DA, Murugesan G, Musani SK, Nelson CP,
Newhouse SJ, O'Connell JR, Padmanabhan S, Palmen J, Patel SR, Pepine CJ,
Pettinger M, Price TS, Rafelt S, Ranchalis J, Rasheed A, Rosenthal E, Ruczinski
I, Shah S, Shen H, Silbernagel G, Smith EN, Spijkerman AW, Stanton A, Steffes MW,
Thorand B, Trip M, van der Harst P, van der A DL, van Iperen EP, van Setten J,
van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Verweij N, Wolffenbuttel BH, Young T, Zafarmand MH,
Zmuda JM; Look AHEAD Research Group; DIAGRAM consortium, Boehnke M, Altshuler D, 
McCarthy M, Kao WH, Pankow JS, Cappola TP, Sever P, Poulter N, Caulfield M,
Dominiczak A, Shields DC, Bhatt DL, Zhang L, Curtis SP, Danesh J, Casas JP, van
der Schouw YT, Onland-Moret NC, Doevendans PA, Dorn GW 2nd, Farrall M, FitzGerald
GA, Hamsten A, Hegele R, Hingorani AD, Hofker MH, Huggins GS, Illig T, Jarvik GP,
Johnson JA, Klungel OH, Knowler WC, Koenig W, März W, Meigs JB, Melander O,
Munroe PB, Mitchell BD, Bielinski SJ, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Rich SS, Rotter JI,
Saleheen D, Samani NJ, Schadt EE, Shuldiner AR, Silverstein R, Kottke-Marchant K,
Talmud PJ, Watkins H, Asselbergs FW, de Bakker PI, McCaffery J, Wijmenga C,
Sabatine MS, Wilson JG, Reiner A, Bowden DW, Hakonarson H, Siscovick DS, Keating 
BJ.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr 6;90(4):753. Sever, Peter [added]; Poulter, Neil [added]
Bhatt, Deepak [corrected to Bhatt, Deepak L]; Asselbergs, Folkert [corrected to
Asselbergs, Folkert W].

To identify genetic factors contributing to type 2 diabetes (T2D), we performed
large-scale meta-analyses by using a custom ~50,000 SNP genotyping array (the
ITMAT-Broad-CARe array) with ~2000 candidate genes in 39 multiethnic
population-based studies, case-control studies, and clinical trials totaling
17,418 cases and 70,298 controls. First, meta-analysis of 25 studies comprising
14,073 cases and 57,489 controls of European descent confirmed eight established 
T2D loci at genome-wide significance. In silico follow-up analysis of putative
association signals found in independent genome-wide association studies
(including 8,130 cases and 38,987 controls) performed by the DIAGRAM consortium
identified a T2D locus at genome-wide significance (GATAD2A/CILP2/PBX4; p = 5.7 ×
10(-9)) and two loci exceeding study-wide significance (SREBF1, and TH/INS; p <
2.4 × 10(-6)). Second, meta-analyses of 1,986 cases and 7,695 controls from eight
African-American studies identified study-wide-significant (p = 2.4 × 10(-7))
variants in HMGA2 and replicated variants in TCF7L2 (p = 5.1 × 10(-15)). Third,
conditional analysis revealed multiple known and novel independent signals within
five T2D-associated genes in samples of European ancestry and within HMGA2 in
African-American samples. Fourth, a multiethnic meta-analysis of all 39 studies
identified T2D-associated variants in BCL2 (p = 2.1 × 10(-8)). Finally, a
composite genetic score of SNPs from new and established T2D signals was
significantly associated with increased risk of diabetes in African-American,
Hispanic, and Asian populations. In summary, large-scale meta-analysis involving 
a dense gene-centric approach has uncovered additional loci and variants that
contribute to T2D risk and suggests substantial overlap of T2D association
signals across multiple ethnic groups.

Copyright Â© 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3309185
PMID: 22325160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2007 Jun 13;2(6):e519.

Mutants in the mouse NuRD/Mi2 component P66alpha are embryonic lethal.

Marino S(1), Nusse R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Developmental Biology, Beckman 
Center, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: The NuRD/Mi2 chromatin complex is involved in histone modifications
and contains a large number of subunits, including the p66 protein. There are two
mouse and human p66 paralogs, p66alpha and p66beta. The functions of these genes 
are not clear, in part because there are no mutants available, except in
invertebrate model systems.
METHODOLOGY: We made loss of function mutants in the mouse p66alpha gene
(mp66alpha, official name Gatad2a, MGI:2384585). We found that mp66alpha is
essential for development, as mutant embryos die around day 10 of embryogenesis. 
The gene is not required for normal blastocyst development or for implantation.
The phenotype of mutant embryos and the pattern of gene expression in mutants are
consistent with a role of mp66alpha in gene silencing.
CONCLUSION: mp66alpha is an essential gene, required for early mouse development.
The lethal phenotype supports a role in execution of methylated DNA silencing.

PMCID: PMC1885217
PMID: 17565372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


