
1. Differentiation. 2016 Mar 21. pii: S0301-4681(15)30098-0. doi:
10.1016/j.diff.2016.02.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Key transcription factors in the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Almalki SG(1), Agrawal DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine,
Omaha, NE, USA. (2)Clinical and Translational Science, Creighton University
School of Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: dkagr@creighton.edu.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells that represent a promising
source for regenerative medicine. MSCs are capable of osteogenic, chondrogenic,
adipogenic and myogenic differentiation. Efficacy of differentiated MSCs to
regenerate cells in the injured tissues requires the ability to maintain the
differentiation toward the desired cell fate. Since MSCs represent an attractive 
source for autologous transplantation, cellular and molecular signaling pathways 
and micro-environmental changes have been studied in order to understand the role
of cytokines, chemokines, and transcription factors on the differentiation of
MSCs. The differentiation of MSC into a mesenchymal lineage is genetically
manipulated and promoted by specific transcription factors associated with a
particular cell lineage. Recent studies have explored the integration of
transcription factors, including Runx2, Sox9, PPAR<U+03B3>, MyoD, GATA4, and GATA6 in
the differentiation of MSCs. Therefore, the overexpression of a single
transcription factor in MSCs may promote trans-differentiation into specific cell
lineage, which can be used for treatment of some diseases. In this review, we
critically discussed and evaluated the role of transcription factors and related 
signaling pathways that affect the differentiation of MSCs toward adipocytes,
chondrocytes, osteocytes, skeletal muscle cells, cardiomyocytes, and smooth
muscle cells.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27012163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2015 Nov-Dec;77(6):735-41.

Effect of Structural Changes in Proteins Derived from GATA4 Nonsynonymous Single 
Nucleotide Polymorphisms in Congenital Heart Disease.

Manjegowda DS(1), Karunakar P(2), Ramachandra NB(3).

Author information: 
(1)NUCSER, K S Hegde Medical Academy, NITTE University, Deralakatte,
Mangalore-575 018, India. (2)Department of Biotechnology, PES Institute of
Technology, BSK III Stage, Bengaluru-560 085, India, India. (3)Department of
Studies in Zoology, Genomics Laboratory, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri,
Mysore-570 006, India.

Congenital heart disease is the most common type of birth defect. The single
nucleotide polymorphism in GATA4 is associated with various congenital heart
disease phenotypes. In the present study, we analysed the nonsynonymous single
nucleotide polymorphism of GATA4, which are involved in congenital heart disease 
by predicting the changes in protein structures. Total of 49 nonsynonymous single
nucleotide polymorphisms of GATA4 was screened from congenital heart disease
patients of Mysore and also globally reported nonsynonymous single nucleotide
polymorphisms. To understand the role of nonsynonymous single nucleotide
polymorphisms, we mutated the sequence and translated into amino acids. Further
the mutated protein secondary structure is predicted and tertiary structure is
predicted using homology modeling. The quantitative evaluation of protein
structure quality was verified with Volume Area Dihedral Angle Reporter server.
Results revealed the secondary, tertiary structural changes along with changes in
free energy of folding, volume and accessible surface area. Thus, the structural 
changes in the mutated proteins impaired the normal function of GATA4.

PMCID: PMC4778234
PMID: 26997702  [PubMed]


3. Endocrinology. 2016 Mar 14:en20151927. [Epub ahead of print]

GATA4 regulates blood-testis barrier function and lactate metabolism in mouse
Sertoli cells.

Schrade A(1,)(2), Kyrönlahti A(1), Akinrinade O(1), Pihlajoki M(1), Fischer S(3),
Rodriguez VM(2), Otte K(3), Velagapudi V(4), Toppari J(5), Wilson DB(2,)(6),
Heikinheimo M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, a University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Departments of Pediatrics e and Developmental
Biology. (3)Institute of Applied Biotechnology, b University of Applied Sciences 
Biberach, Biberach, Germany. (4)Metabolomics Unit, c Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Departments of
Physiology and Pediatrics, d University of Turku and Turku University Hospital,
Turku, Finland. (6)Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Conditional deletion of Gata4 in Sertoli cells (SCs) of adult mice has been shown
to increase permeability of the blood-testis barrier (BTB) and disrupt
spermatogenesis. To gain insight into the molecular underpinnings of these
phenotypic abnormalities, we assessed the impact of Gata4 gene silencing in cell 
culture models. Microarray hybridization identified genes dysregulated by
siRNA-mediated inhibition of Gata4 in TM4 cells, an immortalized mouse SC line.
Differentially expressed genes were validated by qRT-PCR analysis of primary
cultures of Gata4(flox/flox) mouse SCs that had been subjected to cre-mediated
recombination in vitro. Depletion of GATA4 in TM4 cells and primary SCs was
associated with altered expression of genes involved in key facets of BTB
maintenance, including tight/adherens junction formation (Tjp1, Cldn12, Vcl, Tnc,
Csk) and extracellular matrix reorganization (Lamc1, Col4a1, Col4a5, Mmp10,
Mmp23, Timp2). Western blotting and immunocytochemistry demonstrated reduced
levels of TJP1, a prototypical tight junction protein, in GATA4-depleted cells.
These changes were accompanied by a loss of morphologically-recognizable
junctional complexes and a decline in trans-epithelial membrane resistance.
Furthermore, Gata4 gene silencing was associated with altered expression of Hk1, 
Gpi1, Pfkp, Pgam1, Gls2, Pdk3, Pkd4, and Ldhb, genes regulating the production of
lactate, a key nutrient that SCs provide to developing germ cells. Comprehensive 
metabolomic profiling demonstrated impaired lactate production in GATA4-deficient
SCs. We conclude that GATA4 plays a pivotal role in the regulation of BTB
function and lactate metabolism in mouse SCs.

PMID: 26974005  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. BMB Rep. 2016 Mar 14. pii: 3488. [Epub ahead of print]

GATA4 negatively regulates bone sialoprotein expression in osteoblasts.

Song I, Jeong BC, Choi YJ, Chung YS, Kim N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chonnam
National University Medical School, Gwangju 61469, Korea.

GATA4 has been reported to act as a negative regulator in osteoblast
differentiation by inhibiting Dlx5 transactivation of Runx2 via the attenuation
of the binding ability of Dlx5 to the Runx2 promoter region. Herein, we determine
the role of GATA4 in the regulation of bone sialoprotein (Bsp) in osteoblasts.
Overexpression of Runx2 or Sox9 induced Bsp expression in osteoblastic cells.
Silencing GATA4 further enhanced Runx2- and Sox9-mediated Bsp promoter activity, 
whereas GATA4 overexpression down-regulated Bsp promoter activity mediated by
Runx2 and Sox9. GATA4 interacted with Runx2 and Sox9. GATA4 attenuated the
binding ability of Runx2 and Sox9 to Bsp promoter region. Our data suggest that
GATA4 acts as a negative regulator of Bsp expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 26973342  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Stem Cell Res. 2016 Feb 23;16(2):522-530. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2016.02.032. [Epub
ahead of print]

Generation of electrophysiologically functional cardiomyocytes from mouse induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Wang H(1), Xi Y(2), Zheng Y(3), Wang X(4), Cooney AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dell Pediatric Research Institute, University of
Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, 1400 Barbara Jordan Blvd., Austin, TX 78723,
USA. (2)Electrophysiology Research Laboratory, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA. (4)Stem Cell Center, Texas Heart Institute,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Dell Pediatric Research
Institute, University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, 1400 Barbara Jordan
Blvd., Austin, TX 78723, USA. Electronic address:
austin.cooney@austin.utexas.edu.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can efficiently differentiate into the three
germ layers similar to those formed by differentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. 
This provides a new source of cells in which to establish preclinical allogeneic 
transplantation models. Our iPS cells were generated from mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) transfected with the Yamanaka factors, the four transcription 
factors (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc), without antibiotic selection or MEF
feeders. After the formation of embryoid bodies (EBs), iPS cells spontaneously
differentiated into Flk1-positive cardiac progenitors and cardiomyocytes
expressing cardiac-specific markers such as alpha sarcomeric actinin (a-actinin),
cardiac alpha myosin heavy chain (a-MHC), cardiac troponin T (cTnT), and connexin
43 (CX43), as well as cardiac transcription factors Nk2 homebox 5 (Nkx2.5) and
gata binding protein 4 (gata4). The electrophysiological activity of iPS
cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPS-CMs) was detected in beating cell clusters with 
optical mapping and RH237 a voltage-sensitive dye, and in single contracting
cells with patch-clamp technology. Incompletely differentiated iPS cells formed
teratomas when transplanted into a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse 
model of myocardial infarction. Our results show that somatic cells can be
reprogrammed into pluripotent stem cells, which in turn spontaneously
differentiate into electrophysiologically functional mature cardiomyocytes
expressing cardiac-specific makers, and that these cells can potentially be used 
to repair myocardial infarction (MI) in the future.

Copyright © 2016 University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26972055  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2016 Mar 8;18:e3. doi: 10.1017/erm.2016.2.

The emerging role of GATA transcription factors in development and disease.

Lentjes MH(1), Niessen HE(1), Akiyama Y(2), de Bruïne AP(1), Melotte V(1), van
Engeland M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology,GROW - School for Oncology and Developmental
Biology,Maastricht University Medical Center,Maastricht,The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Oncology,Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry,Tokyo Medical and Dental University,Tokyo,Japan.

The GATA family of transcription factors consists of six proteins (GATA1-6) which
are involved in a variety of physiological and pathological processes. GATA1/2/3 
are required for differentiation of mesoderm and ectoderm-derived tissues,
including the haematopoietic and central nervous system. GATA4/5/6 are implicated
in development and differentiation of endoderm- and mesoderm-derived tissues such
as induction of differentiation of embryonic stem cells, cardiovascular
embryogenesis and guidance of epithelial cell differentiation in the adult.

PMID: 26953528  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Signal. 2016 Mar 2;28(6):585-594. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.019. [Epub 
ahead of print]

PKG-1a mediates GATA4 transcriptional activity.

Ma Y(1), Wang J(2), Yu Y(3), Schwartz RJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, 1838 North Guangzhou Ave, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China; Hainan 
Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Reproductive Medicine and Genetic Research,
Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical University, Hainan Medical University,
Haikou, Hainan 570102, China; The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas 
A&M University System Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Texas
Heart Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838 North Guangzhou
Ave, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China. Electronic address:
yuyh1010@hotmail.com. (4)Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204,
USA. Electronic address: rjschwartz@uh.edu.

GATA4, a zinc-finger transcription factor, is central for cardiac development and
diseases. Here we show that GATA4 transcriptional activity is mediated by cell
signaling via cGMP dependent PKG-1a activity. Protein kinase G (PKG), a
serine/tyrosine specific kinase is the major effector of cGMP signaling. We
observed enhanced transcriptional activity elicited by co-expressed GATA4 and
PKG-1a. Phosphorylation of GATA4 by PKG-1a was detected on serine 261 (S261),
while the C-terminal activation domain of GATA4 associated with PKG-1a. GATA4's
DNA binding activity was enhanced by PKG-1a via by both phosphorylation and
physical association. More importantly, a number of human disease-linked GATA4
mutants exhibited impaired S261 phosphorylation, pointing to defective S261
phosphorylation in the elaboration of human heart diseases. We showed S261
phosphorylation was favored by PKG-1a but not by PKA, and several other kinase
signaling pathways such as MAPK and PKC. Our observations demonstrate that
cGMP-PKG signaling mediates transcriptional activity of GATA4 and links defective
GATA4 and PKG-1a mutations to the development of human heart disease.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26946174  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Mar 3;18(3):382-95. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.02.003.

Bmi1 Is a Key Epigenetic Barrier to Direct Cardiac Reprogramming.

Zhou Y(1), Wang L(1), Vaseghi HR(1), Liu Z(1), Lu R(2), Alimohamadi S(1), Yin
C(1), Fu JD(3), Wang GG(4), Liu J(1), Qian L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; McAllister Heart Institute, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, Heart and Vascular Research Center, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44109, USA. (4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; McAllister Heart Institute, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Direct reprogramming of induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) suffers from low efficiency
and requires extensive epigenetic repatterning, although the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. To address these issues, we screened for
epigenetic regulators of iCM reprogramming and found that reducing levels of
the polycomb complex gene Bmi1 significantly enhanced induction of beating iCMs
from neonatal and adult mouse fibroblasts. The inhibitory role of Bmi1 in iCM
reprogramming is mediated through direct interactions with regulatory regions of 
cardiogenic genes, rather than regulation of cell proliferation. Reduced Bmi1
expression corresponded with increased levels of the active histone mark H3K4me3 
and reduced levels of repressive H2AK119ub at cardiogenic loci, and de-repression
of cardiogenic gene expression during iCM conversion. Furthermore, Bmi1 deletion 
could substitute for Gata4 during iCM reprogramming. Thus, Bmi1 acts as a
critical epigenetic barrier to iCM production. Bypassing this barrier simplifies 
iCM generation and increases yield, potentially streamlining iCM production for
therapeutic purposes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4779178 [Available on 2017-03-03]
PMID: 26942853  [PubMed - in process]


9. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: S0012-1606(15)30286-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.024. [Epub ahead of print]

WNT/ß-catenin and p27/FOXL2 differentially regulate supporting cell proliferation
in the developing ovary.

Gustin SE(1), Hogg K(1), Stringer JM(1), Rastetter RH(2), Pelosi E(3), Miles
DC(1), Sinclair AH(4), Wilhelm D(2), Western PS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research and
Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH-IRP, Baltimore, USA. (4)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal Children's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (5)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Hudson 
Institute of Medical Research and Department of Molecular and Translational
Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
patrick.western@hudson.org.au.

Sexual development is initiated through differentiation of testicular Sertoli
cells or ovarian granulosa cells. Although these supporting cells are considered 
to develop from common bipotential precursors, recent evidence suggests that
distinct supporting cell populations are present in the ovary, with one providing
granulosa cells of the medullary follicles and the other providing granulosa
cells of the cortical follicles, the latter of which support lifelong fertility. 
Here, we demonstrate that XX fetal gonads contain GATA4 expressing supporting
cells that either enter mitotic arrest, or remain proliferative. Blocking WNT
signalling reduces XX supporting cell proliferation, while stabilising ß-catenin 
signalling promotes proliferation, indicating that the renewal of pre-granulosa
cells is dependent on WNT/ß-catenin signalling in the proliferative supporting
cell population. In contrast, XX supporting cells express p27 and FOXL2 and are
maintained in mitotic arrest. Although FOXL2 is required for maintaining high
levels of p27 expression, it is dispensable for entry and maintenance of mitotic 
arrest in XX supporting cells. Combined our data suggest that both medullary and 
cortical precursors arise from a common GATA4 expressing cell type. In addition, 
this work indicates that a balance between supporting cell self-renewal and
differentiation is maintained in the developing ovary by relative WNT/ß-catenin
and p27/FOXL2 activities. This study provides significant new insights into the
origin and formation of ovarian follicles and evidence supporting a common fetal 
origin of medullary and cortical granulosa cells.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26939755  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar 3:jc20153776. [Epub ahead of print]

Variants in FSHB are associated with polycystic ovary syndrome and luteinizing
hormone level in Han Chinese women.

Tian Y(1,)(2), Zhao H(1), Chen H(3), Peng Y(1), Cui L(1), Du Y(2), Wang Z(1), Xu 
J(3,)(4), Chen ZJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Jinan, China; National Research Center for Assisted
Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, China; The Key laboratory for 
Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, China; Shandong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Jinan, China. (2)Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and
Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai, China. (3)Center for Genomic Translational
Medicine and Prevention, Fudan School of Public Health, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (4)Program for Personalized Cancer Care and Department of
Surgery, NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, IL, U.S.A.

CONTEXT: A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) has identified 3
susceptibility loci (8p32.1, 11p14.1, and 9q22.32) for PCOS in women of European 
ancestry. The 9q22.32 loci was previously found in our Chinese PCOS GWAS.
Replication of the other two loci is necessary to determine whether the same
variants confer risk to PCOS in Han Chinese women.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of the European GWAS loci on PCOS
susceptibility in Han Chinese women.
DESIGN: Genetic association study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENTS: 1601 PCOS cases, 1238 age-matched controls. Interventions and Main
Outcome Measure: After screening of the regions that cover 500kb upstream and
downstream of the two SNPs using our previous Chinese GWAS data, rs11031010,
located in the region of follicle-stimulating hormone B polypeptide (FSHB) gene, 
was selected for further replication. Whereas the other SNPs near rs804279
(GATA4/NEIL2) were excluded based on our previous GWAS data. Then, the variant
rs11031010 was genotyped in an independent cohort and the associations with PCOS,
endocrine and metabolic traits were assessed.
RESULTS: In the current replication study, rs11031010 was associated with PCOS in
Han Chinese women (P = 2.76×10(-3)), even after adjustment for age and BMI.
Meta-analysis with our previous GWAS data showed that the allele frequency
difference of rs11031010 between PCOS and controls reached genome-wide
significance (P = 4.27×10(-8)). PCOS women with AA and AC genotype had a
significantly higher LH level than individuals carrying CC genotype (P
=1.60×10(-4)). The genetic risk score based on total sixteen Chinese PCOS risk
SNPs, calculated by total number of risk alleles for each subject, was associated
with the diagnosis of PCOS (P < 1.00×10(-4)).
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in FSHB gene are associated with PCOS and LH level in Han
Chinese women. FSHB is thus likely to play an important role in the etiology of
PCOS, regardless of ethnicities.

PMID: 26938199  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):780-6. doi: 10.1242/dev.127217.

GATA4 and GATA6 regulate pancreatic endoderm identity through inhibition of
hedgehog signaling.

Xuan S(1), Sussel L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA lgs2@cumc.columbia.edu.

GATA4 and GATA6 are zinc finger transcription factors that have important
functions in several mesodermal and endodermal organs, including heart, liver and
pancreas. In humans, heterozygous mutations of either factor are associated with 
pancreatic agenesis; however, homozygous deletion of both Gata4 and Gata6 is
necessary to disrupt pancreas development in mice. In this study, we demonstrate 
that arrested pancreatic development in Gata4(fl/fl); Gata6(fl/fl); Pdx1:Cre
(pDKO) embryos is accompanied by the transition of ventral and dorsal pancreatic 
fates into intestinal or stomach lineages, respectively. These results indicate
that GATA4 and GATA6 play essential roles in maintaining pancreas identity by
regulating foregut endodermal fates. Remarkably, pancreatic anlagen derived from 
pDKO embryos also display a dramatic upregulation of hedgehog pathway components,
which are normally absent from the presumptive pancreatic endoderm. Consistent
with the erroneous activation of hedgehog signaling, we demonstrate that GATA4
and GATA6 are able to repress transcription through the sonic hedgehog (Shh)
endoderm-specific enhancer MACS1 and that GATA-binding sites within this enhancer
are necessary for this repressive activity. These studies establish the
importance of GATA4/6-mediated inhibition of hedgehog signaling as a major
mechanism regulating pancreatic endoderm specification during patterning of the
gut tube.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26932670  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mymensingh Med J. 2016 Jan;25(1):79-84.

The Aspect of NK2 Transcription Factor Related Locus-5 (NKX2.5) Gene Mutations in
Bangladeshi Atrial Septal Defect (ASD) patients and 2D Relationship with their
Age.

Roy RR(1), Sultana GN, Begum R, Shahinuzzaman AD, Sharif MI.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Ratna Rani Roy, Assistant Professor, Department of Anatomy, Dr. Sirajul
Islam Medical College, Moghbazar, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a developmental defect of the heart which arises
from the congenital abnormality of interatrial septum that perturbs the normal
blood flow. Development of the heart is a complex biological process regulated by
numerous genetic and environmental factors. During this process DNA binding
proteins Myocardin, NKX2.5 (NK2 Transcription Factor Related Locus-5) and GATA4
(GATA Binding Protein-4) function by binding to SRF (Serum Response Factor) which
is also a key regulator of myogenic terminal differentiation and frequently
results in mitogenesis. Several studies suggest that mutations in the homeodomain
containing transcription factor, NKX2.5, is implicated with atrial septal defect.
This cross sectional descriptive study was done to investigate the frequency of
NKX2.5 gene mutations among the patient with ASD who were undergoing surgical
repair at the National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases (NICVD) and National 
Heart Foundation and Research Institute (NHF&RI), Dhaka from July 2010 to June
2011. Patients presented with ASD at any age of both sexes were selected as study
population. We found six distinct polymorphic sites among Bangladeshi population.
Among six polymorphic sites, two were located at position 487 and 495. These were
present in around 80% of the affected individuals. However they were not present 
in control population. Our study also revealed that mutations present in the
downstream sites or towards the end of the genes are restricted to older people, 
whereas mutations present towards the 5' site is common to population of all
ages. This interesting relationship has encouraged us to raise two new
hypotheses.

PMID: 26931254  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Feb 25. pii: S1934-5909(16)00011-4. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2016.01.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct Reprogramming of Hepatic Myofibroblasts into Hepatocytes In Vivo
Attenuates Liver Fibrosis.

Song G(1), Pacher M(2), Balakrishnan A(2), Yuan Q(2), Tsay HC(3), Yang D(4),
Reetz J(5), Brandes S(2), Dai Z(4), Pützer BM(5), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(6), Steinemann 
D(7), Luedde T(8), Schwabe RF(9), Manns MP(10), Schöler HR(11), Schambach A(12), 
Cantz T(13), Ott M(14), Sharma AD(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver 
Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover
30625, Germany; Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, Cluster of
Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Twincore Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625, Germany. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver Regeneration,
Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; 
Twincore Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625,
Germany. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA 
in Liver Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (5)Institute for Experimental Gene Therapy and Cancer
Research, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock 18057, Germany. (6)Group of 
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, San Sebastián 20014, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
Bilbao 48013, Spain. (7)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (8)Division of Hepatobiliary Oncology, Department of
Medicine III, University Hospital RWTH, Aachen 52074, Germany. (9)Department of
Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (10)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (11)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster 48149, Germany. (12)Institute
for Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell
Biology, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, 
Germany. (14)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Twincore Centre for
Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625, Germany. Electronic
address: ott.michael@mh-hannover.de. (15)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; 
Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence
REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany. Electronic address:
sharma.amar@mh-hannover.de.

Direct induction of induced hepatocytes (iHeps) from fibroblasts holds potential 
as a strategy for regenerative medicine but until now has only been shown in
culture settings. Here, we describe in vivo iHep formation using transcription
factor induction and genetic fate tracing in mouse models of chronic liver
disease. We show that ectopic expression of the transcription factors FOXA3,
GATA4, HNF1A, and HNF4A from a polycistronic lentiviral vector converts mouse
myofibroblasts into cells with a hepatocyte phenotype. In vivo expression of the 
same set of transcription factors from a p75 neurotrophin receptor peptide
(p75NTRp)-tagged adenovirus enabled the generation of hepatocyte-like cells from 
myofibroblasts in fibrotic mouse livers and reduced liver fibrosis. We have
therefore been able to convert pro-fibrogenic myofibroblasts in the liver into
hepatocyte-like cells with positive functional benefits. This direct in vivo
reprogramming approach may open new avenues for the treatment of chronic liver
disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923201  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Int J Med Sci. 2016 Jan 23;13(1):60-7. doi: 10.7150/ijms.13264. eCollection 2016.

Prevalence and Spectrum of TBX5 Mutation in Patients with Lone Atrial
Fibrillation.

Wang ZC(1), Ji WH(2), Ruan CW(1), Liu XY(3), Qiu XB(4), Yuan F(4), Li RG(4), Xu
YJ(4), Liu X(4), Huang RT(5), Xue S(5), Yang YQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Eighth People's Hospital, 8 Caobao Road,
Shanghai 200235, China; (2)2. Department of Internal Medicine, Huajing Community 
Health Service Center of Xu Hui Distric, 180 Jianhua Road, Shanghai 200231,
China; (3)3. Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, 389 Xincun Road, Shanghai 200065, China; (4)4. Department of
Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 241 West
Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China; (5)5. Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200127, China; (6)4. Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China;; 6.
Department of Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China;; 7.
Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common type of cardiac rhythm disturbance
encountered in clinical practice, is associated with substantially increased
morbidity and mortality. Aggregating evidence demonstrates that abnormal
cardiovascular development is involved in the pathogenesis of AF. A recent study 
has revealed that the TBX5 gene, which encodes a T-box transcription factor key
to cardiovascular development, was associated with AF and atypical Holt-Oram
syndrome. However, the prevalence and spectrum of TBX5 mutation in patients with 
lone AF remain unclear. In this study, the coding regions and splicing junction
sites of TBX5 were sequenced in 192 unrelated patients with lone AF and 300
unrelated ethnically-matched healthy individuals used as controls. The causative 
potential of the identified TBX5 variation was evaluated by MutationTaster and
PolyPhen-2. The functional effect of the mutant TBX5 was assayed by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX5
mutation, p.H170D, was identified in a patient, with a mutational prevalence of
approximately 0.52%. This mutation, which was absent in the 300 control
individuals, altered the amino acid completely conserved evolutionarily across
species, and was predicted to be disease-causing. Functional deciphers showed
that the mutant TBX5 was associated with significantly reduced transcriptional
activity when compared with its wild-type counterpart. Furthermore, the mutation 
significantly decreased the synergistic activation between TBX5 and NKX2-5 or
GATA4. The findings expand the mutational spectrum of TBX5 linked to AF and
provide new evidence that dysfunctional TBX5 may contribute to lone AF.

PMCID: PMC4747871
PMID: 26917986  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Feb 19;93:57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.01.013. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Shh coreceptor Cdo is required for efficient cardiomyogenesis of pluripotent
stem cells.

Jeong MH(1), Leem YE(1), Kim HJ(2), Kang K(3), Cho H(4), Kang JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, 2066, Seobu-Ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyunggi-do 440-746, Republic of
Korea; Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Physiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 2066,
Seobu-Ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyunggi-do 440-746, Republic of Korea; Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 2066,
Seobu-Ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyunggi-do 440-746, Republic of Korea; Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Physiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 2066, Seobu-Ro,
Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyunggi-do 440-746, Republic of Korea; Samsung Biomedical
Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
hanacho@skku.edu. (5)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, 2066, Seobu-Ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyunggi-do
440-746, Republic of Korea; Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: kangj01@skku.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays an important role for early heart
development, such as heart looping and cardiomyogenesis of pluripotent stem
cells. A multifunctional receptor Cdo functions as a Shh coreceptor together with
Boc and Gas1 to activate Shh signaling and these coreceptors seem to play
compensatory roles in early heart development. Thus in this study, we examined
the role of Cdo in cardiomyogenesis by utilizing an in vitro differentiation of
pluripotent stem cells. Here we show that Cdo is required for efficient
cardiomyogenesis of pluripotent stem cells by activation of Shh signaling. Cdo is
induced concurrently with Shh signaling activation upon induction of
cardiomyogenesis of P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells. Cdo-depleted P19 EC and
Cdo(-/-) mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells display decreased expression of key
cardiac regulators, including Gata4, Nkx2.5 and Mef2c and this decrease coincides
with reduced Shh signaling activities. Furthermore Cdo deficiency causes a stark 
reduction in formation of mature contractile cardiomyocytes. This defect in
cardiomyogenesis is overcome by reactivation of Shh signaling at the early
specification stage of cardiomyogenesis. The Shh agonist treatment restores
differentiation capacities of Cdo-deficient ES cells into contractile
cardiomyocytes by recovering both the expression of early cardiac regulators and 
structural genes such as cardiac troponin T and Connexin 43. Therefore Cdo is
required for efficient cardiomyogenesis of pluripotent stem cells and an
excellent target to improve the differentiation potential of stem cells for
generation of transplantable cells to treat cardiomyopathies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26906632  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 23;6:21538. doi: 10.1038/srep21538.

Cardiac sodium channel regulator MOG1 regulates cardiac morphogenesis and rhythm.

Zhou J(1), Wang L(1), Zuo M(1), Wang X(1), Ahmed AS(1), Chen Q(2), Wang
QK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Cardio-X 
Center, College of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome
Research, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Center 
for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic; Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
USA.

MOG1 was initially identified as a protein that interacts with the small GTPase
Ran involved in transport of macromolecules into and out of the nucleus. In
addition, we have established that MOG1 interacts with the cardiac sodium channel
Nav1.5 and regulates cell surface trafficking of Nav1.5. Here we used zebrafish
as a model system to study the in vivo physiological role of MOG1. Knockdown of
mog1 expression in zebrafish embryos significantly decreased the heart rate (HR).
Consistently, the HR increases in embryos with over-expression of human MOG1.
Compared with wild type MOG1 or control EGFP, mutant MOG1 with mutation E83D
associated with Brugada syndrome significantly decreases the HR. Interestingly,
knockdown of mog1 resulted in abnormal cardiac looping during embryogenesis.
Mechanistically, knockdown of mog1 decreases expression of hcn4 involved in the
regulation of the HR, and reduces expression of nkx2.5, gata4 and hand2 involved 
in cardiac morphogenesis. These data for the first time revealed a novel role
that MOG1, a nucleocytoplasmic transport protein, plays in cardiac physiology and
development.

PMCID: PMC4763225
PMID: 26903377  [PubMed - in process]


17. Development. 2016 Mar 15;143(6):936-49. doi: 10.1242/dev.130971. Epub 2016 Feb
18.

GATA4 regulates Fgf16 to promote heart repair after injury.

Yu W(1), Huang X(1), Tian X(1), Zhang H(1), He L(1), Wang Y(1), Nie Y(2), Hu
S(2), Lin Z(3), Zhou B(4), Pu W(3), Lui KO(5), Zhou B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Departments of
Genetics, Pediatrics and Medicine (Cardiology), Albert Einstein College of
Medicine of Yeshiva University, 1301 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(5)Department of Chemical Pathology, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong 
SAR, 999077 China. (6)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for
Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate
School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200031, China Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience,
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai,
201210 China zhoubin@sibs.ac.cn.

Although the mammalian heart can regenerate during the neonatal stage, this
endogenous regenerative capacity is lost with age. Importantly, replication of
cardiomyocytes has been found to be the key mechanism responsible for neonatal
cardiac regeneration. Unraveling the transcriptional regulatory network for
inducing cardiomyocyte replication will, therefore, be crucial for the
development of novel therapies to drive cardiac repair after injury. Here, we
investigated whether the key cardiac transcription factor GATA4 is required for
neonatal mouse heart regeneration. Using the neonatal mouse heart cryoinjury and 
apical resection models with an inducible loss of GATA4 specifically in
cardiomyocytes, we found severely depressed ventricular function in the
Gata4-ablated mice (mutant) after injury. This was accompanied by reduced
cardiomyocyte replication. In addition, the mutant hearts displayed impaired
coronary angiogenesis and increased hypertrophy and fibrosis after injury.
Mechanistically, we found that the paracrine factor FGF16 was significantly
reduced in the mutant hearts after injury compared with littermate controls and
was directly regulated by GATA4. Cardiac-specific overexpression of FGF16 via
adeno-associated virus subtype 9 (AAV9) in the mutant hearts partially rescued
the cryoinjury-induced cardiac hypertrophy, promoted cardiomyocyte replication
and improved heart function after injury. Altogether, our data demonstrate that
GATA4 is required for neonatal heart regeneration through regulation of Fgf16,
suggesting that paracrine factors could be of potential use in promoting
myocardial repair.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26893347  [PubMed - in process]


18. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:6029271. doi: 10.1155/2016/6029271. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Subculture of Germ Cell-Derived Colonies with GATA4-Positive Feeder Cells from
Neonatal Pig Testes.

Lee KH(1), Lee WY(2), Kim JH(1), Park CK(1), Do JT(1), Kim JH(3), Choi YS(3), Kim
NH(4), Song H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Animal Bioscience & Technology,
Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Food
Bioscience, College of Biomedical & Health Science, Konkuk University, Chungju
380-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life 
Science, CHA University, Seongnam 463-836, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Animal Science, College of Agriculture, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju
361-763, Republic of Korea.

Enrichment of spermatogonial stem cells is important for studying their
self-renewal and differentiation. Although germ cell-derived colonies (GDCs) have
been successfully cultured from neonatal pig testicular cells under 31°C
conditions, the short period of in vitro maintenance (<2 months) limited their
application to further investigations. To develop a culture method that allows
for in vitro maintenance of GDCs for long periods, we subcultured the GDCs with
freshly prepared somatic cells from neonatal pig testes as feeder cells. The
subcultured GDCs were maintained up to passage 13 with the fresh feeder cells
(FFCs) and then frozen. Eight months later, the frozen GDCs could again form the 
colonies on FFCs as shown in passages 1 to 13. Immunocytochemistry data revealed 
that the FFCs expressed GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4), which is also detected in
the cells of neonatal testes and total testicular cells, and that the expression 
of GATA4 was decreased in used old feeder cells. The subcultured GDCs in each
passage had germ and stem cell characteristics, and flow cytometric analyses
revealed that ~60% of these cells were GFRa-1 positive. In conclusion, neonatal
pig testes-derived GDCs can be maintained for long periods with GATA4-expressing 
testicular somatic cells.

PMCID: PMC4736562
PMID: 26880974  [PubMed]


19. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):357-67. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.007.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Early Developmental Perturbations in a Human Stem Cell Model of MODY5/HNF1B
Pancreatic Hypoplasia.

Teo AK(1), Lau HH(2), Valdez IA(3), Dirice E(3), Tjora E(4), Raeder H(4),
Kulkarni RN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
Discovery Research Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis
Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 117596, Singapore; Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 308232, Singapore. Electronic
address: ateo@imcb.a-star.edu.sg. (2)Discovery Research Division, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore. (3)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Clinical Science, KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (5)Section of Islet Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu.

Patients with an HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation (MODY5) typically exhibit pancreatic
hypoplasia. However, the molecular mechanisms are unknown due to inaccessibility 
of patient material and because mouse models do not fully recapitulate MODY5.
Here, we differentiated MODY5 human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into 
pancreatic progenitors, and show that the HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation causes a
compensatory increase in several pancreatic transcription factors, and
surprisingly, a decrease in PAX6 pancreatic gene expression. The lack of
suppression of PDX1, PTF1A, GATA4, and GATA6 indicates that MODY5-mediated
pancreatic hypoplasia is mechanistically independent. Overexpression studies
demonstrate that a compensatory increase in PDX1 gene expression is due to mutant
HNF1B(S148L/+) but not wild-type HNF1B or HNF1A. Furthermore, HNF1B does not
appear to directly regulate PAX6 gene expression necessary for glucose tolerance.
Our results demonstrate compensatory mechanisms in the pancreatic transcription
factor network due to mutant HNF1B(S148L/+) protein. Thus, patients typically
develop MODY5 but not neonatal diabetes despite exhibiting pancreatic hypoplasia.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788763
PMID: 26876668  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cell. 2016 Feb 25;164(5):999-1014. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Feb
11.

Complex Interdependence Regulates Heterotypic Transcription Factor Distribution
and Coordinates Cardiogenesis.

Luna-Zurita L(1), Stirnimann CU(2), Glatt S(2), Kaynak BL(1), Thomas S(3), Baudin
F(4), Samee MA(3), He D(1), Small EM(5), Mileikovsky M(6), Nagy A(7), Holloway
AK(8), Pollard KS(8), Müller CW(9), Bruneau BG(10).

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA;
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Gladstone Institute
of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (4)Structural and
Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany; UJF-EMBL-CNRS UMI 3265, Unit of Virus Host-Cell
Interactions, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France. (5)Aab Cardiovascular Research
Institute, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester,
NY 14642, USA. (6)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada. (7)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON 
M5S 1A8, Canada. (8)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco,
CA 94158, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (9)Structural and
Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: cmueller@embl.de. (10)Gladstone
Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Roddenberry
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, 
USA; Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address:
benoit.bruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Transcription factors (TFs) are thought to function with partners to achieve
specificity and precise quantitative outputs. In the developing heart,
heterotypic TF interactions, such as between the T-box TF TBX5 and the
homeodomain TF NKX2-5, have been proposed as a mechanism for human congenital
heart defects. We report extensive and complex interdependent genomic occupancy
of TBX5, NKX2-5, and the zinc finger TF GATA4 coordinately controlling cardiac
gene expression, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Interdependent binding
serves not only to co-regulate gene expression but also to prevent TFs from
distributing to ectopic loci and activate lineage-inappropriate genes. We define 
preferential motif arrangements for TBX5 and NKX2-5 cooperative binding sites,
supported at the atomic level by their co-crystal structure bound to DNA,
revealing a direct interaction between the two factors and induced DNA bending.
Complex interdependent binding mechanisms reveal tightly regulated TF genomic
distribution and define a combinatorial logic for heterotypic TF regulation of
differentiation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4769693 [Available on 2017-02-25]
PMID: 26875865  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):861-869. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Loss of GATA5 expression due to gene promoter methylation induces growth and
colony formation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Xia L(1), Gong Y(2), Zhang A(3), Cai S(3), Zeng Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Security, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (2)Health Management Institute, Chinese
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese People's Liberation Army General 
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.

GATA5 is a transcription factor that is capable of suppressing the development of
various types of human cancer. The present study investigated the expression of
GATA5 and GATA4, and examined their roles in the proliferation and colony
formation ability of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cells. The GATA4 
and GATA5 expression levels and gene promoter methylation of HCC tissue samples
from 38 patients and HCC cell lines were analyzed using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and methylation-specific PCR
(MSP), respectively. The effects of GATA4 and GATA5 overexpression on the
proliferation and colony forming ability of HCC cells were also assessed using
cell viability and colony formation assays. A luciferase reporter assay was
utilized to investigate the transcriptional interaction of GATA4 and GATA5 with
canonical Wnt signaling. The results indicated that the expression levels of
GATA4 and GATA5 were lost or reduced following methylation of gene promoters in
HCC tissues and cell lines. Treatment with a demethylating agent,
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-AZA), restored GATA4 and GATA5 expression in HCC cell
lines. Furthermore, methylation of the GATA5 promoter was observed to be
associated with the age of patients exhibiting HCC. Restoration of GATA4 and
GATA5 expression inhibited colony formation and induced apoptosis of HCC cells in
vitro. The present study concluded that the expression levels of GATA4 and GATA5 
were reduced in HCC tissues and cell lines. Treatment with 5-AZA restored GATA4
and GATA5 expression in HCC cell lines, suppressing tumor cell growth and colony 
formation, as well as inducing apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4727174
PMID: 26870297  [PubMed]


22. G3 (Bethesda). 2016 Feb 10. pii: g3.115.026518. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.026518. [Epub
ahead of print]

A HAND2 Loss-of-Function Mutation Causes Familial Ventricular Septal Defect and
Pulmonary Stenosis.

Sun YM(1), Wang J(2), Qiu XB(3), Yuan F(3), Li RG(3), Xu YJ(3), Qu XK(3), Shi
HY(3), Hou XM(3), Huang RT(4), Xue S(4), Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jing'an District Central Hospital; (2)Jing'an District Central Hospital;
wang_jun98@sina.cn. (3)Shanghai Chest Hospital; (4)Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
(5)Shanghai Chest Hospital; dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common developmental abnormality and
is the leading non-infectious cause of mortality in neonates. Increasing evidence
demonstrates that genetic defects play an important role in the pathogenesis of
CHD. However, CHD is of substantial heterogeneity and the genetic determinants
for CHD in an overwhelming majority of cases remain unknown. In the current
study, the coding exons and flanking introns of the HAND2 gene, which encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor essential for normal cardiovascular
development, were sequenced in 192 unrelated patients with CHD, and a novel
heterozygous mutation, p.S65I, was identified in a patient with congenital
ventricular septal defect (VSD). Genetic analysis of the index patient's pedigree
revealed that the mutation was present in all the seven affected family members
available but absent in the thirteen unaffected family members examined. Besides,
in addition to VSD, five of the proband's close relatives also had pulmonary
stenosis (PS), and the proband's son also had double outlet right ventricle
(DORV). The missense mutation, which altered the evolutionarily conserved amino
acid, was absent in 300 unrelated, ethnically-matched healthy individuals.
Biological analyses by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system showed that 
the mutant HAND2 was associated with significantly diminished transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, the mutation abolished the synergistic activation between 
HAND2 and GATA4 as well as NKX2.5, two other cardiac core transcriptional factors
that have been causally linked to CHD. These findings indicate that HAND2
loss-of-function mutation contributes to human CHD, perhaps via its interaction
with GATA4 as well as NKX2.5.

Copyright © 2016 Author et al.

PMID: 26865696  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb 10. doi: 10.1002/stem.2304. [Epub ahead of print]

A Role for REST in Embryonic Stem Cells Cardiac Lineage Specification.

Aksoy I(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Marcy G(2,)(3,)(4), Chen J(1), Divakar U(1), Kumar V(1), 
John-Sanchez D(1), Rahmani M(1), Buckley NJ(5), Stanton LW(1,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis
St, Singapore, 138672. (2)INSERM, U846, 18 Avenue Doyen Lépine, F-69500, Bron,
France. (3)Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, F-69500, Bron, France.
(4)Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, F-69003, Lyon, France. (5)University of
Oxford, Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, Warneford Lane Headington, 
Oxford, OX3 7JX. (6)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798. (7)Department of Biological
Sciences, National University of Singapore, 117543.

During development, lineage specification is controlled by several signaling
pathways involving various transcription factors (TFs). Here, we studied the
RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST) and identified an important role of
this TF in cardiac differentiation. Using mouse embryonic stem cells (ESC) to
model development, we found that REST knock-out cells lost the ability to
differentiate into the cardiac lineage. Detailed analysis of specific lineage
markers expression showed selective down-regulation of endoderm markers in
REST-null cells, thus contributing to a loss of cardiogenic signals. REST
regulates cardiac differentiation of ESCs by negatively regulating the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and positively regulating the cardiogenic
transcription factor Gata4. We propose here a new role for REST in cell fate
specification besides its well-known repressive role of neuronal differentiation.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26864965  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb 10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10590. [Epub ahead of print]

Biphasic Modulation of Wnt Signaling Supports Efficient Foregut Endoderm
Formation from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Hoepfner J(1,)(2), Kleinsorge M(1,)(2), Papp O(1,)(2), Ackermann M(3), Alfken
S(1,)(2), Rinas U(4), Solodenko W(1), Kirschning A(5), Sgodda M(1,)(2), Cantz
T(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Dept. Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)iPSC based Gene Therapy, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. (4)Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (5)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (6)Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

Pluripotent stem cells (embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells) 
are of great promise in regenerative medicine, including molecular studies of
disease mechanisms, if the affected cell type can be authentically generated
during in vitro differentiation. Most existing protocols aim to mimic embryonic
development steps by the supplementation of specific cytokines and small
molecules, but the involved signaling pathways need further exploration. In this 
study, we investigated enhanced initial activation of Wnt signaling for
definitive endoderm formation and subsequent rapid shutdown of Wnt signaling for 
proper foregut endoderm specification using 3 µM CHIR99021 and 0.5 µg/mL of
secreted frizzled-related protein 5 (sFRP-5) for biphasic modulation of the Wnt
pathway. The definitive endoderm and foregut endoderm differentiation
capabilities of Wnt pathway-modulated cells were determined based on the
expression levels of the endodermal transcription factors SOX17 and FOXA2 and
those of the transcription activator GATA4 and the a-fetoprotein (AFP) gene,
respectively. Furthermore, the resulting biphasic Wnt pathway modulation was
investigated at the protein level by analyzing phosphorylation of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß) and ß-catenin. Finally, Wnt target gene expression
was determined using an improved lentiviral reporter construct that enabled
robust T-cell transcription factor 4 (TCF4)/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1
(LEF1)-mediated luciferase expression in differentiating pluripotent stem cells. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated robust, homogeneous, and efficient derivation of
foregut endodermal cells by inducing a biphasic modulation of the Wnt signaling
pathway.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26861571  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Interdiscip Sci. 2016 Feb 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Unwinding the Novel Genes Involved in the Differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells
into Insulin-Producing Cells: A Network-Based Approach.

Blessia TF(1), Singh S(2), Vennila JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Biotechnology and Health Sciences,
Karunya University, Coimbatore, India. (2)Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Karunya University, Coimbatore, India.
sachidanand@karunya.edu. (3)Department of Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology 
and Health Sciences, Karunya University, Coimbatore, India.

Diabetes is one of the main causes of death in the world. Diabetes is marked by
high blood glucose levels and develops when the body doesn't produce enough
insulin or is not able to use insulin effectively, or both. Type I diabetes is a 
chronic sickness caused by lack of insulin due to the autoimmune destruction of
pancreatic insulin-producing beta cells. Research on permanent cure for diabetes 
is in progress with several remarkable findings in the past few decades among
which stem cell therapy has turned out to be a promising way to cure diabetes.
Stem cells have the remarkable potential to differentiate into glucose-responsive
beta cells through controlled differentiation protocols. Discovering novel
targets that could potentially influence the differentiation to specific cell
type will help in disease therapy. The present work focuses on finding novel
genes or transcription factors involved in the human embryonic stem cell
differentiation into insulin-producing beta cells using network biology approach.
The interactome of 321 genes and their associated molecules involved in human
embryonic stem cell differentiation into beta cells was constructed, which
includes 1937 nodes and 8105 edges with a scale-free topology. Pathway analysis
for the hubs obtained through MCODE revealed that four highly interactive hubs
were relevant to embryonic stem cell differentiation into insulin-producing
cells. Their role in different pathways and stem cell differentiation was
studied. Centrality parameters were applied to identify the potential controllers
of the differentiation processes: BMP4, SALL4, ZIC1, NTS, RNF2, FOXO1, AKT1 and
GATA4. This type of approach gives an insight to identify potential
genes/transcription factors which may play influential role in many complex
biological processes.

PMID: 26853975  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 31. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7092. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation of functional hepatocytes from human spermatogonial stem cells.

Chen Z(1), Sun M(1), Yuan Q(1), Niu M(1), Yao C(1), Hou J(1), Wang H(1), Wen
L(1), Liu Y(1), Li Z(2), He Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji- Med X Clinical
Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China. (2)Department of Urology, Ren Ji
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute
of Andrology, Shanghai 200001, China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Assisted
Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai 200127, China. (4)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

To generate functional human hepatocytes from stem cells and/or extra-hepatic
tissues could provide an important source of cells for treating liver diseases.
Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) have an unlimited plasticity since they can
dedifferentiate and transdifferentiate to other cell lineages. However,
generation of mature and functional hepatocytes from human SSCs has not yet been 
achieved. Here we have for the first time reported direct transdifferentiation of
human SSCs to mature and functional hepatocytes by three-step induction using the
defined condition medium. Human SSCs were first transdifferentiated to hepatic
stem cells, as evidenced by their morphology and biopotential nature of
co-expressing hepatocyte and cholangiocyte markers but not hallmarks for
embryonic stem cells. Hepatic stem cells were further induced to differentiate
into mature hepatocytes identified by their morphological traits and strong
expression of CK8, CK18, ALB, AAT, TF, TAT, and cytochrome enzymes rather than
CK7 or CK19. Significantly, mature hepatocytes derived from human SSCs assumed
functional attributes of human hepatocytes, because they could produce albumin,
remove ammonia, and uptake and release indocyanine green. Moreover, expression of
ß-CATENIN, HNF4A, FOXA1 and GATA4 was upregulated during the transdifferentiation
of human SSCs to mature hepatocytes. Collectively, human SSCs could directly
transdifferentiate to mature and functional hepatocytes. This study could offer
an invaluable source of human hepatocytes for curing liver disorders and drug
toxicology screening and provide novel insights into mechanisms underlying human 
liver regeneration.

PMID: 26840458  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2016;136(2):151-6. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00226-2.

Functional Analysis of GATA4 Complex, a Cardiac Hypertrophy-response
Transcriptional Factor, Using a Proteomics Approach.

Sunagawa Y(1), Katanasaka Y, Wada H, Hasegawa K, Morimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka.

  Various stresses on the heart, such as myocardial infarction and hemodynamic
overload, activate the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin
system, ultimately reach the nuclei of cardiomyocytes, and change the pattern of 
gene expression associated with cardiac hypertrophy. Although present
pharmacological therapy for heart failure targets such extracellular molecules,
mortality due to heart failure is still high. A zinc finger protein, GATA4, is
one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription factors, forms a functional
protein complex with an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, p300, and regulates 
pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Disruption of this complex results in the
inhibition of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure in vivo. To establish a more 
effective therapy for heart failure, we have been analyzing a common nuclear
pathway within cardiomyocytes. We identified 73 GATA4 binding proteins by
tandem-affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis. Noble GATA4 binding
partners, such as cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (Cdk9: the core factor of positive
transcription elongation factor b) and retinoblastoma-association protein 48/46
(RbAp48/46: the co-repressor complexes containing HDAC1/2), regulate the
p300/GATA4-mediated signaling pathway and hypertrophic responses. Further
analysis of p300/GATA4 complex is expected to identify target molecules for heart
failure therapy.

PMID: 26831785  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Triiodo-L-thyronine promotes the maturation of cardiomyocytes derived from rat
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Shi ST(1), Wu XX, Hao W, Wang X, Miao HT, Zhen L, Nie SP.

Author information: 
(1)1Emergency & Critical Care Center, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China 2Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung, and Blood Vessel
Diseases, Beijing, China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs) can differentiate into cardiomyocytes
and be used in cardiac tissue engineering for heart regeneration. However, the
effective clinical application of cardiomyocytes derived from BMMSCs is limited
because of their immature phenotype. The aim of this study was to investigate the
potential of triiodo-L-thyronine (T3) to drive cardiomyocytes derived from BMMSCs
to a more mature state.BMMSCs were divided into three groups: untreated controls,
differentiated, and T3 treated. The differentiation potential was evaluated by
immunofluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Data was represented as the
numbers of cells positive for the troponin I (cTnI), a-actinin, GATA4 and the
connexin-43 (Cx-43). mRNA levels of these specific markers of cardiomyocytes were
determined by quantitative real-time PCR. The levels of cardiomyocytes markers
protein and octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct-4) were determined by
Western blot analyses.Our data demonstrates that T3 treatment leads to a
significant increase in cells positive for cTnI, GATA4, Cx-43, and a-actinin. The
mRNA and protein expression levels of these specific markers of cardiomyocytes
were also increased after T3 treatment. At the same time, the protein expression 
level of Oct-4 was substantially downregulated in T3-treated cells. These results
demonstrate that T3 treatment increases the differentiation of BMMSCs induced to 
cardiomyocytes and promotes their maturation.

PMID: 26808713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Biol Reprod. 2016 Feb;94(2):42. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.137117. Epub 2016 Jan
20.

Testis Cord Maintenance in Mouse Embryos: Genes and Signaling.

Chen SR(1), Liu YX(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China chensuren@ioz.ac.cn.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China liuyx@ioz.ac.cn.

Testis cords, embryonic precursors of the seminiferous tubules, are fundamental
for testis structure and function. Delay or disruption of testis cord formation
could result in gonadal dysgenesis. Although mechanisms regulating testis cord
formation during sex determination have been well-studied, the genes and
signaling pathways involving in testis cord maintenance after the cords have
formed are not well characterized. It is now clear that the maintenance of cord
structure is an active process. In this review, we summarize the recent findings 
regarding the regulation of testis cord integrity by a series of Sertoli cell
transcription factors, including the WT1-SOX8/SOX9-beta-CATENIN-DHH network,
GPR56, STIM1, and NR0B1 (also known as DAX1). In particularly, we emphasize the
underappreciated role of peritubular myoid cells in testis cord maintenance and
their cooperation with Sertoli cells. The regulation of the size, shape, and
number of testis cords by Sertoli cell proliferation (e.g., SMAD4, GATA4, and
TGF-beta signaling), Leydig cell products (e.g., ACTIVIN A), vascular development
(a lesson learned from PDGF signaling), and available gonad space (as observed in
Ift144 mutant mice) is also addressed. Further efforts and new genetic models are
needed to unveil the gene networks and underlying mechanisms regulating testis
cord integrity and morphology after sex determination.

© 2016 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26792939  [PubMed - in process]


30. Cardiovasc Res. 2016 May 1;110(1):30-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw014. Epub 2016 Jan
19.

Modulators of right ventricular apoptosis and contractility in a rat model of
pulmonary hypertension.

Zungu-Edmondson M(1), Shults NV(1), Wong CM(1), Suzuki YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington DC 20057, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and Physiology, Georgetown University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir
Road NW, Washington DC 20057, USA ys82@georgetown.edu.

AIMS: Right ventricular (RV) failure is the major cause of death among patients
with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). However, the mechanism of RV failure 
has not been defined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study examined mechanisms and consequences of RV
myocyte apoptosis and fibrosis in response to PAH. Rats were injected with SU5416
(vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor), followed by hypoxia for 3 weeks, 
and subsequently maintained in normoxia for 2, 5, or 14 weeks (5-, 8-, and
17-week time points after the SU5416 injection, respectively). RV systolic
pressure (RVSP) was elevated to >70 mmHg at 5-week time point, and this pressure 
was sustained thereafter. Significant RV myocyte apoptosis and fibrosis were
observed at 8- and 17-week time points. Apoptosis was associated with
downregulated Bcl-xL (anti-apoptotic protein), downregulated GATA4
(transcriptional regulator of Bcl-xL), and upregulated p53 (negative regulator of
GATA4 gene transcription). PAH-mediated RV apoptosis and fibrosis were attenuated
in p53 knock-out rats. Despite the major loss of cardiomyocytes, RV contractility
was enhanced, suggesting that the remaining myocytes can perform improved
contractile functions. Improved RV contractility is associated with the increased
expression of contractile and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) uptake proteins. In
contrast, the expression of calsequestrin 2 (CSQ2) was downregulated. The siRNA
knockdown of CSQ2 improved RV contractility and increased the expression of
contractile and Ca(2+) uptake proteins.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that RV decompensation is associated with the
death of cardiomyocytes, resulting in fibrosis. However, the remaining myocytes
are capable of sustaining RV contractility through the mechanism that involves
CSQ2.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2016. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4798045 [Available on 2017-05-01]
PMID: 26790474  [PubMed - in process]


31. Mech Dev. 2016 Feb;139:31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2016.01.001. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Ventricular cell fate can be specified until the onset of myocardial
differentiation.

Caporilli S(1), Latinkic BV(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff CF10 3AX,
Wales, UK. (2)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff
CF10 3AX, Wales, UK. Electronic address: latinkicb@cardiff.ac.uk.

The mechanisms that govern specification of various cell types that constitute
vertebrate heart are not fully understood. Whilst most studies of heart
development have utilised the mouse embryo, we have used an alternative model,
embryos of the frog Xenopus laevis, which permits direct experimental
manipulation of a non-essential heart. We show that in this model pluripotent
animal cap explants injected with cardiogenic factor GATA4 mRNA express
pan-myocardial as well as ventricular and proepicardial markers. We found that
cardiac cell fate diversification, as assessed by ventricular and proepicardial
markers, critically depends on tissue integrity, as it is disrupted by
dissociation but can be fully restored by inhibition of the BMP pathway and
partially by Dkk-1. Ventricular and proepicardial cell fates can also be restored
in reaggregated GATA4-expressing cells upon transplantation into a host embryo.
The competence of the host embryo to induce ventricular and proepicardial markers
gradually decreases with the age of the transplant and is lost by the onset of
myocardial differentiation at the late tailbud stage (st. 28). The influence of
the host on the transplant was not limited to diversification of cardiac cell
fates, but also included induction of growth and rhythmic beating, resulting in
generation of a secondary heart-like structure. Our results additionally show
that efficient generation of secondary heart requires normal axial patterning of 
the host embryo. Furthermore, secondary hearts can be induced in a wide range of 
locations within the host, arguing that the host embryo provides a permissive
environment for development of cardiac patterning, growth and physiological
maturation. Our results have implications for a major goal of cardiac
regenerative medicine, differentiation of ventricular myocardium.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4798847
PMID: 26776863  [PubMed - in process]


32. Growth Factors. 2015 Oct;33(5-6):393-400. doi: 10.3109/08977194.2015.1102138.

Expression profile of FGF receptors in preimplantation ovine embryos and the
effect of FGF2 and PD173074.

Moradi M(1,)(2), Riasi A(2), Ostadhosseini S(1), Hajian M(1), Hosseini M(1),
Hosseinnia P(1), Nasr-Esfahani MH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Reproductive Biotechnology , Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology , ACECR , Isfahan , Iran . (2)b
Department of Animal Science , College of Agriculture, Isfahan University of
Technology , Isfahan , Iran , and. (3)c Department of Embryology , Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine , ACECR
, Tehran , Iran.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFRs) are increasingly
recognized as important regulators of embryo development in mammals. This study
investigated the importance of FGF signaling during in vitro development of ovine
embryo. The mRNAs of four FGFR subtypes were detected throughout preimplantation 
development of in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos, peaked in abundance at the
morula stage, and decreased significantly at the blastocyst stage. To gain
insight into the role of these mRNAs in embryo development, IVF embryos were
cultured in the presence of FGF2 (100 or 500<U+2009>ng/ml: beginning from days 1 or 4 to
7) or PD173074 (1<U+2009>µM: beginning from days 1 to 7) as usual treatments for
activation or inhibition of FGFRs, respectively. FGF2-supplementation did not
affect the percentage of embryos that developed to the blastocyst, blastocyst
cell count and the proportion of cells allocated in inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) compared to control (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Also, increasing the dosage or
duration of FGF2 treatment did not significantly alter blastocyst yield or
differential cell count (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). PD173074-mediated inhibition of FGFRs did not
significantly affect blastocyst yield (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Assessment of expression
profiles of lineage-associated markers revealed that FGF2 (500<U+2009>ng/ml)
supplementation: (i) significantly increased expression of putative hypoblast
marker (GATA4), (ii) significantly decreased expression of putative epiblast
(EPI) marker (NANOG) and (iii) did not change TE markers (CDX2 and IFNT) and
pluripotency makers (OCT4, SOX2 and REX1). In summary, FGF2-mediated activation
of FGFRs may promote a switch in transcriptional profile of ovine ICM from EPI-
to hypoblast-associated gene expression.

PMID: 26768755  [PubMed - in process]


33. Cell Reprogram. 2016 Jan 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypoxia Enhances Direct Reprogramming of Mouse Fibroblasts to Cardiomyocyte-Like 
Cells.

Wang Y(1), Shi S(1), Liu H(1), Meng L(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Histology and EmbryologyHarbin Medical University , Harbin,
China, 150081 . (2)2 University Hospital Fertility Center, Case Western Reserve
University , Cleveland, OH, USA, 44122 .

Recent work has shown that mouse and human fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to
cardiomyocyte-like cells with a combination of transcription factors. Current
research has focused on improving the efficiency and mechanisms for fibroblast
reprogramming. Previously, it has been reported that hypoxia enhances fibroblast 
cell reprogramming to pluripotent stem cells. In this study, we observed that 6<U+2009>h
of hypoxic conditions (2% oxygen) on newborn mouse dermal fibroblasts can improve
the efficiency of reprogramming to cardiomyocyte-like cells. Expression of
cardiac-related genes and proteins increased at 4 weeks after transfer of three
transcription factors (Gata4/Mef2c/Tbx5 [GMT]). However, beating cardiomyocyte
cells were not detected. The epigenetic mechanism of hypoxia-induced fibroblast
reprogramming to cardiomyocyte cells requires further study.

PMID: 26757100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jan 26;113(4):1002-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1523930113. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Quantitative proteomics identify DAB2 as a cardiac developmental regulator that
inhibits WNT/ß-catenin signaling.

Hofsteen P(1), Robitaille AM(2), Chapman DP(3), Moon RT(4), Murry CE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Center
for Cardiovascular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109;
Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98109; (2)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Department of Pharmacology,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Center for Cardiovascular Biology,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; (4)Institute for Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Department of
Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815; rtmoon@uw.edu murry@uw.edu. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Center for Cardiovascular
Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Institute for Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Department of
Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109; Division of
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109
rtmoon@uw.edu murry@uw.edu.

To reveal the molecular mechanisms involved in cardiac lineage determination and 
differentiation, we quantified the proteome of human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs), cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs), and cardiomyocytes during a time course
of directed differentiation by label-free quantitative proteomics. This approach 
correctly identified known stage-specific markers of cardiomyocyte
differentiation, including SRY-box2 (SOX2), GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4), and
myosin heavy chain 6 (MYH6). This led us to determine whether our proteomic
screen could reveal previously unidentified mediators of heart development. We
identified Disabled 2 (DAB2) as one of the most dynamically expressed proteins in
hESCs, CPCs, and cardiomyocytes. We used clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) mutagenesis in
zebrafish to assess whether DAB2 plays a functional role during cardiomyocyte
differentiation. We found that deletion of Dab2 in zebrafish embryos led to a
significant reduction in cardiomyocyte number and increased endogenous
WNT/ß-catenin signaling. Furthermore, the Dab2-deficient defects in cardiomyocyte
number could be suppressed by overexpression of dickkopf 1 (DKK1), an inhibitor
of WNT/ß-catenin signaling. Thus, inhibition of WNT/ß-catenin signaling by DAB2
is essential for establishing the correct number of cardiomyocytes in the
developing heart. Our work demonstrates that quantifying the proteome of human
stem cells can identify previously unknown developmental regulators.

PMCID: PMC4743825 [Available on 2016-07-26]
PMID: 26755607  [PubMed - in process]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jan 19;113(3):656-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1509834113. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Extracardiac septum transversum/proepicardial endothelial cells pattern embryonic
coronary arterio-venous connections.

Cano E(1), Carmona R(2), Ruiz-Villalba A(3), Rojas A(4), Chau YY(5), Wagner
KD(6), Wagner N(6), Hastie ND(5), Muñoz-Chápuli R(2), Pérez-Pomares JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Instituto de Investigación 
Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain; Group of 
Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Vertebrate Genomics and Cardiovascular
Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin 13125, Germany; Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin
13125, Germany; (2)Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Instituto
de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga,
Spain; Andalusian Center for Nanomedicine and Biotechnology (BIONAND), 29590
Málaga, Spain; (3)Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga,
Spain; Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical
Center-University of Amsterdam, AZ1105 Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (4)Centro
Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa, 41092 Sevilla, Spain;
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas
Asociadas, 41092 Sevilla, Spain; (5)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit,
Western General Hospital, EH4 2XU, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine at the University of Edinburgh, Western General
Hospital, EH4 2XU, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; (6)Institut de Biologie Valrose,
Université Nice Sophia, CNRS, INSERM, 06108 Nice, France. (7)Department of Animal
Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga
(IBIMA), University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain; Andalusian Center for
Nanomedicine and Biotechnology (BIONAND), 29590 Málaga, Spain; jmperezp@uma.es.

Recent reports suggest that mammalian embryonic coronary endothelium (CoE)
originates from the sinus venosus and ventricular endocardium. However, the
contribution of extracardiac cells to CoE is thought to be minor and
nonsignificant for coronary formation. Using classic (Wt1(Cre)) and previously
undescribed (G2-Gata4(Cre)) transgenic mouse models for the study of coronary
vascular development, we show that extracardiac septum transversum/proepicardium 
(ST/PE)-derived endothelial cells are required for the formation of ventricular
coronary arterio-venous vascular connections. Our results indicate that at least 
20% of embryonic coronary arterial and capillary endothelial cells derive from
the ST/PE compartment. Moreover, we show that conditional deletion of the ST/PE
lineage-specific Wilms' tumor suppressor gene (Wt1) in the ST/PE ofG2-Gata4(Cre) 
mice and in the endothelium of Tie2(Cre) mice disrupts embryonic coronary
transmural patterning, leading to embryonic death. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that ST/PE-derived endothelial cells contribute significantly to and 
are required for proper coronary vascular morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4725486 [Available on 2016-07-19]
PMID: 26739565  [PubMed - in process]


36. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2016 Mar 1;24(7):345-60. doi: 10.1089/ars.2015.6342.

Heme Oxygenase-1/Carbon Monoxide System and Embryonic Stem Cell Differentiation
and Maturation into Cardiomyocytes.

Suliman HB(1,)(2,)(3), Zobi F(4), Piantadosi CA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine , Durham, North
Carolina. (2)2 Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine ,
Durham, North Carolina. (3)3 Department of Pathology, Duke University School of
Medicine , Durham, North Carolina. (4)4 Department of Chemistry, University of
Fribourg , Fribourg, Switzerland .

AIMS: The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into energetically
efficient cardiomyocytes contributes to functional cardiac repair and is
envisioned to ameliorate progressive degenerative cardiac diseases. Advanced cell
maturation strategies are therefore needed to create abundant mature
cardiomyocytes. In this study, we tested whether the redox-sensitive heme
oxygenase-1/carbon monoxide (HO-1/CO) system, operating through mitochondrial
biogenesis, acts as a mechanism for ES cell differentiation and cardiomyocyte
maturation.
RESULTS: Manipulation of HO-1/CO to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis demonstrates
a direct pathway to ES cell differentiation and maturation into beating
cardiomyocytes that express adult structural markers. Targeted HO-1/CO
interventions up- and downregulate specific cardiogenic transcription factors,
transcription factor Gata4, homeobox protein Nkx-2.5, heart- and neural crest
derivatives-expressed protein 1, and MEF2C. HO-1/CO overexpression increases
cardiac gene expression for myosin regulatory light chain 2, atrial isoform,
MLC2v, ANP, MHC-ß, and sarcomere a-actinin and the major mitochondrial fusion
regulators, mitofusin 2 and MICOS complex subunit Mic60. This promotes structural
mitochondrial network expansion and maturation, thereby supporting energy
provision for beating embryoid bodies. These effects are prevented by silencing
HO-1 and by mitochondrial reactive oxygen species scavenging, while disruption of
mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial DNA depletion by loss of mitochondrial
transcription factor A compromise infrastructure. This leads to failure of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and maturation and contractile dysfunction.
INNOVATION: The capacity to augment cardiomyogenesis via a defined mitochondrial 
pathway has unique therapeutic potential for targeting ES cell maturation in
cardiac disease.
CONCLUSION: Our findings establish the HO-1/CO system and redox regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis as essential factors in ES cell differentiation as well 
as in the subsequent maturation of these cells into functional cardiac cells.
Antioxid. Redox Signal. 24, 345-360.

PMCID: PMC4779979
PMID: 26725491  [PubMed - in process]


37. Biol Sex Differ. 2015 Dec 10;6:32. doi: 10.1186/s13293-015-0048-4. eCollection
2015.

Sex differences in porcine left ventricular myocardial remodeling due to right
ventricular pacing.

Kiczak L(1), Tomaszek A(2), Paslawska U(3), Bania J(4), Noszczyk-Nowak A(3),
Skrzypczak P(5), Paslawski R(6), Zacharski M(1), Janiszewski A(3), Kuropka P(7), 
Ponikowski P(2), Jankowska EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Centre, Regional Specialist Hospital in Wroclaw,
Kamienskiego Street 73a, 51-124 Wroclaw, Poland ; Department of Biochemistry,
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw University
of Environmental and Life Sciences, Norwida Street 31, 50-375 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Research and Development Centre, Regional Specialist Hospital in Wroclaw,
Kamienskiego Street 73a, 51-124 Wroclaw, Poland ; Department of Heart Diseases,
Wroclaw Medical University, Weigla Street 5, 50-981 Wroclaw, Poland. (3)Research 
and Development Centre, Regional Specialist Hospital in Wroclaw, Kamienskiego
Street 73a, 51-124 Wroclaw, Poland ; Department of Internal Diseases and Clinic
of Diseases of Horses, Dogs and Cats, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Grunwaldzki Sq. 47, 50-366
Wroclaw, Poland. (4)Research and Development Centre, Regional Specialist Hospital
in Wroclaw, Kamienskiego Street 73a, 51-124 Wroclaw, Poland ; Department of Food 
Hygiene and Consumer Health Protection, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Norwida Street 31, 50-375 Wroclaw,
Poland. (5)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Grunwaldzki Sq. 51, 50-366
Wroclaw, Poland. (6)Research and Development Centre, Regional Specialist Hospital
in Wroclaw, Kamienskiego Street 73a, 51-124 Wroclaw, Poland ; Department and
Clinic of Internal and Occupational Diseases, Hypertension and Clinical Oncology,
Wroclaw Medical University, Borowska Street 213, 50-556 Wroclaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Animal Physiology and Biostructure, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Although sex differences in heart failure (HF) prevalence and
severity have been recognized, its molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. We
used a tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy model to determine the sex specific
remodeling pattern in male and female adult pigs.
METHODS: We compared the echocardiographic and molecular measures of myocardial
remodeling in 19 male and 12 female pigs with chronic symptomatic systolic HF due
to right ventricle (RV) pacing (170 bpm) and 6 male and 5 female sham-operated
controls. Males achieved subsequent HF stages earlier than females.
RESULTS: The progression of symptomatic HF was associated with the reduction of
the left ventricle (LV) ejection fraction in both sexes (all p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). A
significant LV dilatation occurred only in males (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). The HF development 
was accompanied by an increased pro-hypertrophic factor GATA4 and TGF-ß1
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in the LV only in male pigs (all p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). The
total gelatinolytic activity in LV was higher in males than females (irrespective
of HF, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and the HF progression was associated with a reduced total
gelatinolytic activity (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in the LV only in males. No differences in LV
myocardial collagen content were found between HF groups and sexes. Cardiomyocyte
cross-sectional diameter was significantly smaller in male hearts as compared to 
female (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Male and female porcine hearts respond differently to RV pacing.
Males, most likely due to a higher extracellular matrix turnover, demonstrated a 
significant LV dilatation, followed by a strong induction of pro-hypertrophic
program, and an earlier development of symptomatic HF.

PMCID: PMC4676102
PMID: 26693003  [PubMed]


38. Gene. 2016 Feb 15;577(2):265-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.12.013. Epub 2015 Dec
9.

Characterization of the zebrafish cx36.7 gene promoter: Its regulation of
cardiac-specific expression and skeletal muscle-specific repression.

Miyagi H(1), Nag K(2), Sultana N(3), Munakata K(4), Hirose S(5), Nakamura N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
miyagi.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute
of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: kakon@fais.or.jp. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: sultana.n.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho,
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
munakata.k.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: shirose@bio.titech.ac.jp. (6)Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku,
Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: nnakamur@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Zebrafish connexin 36.7 (cx36.7/ecx) has been identified as a key molecule in the
early stages of heart development in this species. A defect in cx36.7 causes
severe heart malformation due to the downregulation of nkx2.5 expression, a
result which resembles congenital heart disease in humans. It has been shown that
cx36.7 is expressed specifically in early developing heart cardiomyocytes.
However, the regulatory mechanism for the cardiac-restricted expression of cx36.7
remains to be elucidated. In this study we isolated the 5'-flanking promoter
region of the cx36.7 gene and characterized its promoter activity in zebrafish
embryos. Deletion analysis showed that a 316-bp upstream region is essential for 
cardiac-restricted expression. This region contains four GATA elements, the
proximal two of which are responsible for promoter activation in the embryonic
heart and serve as binding sites for gata4. When gata4, gata5 and gata6 were
simultaneously knocked down, the promoter activity was significantly decreased.
Moreover, the deletion of the region between -316 and -133bp led to EGFP
expression in the embryonic trunk muscle. The distal two GATA and A/T-rich
elements in this region act as repressors of promoter activity in skeletal
muscle. These results suggest that cx36.7 expression is directed by cardiac
promoter activation via the two proximal GATA elements as well as by skeletal
muscle-specific promoter repression via the two distal GATA elements.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26692140  [PubMed - in process]


39. Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 15;410(2):213-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 
Dec 11.

Unique functions of Gata4 in mouse liver induction and heart development.

Borok MJ(1), Papaioannou VE(1), Sussel L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA. Electronic address: lgs2@columbia.edu.

Gata4 and Gata6 are closely related transcription factors that are essential for 
the development of a number of embryonic tissues. While they have nearly
identical DNA-binding domains and similar patterns of expression, Gata4 and Gata6
null embryos have strikingly different embryonic lethal phenotypes. To determine 
whether the lack of redundancy is due to differences in protein function or Gata4
and Gata6 expression domains, we generated mice that contained the Gata6 cDNA in 
place of the Gata4 genomic locus. Gata4(Gata6/Gata6) embryos survived through
embryonic day (E)12.5 and successfully underwent ventral folding morphogenesis,
demonstrating that Gata6 is able to replace Gata4 function in extraembryonic
tissues. Surprisingly, Gata6 is unable to replace Gata4 function in the septum
transversum mesenchyme or the epicardium, leading to liver agenesis and lethal
heart defects in Gata4(Gata6/Gata6) embryos. These studies suggest that Gata4 has
evolved distinct functions in the development of these tissues that cannot be
performed by Gata6, even when it is provided in the identical expression domain. 
Our work has important implications for the respective mechanisms of Gata
function during development, as well as the functional evolution of these
essential transcription factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4758879 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26687508  [PubMed - in process]


40. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:4969430. doi: 10.1155/2016/4969430. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Cardiac Niche Influences the Direct Reprogramming of Canine Fibroblasts into
Cardiomyocyte-Like Cells.

Palazzolo G(1), Quattrocelli M(2), Toelen J(3), Dominici R(4), Anastasia L(5),
Tettamenti G(6), Barthelemy I(7), Blot S(7), Gijsbers R(8), Cassano M(9),
Sampaolesi M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit,
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus
814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering,
IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (2)Translational
Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Organ Systems Development and Regeneration Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Public Health Corporation of
Legnano, Magenta Hospital, 20013 Magenta, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cells for 
Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy ;
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Segrate,
Milan, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San
Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (7)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie, Ecole
Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, 94704 Maisons-Alfort, France. (8)Laboratory of
Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of Pharmaceutical and
Pharmacological Sciences and Leuven Viral Vector Core, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (9)School of Life Sciences, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology
Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4
Bus 814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Human Anatomy Unit, Department of Public Health, 
Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Via Forlanini 8, 27100
Pavia, Italy.

The Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies are caused by mutation of dystrophin
gene and primarily affect skeletal and cardiac muscles. Cardiac involvement in
dystrophic GRMD dogs has been demonstrated by electrocardiographic studies with
the onset of a progressive cardiomyopathy similar to the cardiac disease in DMD
patients. In this respect, GRMD is a useful model to explore cardiac and skeletal
muscle pathogenesis and for developing new therapeutic protocols. Here we
describe a protocol to convert GRMD canine fibroblasts isolated from heart and
skin into induced cardiac-like myocytes (ciCLMs). We used a mix of transcription 
factors (GATA4, HAND2, TBX5, and MEF2C), known to be able to differentiate mouse 
and human somatic cells into ciCLMs. Exogenous gene expression was obtained using
four lentiviral vectors carrying transcription factor genes and different
resistance genes. Our data demonstrate a direct switch from fibroblast into
ciCLMs with no activation of early cardiac genes. ciCLMs were unable to contract 
spontaneously, suggesting, differently from mouse and human cells, an incomplete 
differentiation process. However, when transplanted in neonatal hearts of
SCID/Beige mice, ciCLMs participate in cardiac myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4670879
PMID: 26681949  [PubMed]


41. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Feb;37(2):445-51. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2436. Epub 2015 Dec 
15.

A novel HAND2 loss-of-function mutation responsible for tetralogy of Fallot.

Lu CX(1), Gong HR(1), Liu XY(2), Wang J(3), Zhao CM(3), Huang RT(4), Xue S(4),
Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Huashan Hospital North, Fudan University, Shanghai
201907, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200065, P.R. China. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Renji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD), the most common type of developmental
abnormality, is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality in humans
worldwide. The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, heart and neural
crest derivatives expressed 2 (HAND2), has been demonstrated to be crucial for
normal cardiovascular development in animal models. However, whether a
genetically defective HAND2 contributes to congenital heart disease (CHD) in
humans remains to be explored. In this study, the entire coding region and
splicing boundaries of the HAND2 gene were sequenced in a cohort of 145 unrelated
patients with CHD. A total of 200 unrelated, ethnically-matched healthy
individuals used as controls were also genotyped for HAND2. The functional effect
of the mutant HAND2 was characterized in contrast to its wild-type counterpart by
using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous 
HAND2 mutation, p.L47P, was identified in a patient with tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF). The misense mutation, which altered the amino acid conserved
evolutionarily among species, was absent in 400 control chromosomes. Functional
analyses unveiled that the mutant HAND2 had a significantly decreased
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation markedly reduced the
synergistic activation between HAND2 and GATA4 or NKX2.5, other two cardiac key
transcription factors involved in the pathogenesis of CHD. To the best of our
knowledge, this study is the first to report the association of a HAND2
loss-of-function mutation with an increased vulnerability to TOF in humans, which
provides novel insight into the molecular mechanism underpinning CHD, suggesting 
potential implications for the genetic counseling of families with CHD.

PMID: 26676105  [PubMed - in process]


42. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Dec 15. pii: ezv423. [Epub ahead of print]

An uncommon cause of tricuspid regurgitation: three-dimensional echocardiographic
incremental value, surgical and genetic insights.

Theron A(1), Pinard A(2), Riberi A(3), Zaffran S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, La Timone Hospital, Marseille, France Aix
Marseille Université, GMGF 13385, Marseille, France Inserm, UMR_S910, 13385
Marseille, France. (2)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF 13385, Marseille, France
Inserm, UMR_S910, 13385 Marseille, France. (3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, La
Timone Hospital, Marseille, France. (4)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF 13385,
Marseille, France Inserm, UMR_S910, 13385 Marseille, France
stephane.zaffran@univ-amu.fr.

Congenital tricuspid valve disease is a rare defect that includes regurgitation, 
stenosis and Ebstein's anomaly. We report a case of severe tricuspid
regurgitation associated with functional mitral regurgitation in a 47-year-old
man with congestive heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) ruled out
any Ebstein's anomaly. Three-dimensional TTE revealed a 'tricuspid hole' into the
anterior leaflet that was only attached to the tricuspid annulus next to both
anteroseptal and anteroposterior commissures. There was no sign of leaflet tear
or perforation. The surgical repair of the tricuspid and mitral valves was
performed with an optimal result. No sign of endocarditis or rheumatic disease
was observed during the intervention. Sequence analysis of GATA4, HEY2 and ZFPM2 
genes was performed, but no causative mutation was identified.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26670804  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Mar;193:1-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec 5.

Molecular characterization and functional analysis of the GATA4 in tongue sole
(Cynoglossus semilaevis).

Liu J(1), Zhang W(1), Du X(1), Jiang J(1), Wang C(1), Wang X(1), Zhang Q(1), He
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education, Ocean
University of China, 266003 Qingdao, Shandong, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Marine
Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, 266003
Qingdao, Shandong, China. Electronic address: yanhe@ouc.edu.cn.

The GATA family of transcription factors is characterized by two zinc finger
domains and is involved in different cellular processes. GATA4 is a highly
conserved transcription factor that regulates embryonic morphogenesis and
cellular differentiation. GATA4 in vertebrates regulates its target genes to
influence genital ridge differentiation. In this study, the GATA4 from tongue
sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) was characterized to understand the function of
this transcription factor in sex differentiation. The full-length cDNA of C.
semilaevis GATA4 comprised 2031bp, encoding a predicted polypeptide consisting of
402 amino acids with two conserved zinc finger domains. Phylogenetic, gene
structure, and synteny analyses showed that C. semilaevis GATA4 was homologous to
tetrapod GATA4. The mRNA transcript of C. semilaevis GATA4 exhibited high
expression in the heart, liver, and gonad. GATA4 expression is dimorphic in the
male and female gonads. Embryonic development expression profiles revealed the
possible involvement of C. semilaevis GATA4 in morphogenesis. In situ
hybridization results showed strong GATA4 signals in the spermatogonia and
spermatocytes of the testis and in the oogonia, primary oocytes, and secondary
oocytes of the ovary. The expression of C. semilaevis GATA4 in the male,
pseudomale, and female gonads showed significantly different methylation levels
of the two CpG sites (-2738 and -2647) among the three genders. Basing on these
results, we speculated that GATA4 plays a potential role in sex differentiation. 
This study lays the groundwork for further sex control breeding techniques in C. 
semilaevis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26667142  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Vis Exp. 2015 Nov 13;(105). doi: 10.3791/53426.

Improved Generation of Induced Cardiomyocytes Using a Polycistronic Construct
Expressing Optimal Ratio of Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5.

Wang L(1), Liu Z(1), Yin C(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu J(1), Qian L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, McAllister Heart Institute,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, McAllister Heart Institute, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill; li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Direct conversion of cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) into induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs)
holds great potential for regenerative medicine by offering alternative
strategies for treatment of heart disease. This conversion has been achieved by
forced expression of defined factors such as Gata4 (G), Mef2c (M) and Tbx5 (T).
Traditionally, iCMs are generated by a cocktail of viruses expressing these
individual factors. However, reprogramming efficiency is relatively low and most 
of the in vitro G,M,T-transduced fibroblasts do not become fully reprogrammed,
making it difficult to study the reprogramming mechanisms. We recently have shown
that the stoichiometry of G,M,T is crucial for efficient iCM reprogramming. An
optimal stoichiometry of G,M,T with relative high level of M and low levels of G 
and T achieved by using our polycistronic MGT vector (hereafter referred to as
MGT) significantly increased reprogramming efficiency and improved iCM quality in
vitro. Here we provide a detailed description of the methodology used to generate
iCMs with MGT construct from cardiac fibroblasts. Isolation of cardiac
fibroblasts, generation of virus for reprogramming and evaluation of the
reprogramming process are also included to provide a platform for efficient and
reproducible generation of iCMs.

PMID: 26649751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):e0144145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144145.
eCollection 2015.

Nuclear Receptor-Like Structure and Interaction of Congenital Heart
Disease-Associated Factors GATA4 and NKX2-5.

Kinnunen S(1,)(2), Välimäki M(1,)(2), Tölli M(2), Wohlfahrt G(3), Darwich R(4),
Komati H(4), Nemer M(4), Ruskoaho H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Orion Pharma, Computer-Aided
Drug Design, Espoo, Finland. (4)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and
Differentiation, Department of Biochemistry, Immunology and Microbiology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

AIMS: Transcription factor GATA4 is a dosage sensitive regulator of heart
development and alterations in its level or activity lead to congenital heart
disease (CHD). GATA4 has also been implicated in cardiac regeneration and repair.
GATA4 action involves combinatorial interaction with other cofactors such as
NKX2-5, another critical cardiac regulator whose mutations also cause CHD.
Despite its critical importance to the heart and its evolutionary conservation
across species, the structural basis of the GATA4-NKX2-5 interaction remains
incompletely understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A homology model was constructed and used to identify
surface amino acids important for the interaction of GATA4 and NKX2-5. These
residues were subjected to site-directed mutagenesis, and the mutant proteins
were characterized for their ability to bind DNA and to physically and
functionally interact with NKX2-5. The studies identify 5 highly conserved amino 
acids in the second zinc finger (N272, R283, Q274, K299) and its C-terminal
extension (R319) that are critical for physical and functional interaction with
the third alpha helix of NKX2-5 homeodomain. Integration of the experimental data
with computational modeling suggests that the structural arrangement of the zinc 
finger-homeodomain resembles the architecture of the conserved DNA binding domain
of nuclear receptors.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide novel insight into the structural basis for
protein-protein interactions between two important classes of transcription
factors. The model proposed will help to elucidate the molecular basis for
disease causing mutations in GATA4 and NKX2-5 and may be relevant to other
members of the GATA and NK classes of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4671672
PMID: 26642209  [PubMed - in process]


46. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):16733-6. eCollection 2015.

Correlation between GATA4 gene polymorphism and congenital heart disease.

Yang XY(1), Jing XY(1), Chen Z(1), Liu YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Ward, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University Beijing
100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: The correlation between GATA4 gene polymorphism and congenital heart
disease (CHD) was analyzed.
METHOD: Clinical data and blood samples were collected from 350 CHD patients who 
were treated at the Department of Cardiology in Beijing Anzhen Hospital. The
control group consisted of 350 healthy subjects receiving physical examination at
our hospital during the same period. Polymorphism was detected by polymerase
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis for
locus rs11392441 of GATA4 gene.
RESULTS: Polymorphism of locus rs1139244 of GATA4 gene was detected in CHD
patients. The distribution frequencies of GG genotype and G allele were
significantly higher than those of the control group.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphism of locus rs1139244 of GATA4 gene was correlated with
CHD.

PMCID: PMC4659101
PMID: 26629213  [PubMed]


47. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Dec 8;5(6):1128-42. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.10.019.
Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Fibroblast Growth Factors and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Promote Cardiac 
Reprogramming under Defined Conditions.

Yamakawa H(1), Muraoka N(1), Miyamoto K(1), Sadahiro T(1), Isomi M(1), Haginiwa
S(1), Kojima H(1), Umei T(1), Akiyama M(1), Kuishi Y(1), Kurokawa J(2), Furukawa 
T(2), Fukuda K(1), Ieda M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. (2)Department of Bio-Informational Pharmacology, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan. (3)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; JST, CREST, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. Electronic address: mieda@z8.keio.jp.

Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) by 
overexpression of cardiac transcription factors, including Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5; however, this process is inefficient under serum-based culture conditions, 
in which conversion of partially reprogrammed cells into fully reprogrammed
functional iCMs has been a major hurdle. Here, we report that a combination of
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2, FGF10, and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), termed FFV, promoted cardiac reprogramming under defined serum-free
conditions, increasing spontaneously beating iCMs by 100-fold compared with those
under conventional serum-based conditions. Mechanistically, FFV activated
multiple cardiac transcriptional regulators and converted partially reprogrammed 
cells into functional iCMs through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and
phosphoinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathways. Moreover, FFV enabled cardiac
reprogramming with only Mef2c and Tbx5 through the induction of cardiac
reprogramming factors, including Gata4. Thus, defined culture conditions promoted
the quality of cardiac reprogramming, and this finding provides new insight into 
the mechanism of cardiac reprogramming.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4682292
PMID: 26626177  [PubMed - in process]


48. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2629-45. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6380.

Novel variants in MLL confer to bladder cancer recurrence identified by
whole-exome sequencing.

Wu S(1,)(2), Yang Z(3,)(4), Ye R(5), An D(5), Li C(3), Wang Y(2,)(6), Wang Y(7), 
Huang Y(2), Liu H(5), Li F(5), He L(3), Sun D(5), Yu Y(5), Li Q(5), Huang P(5),
Zhang M(6), Zhao X(5), Bi T(5), Zhuang X(5), Zhang L(5), Lu J(2), Sun X(2), Zhou 
F(7), Liu C(8), Yang G(9), Hou Y(5), Fan Z(3), Cai Z(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Affiliated Luohu Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Luohu Hospital 
Group, Shenzhen, China. (2)Department of Urological Surgery, Shenzhen Second
People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China. (3)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (5)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. (6)Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China. (7)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (8)Department of Urology, Zhujiang
Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (9)Guangdong Second
People's Hospital, Guangzhou, China.

Bladder cancer (BC) is distinguished by high rate of recurrence after surgery,
but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we performed the
whole-exome sequencing of 37 BC individuals including 20 primary and 17 recurrent
samples in which the primary and recurrent samples were not from the same
patient. We uncovered that MLL, EP400, PRDM2, ANK3 and CHD5 exclusively altered
in recurrent BCs. Specifically, the recurrent BCs and bladder cancer cells with
MLL mutation displayed increased histone H3 tri-methyl K4 (H3K4me3) modification 
in tissue and cell levels and showed enhanced expression of GATA4 and ETS1
downstream. What's more, MLL mutated bladder cancer cells obtained with
CRISPR/Cas9 showed increased ability of drug-resistance to epirubicin (a
chemotherapy drug for bladder cancer) than wild type cells. Additionally, the BC 
patients with high expression of GATA4 and ETS1 significantly displayed shorter
lifespan than patients with low expression. Our study provided an overview of the
genetic basis of recrudescent bladder cancer and discovered that genetic
alterations of MLL were involved in BC relapse. The increased modification of
H3K4me3 and expression of GATA4 and ETS1 would be the promising targets for the
diagnosis and therapy of relapsed bladder cancer.

PMID: 26625313  [PubMed - in process]


49. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Nov 17. pii: gkv1244. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphorylation of the chromatin remodeling factor DPF3a induces cardiac
hypertrophy through releasing HEY repressors from DNA.

Cui H(1), Schlesinger J(2), Schoenhals S(3), Tönjes M(4), Dunkel I(4), Meierhofer
D(5), Cano E(6), Schulz K(6), Berger MF(7), Haack T(8), Abdelilah-Seyfried S(9), 
Bulyk ML(10), Sauer S(11), Sperling SR(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research
Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany Department of Biology, Chemistry and
Pharmacy, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany Group of Cardiovascular
Genetics, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research),
partner site Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics,
Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany Group of
Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute 
for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (3)Department of Cardiovascular
Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 
Berlin, Germany Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Freie Universität 
Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (4)Group of Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin,
Germany. (5)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research
Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany. (7)Division of Genetics, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA Committee on Higher Degrees in Biophysics, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (8)Hannover Medical School, Institute of Molecular
Biology, Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany. (9)Hannover Medical
School, Institute of Molecular Biology, Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany Potsdam University, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of 
Animal Physiology, Karl-Liebknecht Str. 24-25, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(10)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA Committee on Higher Degrees in 
Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(11)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany CU Systems
Medicine, University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany. (12)Department of
Cardiovascular Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 
Berlin, Germany Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Freie Universität 
Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany Group of Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin,
Germany DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Berlin,
Berlin, Germany silke.sperling@charite.de.

DPF3 (BAF45c) is a member of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex. Two isoforms
have been described, namely DPF3a and DPF3b. The latter binds to acetylated and
methylated lysine residues of histones. Here, we elaborate on the role of DPF3a
and describe a novel pathway of cardiac gene transcription leading to
pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Upon hypertrophic stimuli, casein kinase 2
phosphorylates DPF3a at serine 348. This initiates the interaction of DPF3a with 
the transcriptional repressors HEY, followed by the release of HEY from the DNA. 
Moreover, BRG1 is bound by DPF3a, and is thus recruited to HEY genomic targets
upon interaction of the two components. Consequently, the transcription of
downstream targets such as NPPA and GATA4 is initiated and pathological cardiac
hypertrophy is established. In human, DPF3a is significantly up-regulated in
hypertrophic hearts of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or aortic
stenosis. Taken together, we show that activation of DPF3a upon hypertrophic
stimuli switches cardiac fetal gene expression from being silenced by HEY to
being activated by BRG1. Thus, we present a novel pathway for pathological
cardiac hypertrophy, whose inhibition is a long-term therapeutic goal for the
treatment of the course of heart failure.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26582913  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2015 Nov 18. pii:
/j/cclm.ahead-of-print/cclm-2015-0766/cclm-2015-0766.xml. doi:
10.1515/cclm-2015-0766. [Epub ahead of print]

HAND1 loss-of-function mutation associated with familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhou YM, Dai XY, Qiu XB, Yuan F, Li RG, Xu YJ, Qu XK, Huang RT, Xue S, Yang YQ.

BACKGROUND: The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND1 is essential
for cardiac development and structural remodeling, and mutations in HAND1 have
been causally linked to various congenital heart diseases. However, whether
genetically compromised HAND1 predisposes to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in
humans remains unknown.
METHODS: The whole coding region and splicing junctions of the HAND1 gene were
sequenced in 140 unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available family
members of the index patient carrying an identified mutation and 260 unrelated
ethnically matched healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for HAND1.
The functional effect of the mutant HAND1 was characterized in contrast to its
wild-type counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous HAND1 mutation, p.R105X, was identified in a family
with DCM transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, which co-segregated with DCM
in the family with complete penetrance. The nonsense mutation was absent in 520
control chromosomes. Functional analyses unveiled that the mutant HAND1 had no
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation abolished the synergistic
activation between HAND1 and GATA4, another crucial cardiac transcription factors
that has been associated with various congenital cardiovascular malformations and
DCM.
CONCLUSIONS: This study firstly reports the association of HAND1 loss-of-function
mutation with increased susceptibility to DCM in humans, which provides novel
insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning DCM.

PMID: 26581070  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142400.
eCollection 2015.

Essential Role of GATA2 in the Negative Regulation of Type 2 Deiodinase Gene by
Liganded Thyroid Hormone Receptor ß2 in Thyrotroph.

Matsunaga H(1), Sasaki S(1), Suzuki S(1), Matsushita A(1), Nakamura H(2),
Nakamura HM(1), Hirahara N(1), Kuroda G(1), Iwaki H(3), Ohba K(4), Morita H(1),
Oki Y(5), Suda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan. 
(2)Kuma Hospital, 8-2-35 Shimoyamate-dori, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0011, Japan.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, 2-12-12
Sumiyoshi, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 430-0906, Japan. (4)Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School Singapore, No 8 College Road, Level 8th, 169857, Singapore.
(5)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.

The inhibition of thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormone; TSH) by thyroid
hormone (T3) and its receptor (TR) is the central mechanism of the
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. Two transcription factors, GATA2 and Pit-1, 
determine thyrotroph differentiation and maintain the expression of the ß subunit
of TSH (TSHß). We previously reported that T3-dependent repression of the TSHß
gene is mediated by GATA2 but not by the reported negative T3-responsive element 
(nTRE). In thyrotrophs, T3 also represses mRNA of the type-2 deiodinase (D2)
gene, where no nTRE has been identified. Here, the human D2 promoter fused to the
CAT or modified Renilla luciferase gene was co-transfected with Pit-1 and/or
GATA2 expression plasmids into cell lines including CV1 and thyrotroph-derived
TaT1. GATA2 but not Pit-1 activated the D2 promoter. Two GATA responsive elements
(GATA-REs) were identified close to cAMP responsive element. The protein kinase A
activator, forskolin, synergistically enhanced GATA2-dependent activity.
Gel-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with TaT1 cells indicated that
GATA2 binds to these GATA-REs. T3 repressed the GATA2-induced activity of the D2 
promoter in the presence of the pituitary-specific TR, TRß2. The inhibition by
T3-bound TRß2 was dominant over the synergism between GATA2 and forskolin. The D2
promoter is also stimulated by GATA4, the major GATA in cardiomyocytes, and this 
activity was repressed by T3 in the presence of TRa1. These data indicate that
the GATA-induced activity of the D2 promoter is suppressed by T3-bound TRs via a 
tethering mechanism, as in the case of the TSHß gene.

PMCID: PMC4646574
PMID: 26571013  [PubMed - in process]


52. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015 Dec;4(12):1415-24. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2015-0136. Epub 
2015 Nov 12.

Generation of Functional Human Cardiac Progenitor Cells by High-Efficiency
Protein Transduction.

Li XH(1), Li Q(2), Jiang L(3), Deng C(3), Liu Z(3), Fu Y(3), Zhang M(3), Tan
H(3), Feng Y(3), Shan Z(3), Wang J(4), Yu XY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan, USA. (2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA. (3)Guangdong
Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (4)Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu. (5)Guangdong Cardiovascular
Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China
yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu.

The reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells raises the
possibility that somatic cells could be directly reprogrammed to cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs). The present study aimed to assess highly efficient
protein-based approaches to reduce or eliminate the genetic manipulations to
generate CPCs for cardiac regeneration therapy. A combination of
QQ-reagent-modified Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 and three cytokines rapidly and
efficiently reprogrammed human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) into CPCs. This
reprogramming process enriched trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4, monoacetylated 
histone H3 lysine 9, and Baf60c at the Nkx2.5 cardiac enhancer region by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay.
Protein-induced CPCs transplanted into rat hearts after myocardial infarction
improved cardiac function, and this was related to differentiation into
cardiomyocyte-like cells. These findings demonstrate that the highly efficient
protein-transduction method can directly reprogram HDFs into CPCs. This protein
reprogramming strategy lays the foundation for future refinements both in vitro
and in vivo and might provide a source of CPCs for regenerative
approaches.SIGNIFICANCE: The findings from the present study have demonstrated an
efficient protein-transduction method of directly reprogramming fibroblasts into 
cardiac progenitor cells. These results have great potential in cell-based
therapy for cardiovascular diseases.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4675512 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26564862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0142528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142528.
eCollection 2015.

Still Heart Encodes a Structural HMT, SMYD1b, with Chaperone-Like Function during
Fast Muscle Sarcomere Assembly.

Prill K(1), Windsor Reid P(1), Wohlgemuth SL(1), Pilgrim DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(1):e0148027.

The vertebrate sarcomere is a complex and highly organized contractile structure 
whose assembly and function requires the coordination of hundreds of proteins.
Proteins require proper folding and incorporation into the sarcomere by assembly 
factors, and they must also be maintained and replaced due to the constant
physical stress of muscle contraction. Zebrafish mutants affecting muscle
assembly and maintenance have proven to be an ideal tool for identification and
analysis of factors necessary for these processes. The still heart mutant was
identified due to motility defects and a nonfunctional heart. The cognate gene
for the mutant was shown to be smyd1b and the still heart mutation results in an 
early nonsense codon. SMYD1 mutants show a lack of heart looping and chamber
definition due to a lack of expression of heart morphogenesis factors gata4,
gata5 and hand2. On a cellular level, fast muscle fibers in homozygous mutants do
not form mature sarcomeres due to the lack of fast muscle myosin incorporation by
SMYD1b when sarcomeres are first being assembled (19hpf), supporting SMYD1b as an
assembly protein during sarcomere formation.

PMCID: PMC4636364
PMID: 26544721  [PubMed - in process]


54. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2016 Feb;52(2):204-17. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9971-2. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Scaffold-free and scaffold-assisted 3D culture enhances differentiation of bone
marrow stromal cells.

Vidyasekar P(1), Shyamsunder P(1), Sahoo SK(2), Verma RS(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology,
Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, Chennai, 600 036, India. (2)Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square,
Bhubaneswar, 751023, India. (3)Stem Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, Indian
Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 600 036, India. vermars@iitm.ac.in.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 600036, Tamil Nadu, India.
vermars@iitm.ac.in.

3D cultures of stem cells can preserve differentiation potential or increase the 
efficiency of methods that induce differentiation. Mouse bone marrow-derived
stromal cells (BMSCs) were cultured in 3D as scaffold-free spheroids or "mesoid
bodies" (MBs) and as aggregates on poly(lactic) acid microspheres (MB/MS). 3D
cultures demonstrated viable cells, interaction on multiple planes, altered cell 
morphology, and the formation of structures similar to epithelial cell bridges.
Cell proliferation was limited in suspension cultures of MB and MB/MS; however,
cells regained proliferative capacity when transferred to flat substrates of
tissue culture plates (TCPs). Expanded as monolayer, cells retained expression of
Sca-1 and CD44 stem cell markers. 3D cultures demonstrated enhanced potential for
adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation showing higher triglyceride
accumulation and robust mineralization in comparison with TCP cultures. Enhanced 
and efficient adipogenesis was also observed in 3D cultures generated in a
rotating cell culture system. Preservation of multilineage potential of BMSC was 
demonstrated in 5-azacytidine treatment of 3D cultures and TCP by expression of
cardiac markers GATA4 and ACTA1 although functioning cardiomyocytes were not
derived.

PMID: 26542170  [PubMed - in process]


55. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Sep;45:77-83. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.10.030. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Human sex-determination and disorders of sex-development (DSD).

Bashamboo A(1), McElreavey K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. Electronic
address: anu.bashamboo@pasteur.fr. (2)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. Electronic address: kenneth.mcelreavey@pasteur.fr.

Several new genes and pathways have been identified in recent years associated
with human errors of sex-determination or DSD. SOX family gene mutations, as well
as mutations involving GATA4, FOG2 and genes involved in MAP kinase signaling
have been associated with virilization in 46,XX individuals or with 46,XY gonadal
dysgenesis. Furthermore, mutations involving another key gene in
sex-determination, NR5A1, are now known to be an important cause spermatogenic
failure in the male and ovarian insufficiency in the female. These new findings
offer insights into human sex-determination and highlight important differences
between the human and mouse model. This review will critically examine the
evidence linking gene mutations, especially MAP3K1, to non-syndromic forms of
human 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis or XX testicular/ovotesticular.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26526145  [PubMed - in process]


56. Pediatr Surg Int. 2016 Feb;32(2):135-40. doi: 10.1007/s00383-015-3824-7. Epub
2015 Oct 30.

Mesenchymal expression of the FRAS1/FREM2 gene unit is decreased in the
developing fetal diaphragm of nitrofen-induced congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Takahashi T(1), Friedmacher F(1), Zimmer J(1), Puri P(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, 
Dublin 12, Ireland. (2)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's
Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland. prem.puri@ncrc.ie. (3)Conway Institute of 
Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, School of Medicine and Medical Science,
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. prem.puri@ncrc.ie.

PURPOSE: Developmental mutations that inhibit normal formation of extracellular
matrix (ECM) in fetal diaphragms have been identified in congenital diaphragmatic
hernia (CDH). FRAS1 and FRAS1-related extracellular matrix 2 (FREM2), which
encode important ECM proteins, are secreted by mesenchymal cells during
diaphragmatic development. The FRAS1/FREM2 gene unit has been shown to form a
ternary complex with FREM1, which plays a crucial role during formation of human 
and rodent diaphragms. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the
diaphragmatic expression of FREM1 is decreased in the nitrofen-induced CDH model.
We hypothesized that FRAS1 and FREM2 expression is decreased in the developing
diaphragms of fetal rats with nitrofen-induced CDH.
METHODS: Pregnant rats were exposed to either nitrofen or vehicle on gestational 
day 9 (D9), and fetuses were harvested on D13, D15 and D18. Microdissected
diaphragms were divided into nitrofen-exposed/CDH and control samples (n = 12 per
time-point and experimental group, respectively). Diaphragmatic gene expression
levels of FRAS1 and FREM2 were analyzed by qRT-PCR. Immunofluorescence double
staining for FRAS1 and FREM2 was combined with the mesenchymal marker GATA4 in
order to evaluate protein expression and localization in pleuroperitoneal folds
(PPFs) and fetal diaphragmatic tissue.
RESULTS: Relative mRNA expression of FRAS1 and FREM2 were significantly reduced
in PPFs of nitrofen-exposed fetuses on D13 (1.76 ± 0.86 vs. 3.09 ± 1.15; p < 0.05
and 0.47 ± 0.26 vs. 0.82 ± 0.36; p < 0.05), developing diaphragms of
nitrofen-exposed fetuses on D15 (1.45 ± 0.80 vs. 2.63 ± 0.84; p < 0.05 and
0.41 ± 0.16 vs. 1.02 ± 0.49; p < 0.05) and fully muscularized diaphragms of CDH
fetuses on D18 (1.35 ± 0.75 vs. 2.32 ± 0.92; p < 0.05 and 0.37 ± 0.24 vs.
0.70 ± 0.32; p < 0.05) compared to controls. Confocal laser scanning microscopy
revealed markedly diminished FRAS1 and FREM2 immunofluorescence in diaphragmatic 
mesenchyme, which was associated with reduced proliferation of mesenchymal cells 
in nitrofen-exposed PPFs and fetal CDH diaphragms on D13, D15 and D18 compared to
controls.
CONCLUSION: Decreased mesenchymal expression of FRAS1 and FREM2 in the
nitrofen-induced CDH model may cause failure of the FRAS1/FREM2 gene unit to
activate FREM1 signaling, disturbing the formation of diaphragmatic ECM and thus 
contributing to the development of diaphragmatic defects in CDH.

PMID: 26519041  [PubMed - in process]


57. Biol Reprod. 2015 Dec;93(6):133. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.132969. Epub 2015
Oct 28.

GATA4 and GATA6 Knockdown During Luteinization Inhibits Progesterone Production
and Gonadotropin Responsiveness in the Corpus Luteum of Female Mice.

Convissar SM(1), Bennett J(1), Baumgarten SC(1), Lydon JP(2), DeMayo FJ(2),
Stocco C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Physiology 
and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois costocco@uic.edu.

The surge of luteinizing hormone triggers the genomic reprogramming, cell
differentiation, and tissue remodeling of the ovulated follicle, leading to the
formation of the corpus luteum. During this process, called luteinization,
follicular granulosa cells begin expressing a new set of genes that allow the
resulting luteal cells to survive in a vastly different hormonal environment and 
to produce the extremely high amounts of progesterone (P4) needed to sustain
pregnancy. To better understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the
regulation of luteal P4 production in vivo, the transcription factors GATA4 and
GATA6 were knocked down in the corpus luteum by crossing mice carrying Gata4 and 
Gata6 floxed genes with mice carrying Cre recombinase fused to the progesterone
receptor. This receptor is expressed exclusively in granulosa cells after the
luteinizing hormone surge, leading to recombination of floxed genes during
follicle luteinization. The findings demonstrated that GATA4 and GATA6 are
essential for female fertility, whereas targeting either factor alone causes
subfertility. When compared to control mice, serum P4 levels and luteal
expression of key steroidogenic genes were significantly lower in conditional
knockdown mice. The results also showed that GATA4 and GATA6 are required for the
expression of the receptors for prolactin and luteinizing hormone, the main
luteotropic hormones in mice. The findings demonstrate that GATA4 and GATA6 are
crucial regulators of luteal steroidogenesis and are required for the normal
response of luteal cells to luteotropins.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712692 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510866  [PubMed - in process]


58. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 27;5:15706. doi: 10.1038/srep15706.

Generation of integration-free induced hepatocyte-like cells from mouse
fibroblasts.

Kim J(1), Kim KP(2), Lim KT(1), Lee SC(1), Yoon J(2), Song G(3), Hwang SI(1),
Schöler HR(2,)(4), Cantz T(2,)(3), Han DW(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 1
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine,
Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany. (3)REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany. (4)University of Münster,
Medical Faculty, Domagkstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany. (5)KU Open-Innovation
Center, Institute of Biomedical Science &Technology, Konkuk University, 1
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

The ability to generate integration-free induced hepatocyte-like cells (iHeps)
from somatic fibroblasts has the potential to advance their clinical application.
Here, we have generated integration-free, functional, and expandable iHeps from
mouse somatic fibroblasts. To elicit this direct conversion, we took advantage of
an oriP/EBNA1-based episomal system to deliver a set of transcription factors,
Gata4, Hnf1a, and Foxa3, to the fibroblasts. The established iHeps exhibit
similar morphology, marker expression, and functional properties to primary
hepatocytes. Furthermore, integration-free iHeps prolong the survival of
fumarylacetoacetate-hydrolase-deficient (Fah(-/-)) mice after cell
transplantation. Our study provides a novel concept for generating functional and
expandable iHeps using a non-viral, non-integrating, plasmid-based system that
could facilitate their pharmaceutical and biomedical application.

PMCID: PMC4621602
PMID: 26503743  [PubMed - in process]


59. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 21;15:756. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1760-5.

Hypermethylation of the GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4) promoter in Chinese
pediatric acute myeloid leukemia.

Tao YF(1), Fang F(2), Hu SY(3), Lu J(4), Cao L(5), Zhao WL(6), Xiao PF(7), Li
ZH(8), Wang NN(9), Xu LX(10), Du XJ(11), Sun LC(12), Li YH(13), Li YP(14), Xu
YY(15), Ni J(16), Wang J(17), Feng X(18), Pan J(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. taoyanfang1982@163.com. (2)Department of Hematology
and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
baseff77@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. hsy139@126.com. (4)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
drlujun_sz@163.com. (5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital 
of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. cl2012@sohu.com. (6)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
wenlizhao69@163.com. (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital
of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. xiaopfdr@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
szlizhiheng@hotmail.com. (9)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. 570843000@qq.com. (10)Department
of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou,
China. xulixiao2013@hotmail.com. (11)Department of Gastroenterology, the 5th
Hospital of Chinese PLA, Yin chuan, China. du_xiaojuan123@163.com. (12)Department
of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute (Hospital), Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
sunlichao_1980@hotmail.com. (13)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens 
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. lyh072006@hotmail.com.
(14)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. ray8302880@163.com. (15)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. rdxyy@163.com.
(16)Translational Research Center, Second Hospital, The Second Clinical School,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. ni_jian2008@163.com. (17)Department
of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou,
China. wj196312@vip.163.com. (18)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. xing_feng66@hotmail.com.
(19)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. panjian2008@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the second-most common form of
leukemia in children. Aberrant DNA methylation patterns are a characteristic
feature of AML. GATA4 has been suggested to be a tumor suppressor gene regulated 
by promoter hypermethylation in various types of human cancers although the
expression and promoter methylation of GATA4 in pediatric AML is still unclear.
METHODS: Transcriptional expression levels of GATA4 were evaluated by
semi-quantitative and real-time PCR. Methylation status was investigated by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and bisulfate genomic sequencing (BGS). The
prognostic significance of GATA4 expression and promoter methylation was assessed
in 105 cases of Chinese pediatric acute myeloid leukemia patients with clinical
follow-up records.
RESULTS: MSP and BGS analysis showed that the GATA4 gene promoter is
hypermethylated in AML cells, such as the HL-60 and MV4-11 human myeloid leukemia
cell lines. 5-Aza treatment significantly upregulated GATA4 expression in HL-60
and MV4-11 cells. Aberrant methylation of GATA4 was observed in 15.0 % (3/20) of 
the normal bone marrow control samples compared to 56.2 % (59/105) of the
pediatric AML samples. GATA4 transcript levels were significantly decreased in
AML patients (33.06<U+2009>±<U+2009>70.94; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011) compared to normal bone marrow/idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura controls (116.76<U+2009>±<U+2009>105.39). GATA4 promoter methylation
was correlated with patient leukocyte counts (WBC, white blood cells) (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.035)
and minimal residual disease MRD (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
revealed significantly shorter overall survival time in patients with GATA4
promoter methylation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic inactivation of GATA4 by promoter hypermethylation was
observed in both AML cell lines and pediatric AML samples; our study implicates
GATA4 as a putative tumor suppressor gene in pediatric AML. In addition, our
findings imply that GATA4 promoter methylation is correlated with WBC and MRD.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed significantly shorter overall survival in
pediatric AML with GATA4 promoter methylation but multivariate analysis shows
that it is not an independent factor. However, further research focusing on the
mechanism of GATA4 in pediatric leukemia is required.

PMCID: PMC4618362
PMID: 26490736  [PubMed - in process]


60. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):157-62. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.126. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Genetic mutation analysis in Japanese patients with non-syndromic congenital
heart disease.

Yoshida A(1,)(2), Morisaki H(1,)(2,)(3), Nakaji M(1,)(3), Kitano M(4), Kim KS(5),
Sagawa K(6), Ishikawa S(6), Satokata I(7), Mitani Y(8), Kato H(5), Hamaoka K(9), 
Echigo S(4), Shiraishi I(4), Morisaki T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics,
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathophysiology, Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Suita, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral 
and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Division of Cardiology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto,
Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect occurring in
humans and some transcriptional factors have been identified as causative.
However, additional mutation analysis of these genes is necessary to develop
effective diagnostic and medical treatment methods. We conducted sequence
analysis of the coding regions of NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX1, TBX5, TBX20, CFC1 and ZIC3
in 111 Japanese patients with non-syndromic CHD and 9 of their relatives. All
patient samples were also analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification using probes involved in chromosome deletion related to CHD. Five
novel variations of TBX5, GATA4 and TBX20 were detected in 6 of the patients,
whereas none were found in 200 controls. The TBX5 variation p.Pro108Thr, located 
in the T-box domain, was identified in a patient with tricuspid atresia, an
exon-intron boundary variation of GATA4 (IVS4+5G>A) was detected in a Tetralogy
of Fallot patient and an 8p23 microdeletion was detected in one patient with
atrioventricular septal defect and psychomotor delay. A total of seven
non-synonymous polymorphisms were found in the patients and controls.
Accumulation of novel variations of genes involving the cardiac development may
be required for better understanding of CHD.

PMID: 26490186  [PubMed - in process]


61. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 2):304-11. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.038. Epub 2015 
Oct 19.

MicroRNA-29c overexpression inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis and
differentiation in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Liu M(1), Chen Y(2), Song G(3), Chen B(2), Wang L(2), Li X(2), Kong X(2), Shen
Y(4), Qian L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, The Affiliated XuZhou
Hospital of Medical College of Southeast University, Xuzhou 221009, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Taizhou People's 
Hospital, Taizhou 225300, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Taizhou People's
Hospital, Taizhou 225300, China. Electronic address: shenyahui1986@163.com.
(5)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address: lmqian@njmu.edu.cn.

Compared to healthy controls, microRNA-29c (miR-29c) is highly expressed in the
heart during progression towards ventricular septal defect. However, studies on
miR-29c function in heart development are scarce. We investigated the role of
miR-29c in P19 cell proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation and the
underlying mechanisms. We evaluated proliferation and cell cycle progression,
detected morphological changes; apoptosis rate; BAX, BCL2, GATA binding protein 4
(GATA4), cardiac troponin T (cTnT), and myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C)
expression; and caspase-3, -8, and -9 activity in miR-29c-overexpressing P19
cells, and investigated whether WNT4 was a miR-29c target. MiR-29c-overexpressing
cells had decreased proliferation, increased G1 cells, and significantly higher
apoptotic rate than the controls. Expression of the apoptosis-related BAX and
BCL2 genes and caspase-3, -8, and -9 activity were significantly increased in
miR-29c-overexpressing cells. Expression of the cardiac-specific markers GATA4,
cTnT, and MEF2C revealed promoted differentiation in miR-29c-overexpressing cells
compared to the controls. Luciferase assay confirmed that WNT4 is a miR-29c
target. Wnt4 and ß-catenin expression was decreased in miR-29c-overexpressing
cells. MiR-29c inhibits P19 cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis and
differentiation, possibly by suppressing Wnt4 signaling, whose deregulation
contributes to congenital heart disease development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26484393  [PubMed - in process]


62. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Dec;50(6):1032-8. doi: 10.1111/rda.12632. Epub 2015 Oct 
20.

VASA (DDX4) is a Putative Marker for Spermatogonia, Spermatocytes and Round
Spermatids in Stallions.

Kim JY(1), Jung HJ(2), Yoon MJ(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Kyungpook National University, Sangju, Korea.
(2)Department of Animal and Biotechnology Science, Kyungpook National University,
Sangju, Korea. (3)Department of Horse, Companion and Wild Animal Science,
Kyungpook National University, Sangju, Korea.

Expression of the protein DDX4/MVH, or VASA, has been reported in germ cells of
several species. The main objectives of this study were to (i) investigate VASA
expression patterns in testicular cells of stallions at two different
reproductive stages (pre-pubertal and post-pubertal) and (ii) evaluate the use of
VASA antibody as a molecular marker for single germ cells from stallions.
Testicular tissues were obtained from stallions and categorized as pre-pubertal
and post-pubertal based on the formation of lumen and status of spermatogenesis
on the cross section of seminiferous tubules. The results of Western blot showed 
a VASA protein band located at 76 kDa, indicating that the rabbit antibody has a 
cross-reactivity with horse testicular tissues. The result of immunolabelling
showed that VASA was expressed in the cytoplasm of spermatogonia at both
reproductive stages and in spermatocytes and round spermatids at the
post-pubertal stage. GATA4-positive Sertoli cells and Leydig cells located in the
interstitial space were not immunolabelled with VASA. These results suggest that 
VASA can be utilized as a molecular marker for germ cells of stallions at
pre-pubertal and post-pubertal stages. Interestingly, immunolabelling intensity
was significantly higher in pachytene spermatocytes compared to spermatogonia and
round spermatid. VASA antibody was also effective for staining of single germ
cell preparations. In conclusion, VASA protein expression can be used as a marker
for identification of spermatogonia, spermatocytes and round spermatids in
testicular tissues of stallions.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 26482643  [PubMed - in process]


63. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Dec;1849(12):1411-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.10.011. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Identification of GATA-4 as a novel transcriptional regulatory component of
regenerating islet-derived family members.

Lepage D(1), Bruneau J(1), Brouillard G(1), Jones C(1), Lussier CR(1), Rémillard 
A(1), Lemieux É(1), Asselin C(1), Boudreau F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 4K8, Canada. (2)Département d'anatomie et
biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Pavillon de
recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 
4K8, Canada. Electronic address: francois.boudreau@usherbrooke.ca.

Intestinal epithelial cells are exposed to luminal bacterial threat and require
adequate defense mechanisms to ensure host protection and epithelium regeneration
against possible deleterious damage. Differentiated intestinal epithelial cells
produce antimicrobial and regenerative components that protect against such
challenges. Few intestinal specific transcription factors have been identified to
control the switching from repression to activation of this class of gene.
Herein, we show that gene transcription of some regenerating islet-derived (REG) 
family members is dependent on the transcription factor GATA-4. Silencing of
GATA-4 expression in cultured intestinal epithelial cells identified Reg3ß as a
target gene using an unbiased approach of gene expression profiling.
Co-transfection and RNA interference assays identified complex GATA-4-interactive
transcriptional components required for the activation or repression of Reg3ß
gene activity. Conditional deletion of Gata4 in the mouse intestinal epithelium
supported its regulatory role for Reg1, Reg3a, Reg3ß and Reg3<U+03B3> genes. Reg1
dramatic down-modulation of expression in Gata4 conditional null mice was
associated with a significant decrease in intestinal epithelial cell migration.
Altogether, these results identify a novel and complex role for GATA-4 in the
regulation of REG family members gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 16;15:37. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0079-4.

Sox7 is dispensable for primitive endoderm differentiation from mouse ES cells.

Kinoshita M(1), Shimosato D(2,)(3), Yamane M(4), Niwa H(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
mk704@cam.ac.uk. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for
Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp. (3)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp.
(4)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
m-yamane@cdb.riken.jp. (5)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre 
for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (6)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(7)Present address: Department of Pluripotent Stem Cell Biology, Institure of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku,
Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Primitive endoderm is a cell lineage segregated from the epiblast in 
the blastocyst and gives rise to parietal and visceral endoderm. Sox7 is a member
of the SoxF gene family that is specifically expressed in primitive endoderm in
the late blastocyst, although its function in this cell lineage remains unclear.
RESULTS: Here we characterize the function of Sox7 in primitive endoderm
differentiation using mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as a model system. We show 
that ectopic expression of Sox7 in ES cells has a marginal effect on triggering
differentiation into primitive endoderm-like cells. We also show that targeted
disruption of Sox7 in ES cells does not affect differentiation into primitive
endoderm cells in embryoid body formation as well as by forced expression of
Gata6.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that Sox7 function is supplementary and not
essential for this differentiation from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC4609079
PMID: 26475439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37012-27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6115.

Loss of Gata4 in Sertoli cells impairs the spermatogonial stem cell niche and
causes germ cell exhaustion by attenuating chemokine signaling.

Chen SR(1), Tang JX(1,)(2), Cheng JM(1,)(2), Li J(1,)(2), Jin C(1,)(2), Li
XY(1,)(2), Deng SL(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang XX(1), Liu YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, RP China. (2)University of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, RP China.

Sertoli cells, the primary somatic cell in the seminiferous epithelium, provide
the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) microenvironment (niche) through physical
support and the expression of paracrine factors. However, the regulatory
mechanisms within the SSC niche, which is primarily controlled by Sertoli cells, 
remain largely unknown. GATA4 is a Sertoli cell marker, involved in genital ridge
initiation, sex determination and differentiation during the embryonic stage.
Here, we showed that neonatal mice with a targeted disruption of Gata4 in Sertoli
cells (Gata4(flox/flox); Amh-Cre; hereafter termed Gata4 cKO) displayed a loss of
the establishment and maintenance of the SSC pool and apoptosis of both
gonocyte-derived differentiating spermatogonia and meiotic spermatocytes. Thus,
progressive germ cell depletion and a Sertoli-cell-only syndrome were observed as
early as the first wave of murine spermatogenesis. Transplantation of germ cells 
from postnatal day 5 (P5) Gata4 cKO mice into Kit(W/W-v) recipient seminiferous
tubules restored spermatogenesis. In addition, microarray analyses of P5 Gata4
cKO mouse testes showed alterations in chemokine signaling factors, including
Cxcl12, Ccl3, Cxcr4 (CXCL12 receptor), Ccr1 (CCL3 receptor), Ccl9, Xcl1 and
Ccrl2. Deletion of Gata4 in Sertoli cells markedly attenuated Sertoli cell
chemotaxis, which guides SSCs or prospermatogonia to the stem cell niche.
Finally, we showed that GATA4 transcriptionally regulated Cxcl12 and Ccl9, and
the addition of CXCL12 and CCL9 to an in vitro testis tissue culture system
increased the number of PLZF+ undifferentiated spermatogonia within Gata4 cKO
testes. Together, these results reveal a novel role for GATA4 in controlling the 
SSC niche via the transcriptional regulation of chemokine signaling shortly after
birth.

PMCID: PMC4741912
PMID: 26473289  [PubMed - in process]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):13255-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1511209112. Epub 2015 Oct 15.

Myocardial NF-<U+03BA>B activation is essential for zebrafish heart regeneration.

Karra R(1), Knecht AK(2), Kikuchi K(2), Poss KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710; 
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC
27710. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham,
NC 27710 kenneth.poss@duke.edu.

Heart regeneration offers a novel therapeutic strategy for heart failure. Unlike 
mammals, lower vertebrates such as zebrafish mount a strong regenerative response
following cardiac injury. Heart regeneration in zebrafish occurs by cardiomyocyte
proliferation and reactivation of a cardiac developmental program, as evidenced
by induction of gata4 regulatory sequences in regenerating cardiomyocytes.
Although many of the cellular determinants of heart regeneration have been
elucidated, how injury triggers a regenerative program through dedifferentiation 
and epicardial activation is a critical outstanding question. Here, we show that 
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling is induced in cardiomyocytes following injury. Myocardial
inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B activity blocks heart regeneration with pleiotropic effects, 
decreasing both cardiomyocyte proliferation and epicardial responses. Activation 
of gata4 regulatory sequences is also prevented by NF-<U+03BA>B signaling antagonism,
suggesting an underlying defect in cardiomyocyte dedifferentiation. Our results
implicate NF-<U+03BA>B signaling as a key node between cardiac injury and tissue
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4629358 [Available on 2016-04-27]
PMID: 26472034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Jan 1;202:710-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.09.115. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

Human myoblast transplantation in mice infarcted heart alters the expression
profile of cardiac genes associated with left ventricle remodeling.

Wiernicki B(1), Rozwadowska N(1), Malcher A(1), Kolanowski T(1), Zimna A(1),
Rugowska A(1), Kurpisz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology and Stem Cells, Institute of Human
Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (2)Department of
Reproductive Biology and Stem Cells, Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy 
of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Electronic address: kurpimac@man.poznan.pl.

BACKGROUND: Myocardial infarction (MI) and left ventricle remodeling (LVR) are
two of the most challenging disease entities in developed societies. Since
conventional treatment cannot fully restore heart function new approaches were
attempted to develop new strategies and technologies that could be used for
myocardial regeneration. One of these strategies pursued was a cell
therapy--particularly applying skeletal muscle stem cells (SkMCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using NOD-SCID murine model of MI and human skeletal
myoblast transplantation we were able to show that SkMC administration
significantly affected gene expression profile (p<0.05) (NPPB, CTGF, GATA4,
SERCA2a, PLB) of the heart ventricular tissue and this change was beneficial for 
the heart function. We have also shown, that the level of heart biomarker,
NT-proBNP, decreased in animals receiving implanted cells and that the NT-proBNP 
level negatively correlated with left ventricle area fraction change (LVFAC)
index which makes NT-proBNP an attractive tool in assessing the efficacy of cell 
therapy both in the animal model and prospectively in clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained suggest that transplanted SkMCs exerted
beneficial effect on heart regeneration and were able to inhibit LVR which was
confirmed on the molecular level, giving hope for new ways of monitoring novel
cellular therapies for MI.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26457413  [PubMed - in process]


68. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 9;5:15014. doi: 10.1038/srep15014.

Directed Differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells Into Cardiomyocytes by Bacterial
Injection of Defined Transcription Factors.

Bai F(1,)(2), Ho Lim C(3), Jia J(1,)(2), Santostefano K(3), Simmons C(4),
Kasahara H(5), Wu W(1), Terada N(3), Jin S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and Colleges of Pharmacy
and Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Molecular 
Genetics and Microbiology College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610. (3)Department of Pathology College of Medicine, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610. (4)Department of Mechanical &Aerospace
Engineering College of Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.
(5)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida,
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Forced expression of defined transcriptional factors has been well documented as 
an effective method for cellular reprogramming or directed differentiation.
However, transgene expression is not amenable for therapeutic application due to 
potential insertional mutagenesis. Here, we have developed a bacterial type III
secretion system (T3SS)-based protein delivery tool and shown its application in 
directing pluripotent stem cell differentiation by a controlled delivery of
transcription factors relevant to early heart development. By fusing to an
N-terminal secretion sequence for T3SS-dependent injection, three transcriptional
factors, namely Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (abbreviated as GMT), were translocated
into murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs), where the proteins are effectively
targeted to the nucleus with an average intracellular half-life of 5.5<U+2009>hours.
Exogenous GMT protein injection activated the cardiac program, and multiple
rounds of GMT protein delivery significantly improved the efficiency of ESC
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Combination of T3SS-mediated GMT delivery
and Activin A treatment showed an additive effect, resulting in on average 60% of
the ESCs differentiated into cardiomyocytes. ESC derived cardiomyocytes displayed
spontaneous rhythmic contractile movement as well as normal hormonal responses.
This work serves as a foundation for the bacterial delivery of multiple
transcription factors to direct cell fate without jeopardizing genomic integrity.

PMCID: PMC4598736
PMID: 26449528  [PubMed - in process]


69. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2015;8(3):114-27. doi: 10.1159/000439382. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

Phytochemical Indicaxanthin Inhibits Colon Cancer Cell Growth and Affects the DNA
Methylation Status by Influencing Epigenetically Modifying Enzyme Expression and 
Activity.

Naselli F(1), Belshaw NJ, Gentile C, Tutone M, Tesoriere L, Livrea MA, Caradonna 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche Chimiche e Farmaceutiche
(STEBICEF), Universitx00E0; di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Recently, we have shown anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects 
of indicaxanthin associated with epigenetic modulation of the onco-suppressor
p16INK4a in the human colon cancer cell line CACO2. In the present study, the
epigenetic activity of indicaxanthin and the mechanisms involved were further
investigated in other colorectal cancer cell lines.
METHODS: LOVO1, CACO2, HT29, HCT116, and DLD1 cells were used to evaluate the
potential influence of consistent dietary concentrations of indicaxanthin on DNA 
methylation, and the epigenetic mechanisms involved were researched.
RESULTS: Indicaxanthin exhibited anti-proliferative activity in all cell lines
but HT29, induced demethylation in the promoters of some methylation-silenced
onco-suppressor genes involved in colorectal carcinogenesis (p16INK4a, GATA4, and
ESR1), and left unchanged others which were basally hypermethylated (SFRP1 and
HPP1). In apparent contrast, cell exposure to indicaxanthin increased DNMT gene
expression, although indicaxanthin appeared to be an inhibitor of DNMT activity. 
Indicaxanthin also increased the expression of genes involved in DNA
demethylation. Finally, an in silico molecular modelling approach suggested
stable binding of indicaxanthin at the DNMT1 catalytic site.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings contribute to new knowledge in the field of
phytochemicals and specifically suggest dietary indicaxanthin as a potential
epigenetic agent to protect colon cells against tumoral alterations.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26439130  [PubMed - in process]


70. Data Brief. 2015 Aug 24;5:59-64. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2015.08.009. eCollection
2015.

Reciprocal repression between Fgf8 and miR-133 regulates cardiac induction
through Bmp2 signaling.

Lopez-Sanchez C(1), Franco D(2), Bonet F(2), Garcia-Lopez V(3), Aranega A(2),
Garcia-Martinez V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Extremadura, 
06006 Badajoz, Spain. (2)Cardiovascular Development Group, Department of
Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, CU Las Lagunillas B3-362, 23071 Jaén,
Spain. (3)Pharmacy Services, Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Cáceres, Spain.

This data article contains complementary figures and results related to the
research article entitled "Negative Fgf8-Bmp2 feed-back is controlled by miR-130 
during early cardiac specification" [15], which reveals what specific role
miR-130 plays during the cardiac induction process. This study evidenced miR-130 
a putative microRNA that targets Erk1/2 (Mapk1) 3'UTR- as a necessary linkage in 
the control of Fgf8 signaling, mediated by Bmp2. Thus, miR-130 regulates a
negative Fgf8-Bmp2 feed-back loop responsible to achieve early cardiac
specification. A significant aspect supporting our conclusions is given by the
expression pattern of miR-130 during early cardiac specification, as well as by
those results obtained after the designed experimental procedures. The data
presented here reveal that miR-133 is also expressed within the precardiac areas 
during early cardiogenesis, pattern which is comparable to that of FGFR1,
receptor involved in the Fgf8/ERK signaling pathway. Interestingly, our miR-133
overexpression experiments resulted in a decrease of Fgf8 expression, whereas we 
observed an increase of Bmp2 and subsequently of cardiac specific markers Nkx-2.5
and Gata4. Additionally, our loss-of-function experiments -through Fgf8 siRNA
electroporation- showed an increase of miR-133 expression. Finally, after our
Bmp2 experiments, we observed that miR-133 is upstream-regulated by Bmp2. All
those results suggest that miR-133 also constitutes a crucial linkage in the
crosstalk between Fgf8 and Bmp2 signaling by regulating the Fgf8/ERK pathway
during cardiac induction.

PMCID: PMC4564382
PMID: 26425666  [PubMed]


71. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2015 May;43(5):437-41.

[Experimental studies on the role of GATA4 in the endocardial cushions
development].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Chen M(2), Chen Y(1), Hong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of pediatric, Anhui Medical University Affiliated to Anhui
Provincial Hospital, Hefei 230001, China. (2)Department of pediatric, Anhui
Medical University Affiliated to Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei 230001, China; 
Email: chenmingwu01@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of GATA4 gene in the endocardial cushions
development.
METHODS: Target gene eukaryote expression vectors were constructed by pcDNA3.1(-)
vector plasmid, and were identified by DNA sequence analysis. Recombinant
plasmids were transfected into Hela cells with lipofectamine 2000, meanwhile Hela
cells transfected with empty vector or those without transfection served as
transfection control group and blank control group, respectively. Real-time PCR
and Western blot were performed to detect the relative expression of mRNA and
protein of transcription factors GATA4, Sox9, Scleraxis and ECM proteins
Aggrecan, Tenascin in each group.
RESULTS: The relative mRNA expression of GATA4 in experimental group was
significantly higher than in transfection control group and blank control group. 
GATA4 mRNA expression in Hela(GATA4), Hela(H436Y), Hela(Null) and Hela group was 
310.83 ± 2.39, 146.35 ± 1.74, 0.94 ± 0.32, 1.00 ± 0.28, respectively (F = 72.508,
P < 0.05). Western blot results were consistent with the results obtained by
qRT-PCR. The relative mRNA and protein expressions of Sox9, Scleraxis, Aggrecan
and Tenascin in both experimental groups were significantly higher than that in
transfection control group and blank control group (P < 0.05), and above gene
expressions were significantly downregulated in GATA4(H436Y) group, while they
were similar between transfection control group and blank control group (all P > 
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: GATA4 H436Y mutation reduces it's transcriptional activation, which 
might serve as a theoretical framework to demonstrate the roles of GATA4 gene in 
endocardial cushion development.

PMID: 26419991  [PubMed - in process]


72. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb;34(2):288-98. doi: 10.1002/stem.2223. Epub 2015 Oct 15.

ErbB4 Activated p38<U+03B3> MAPK Isoform Mediates Early Cardiogenesis Through NKx2.5 in 
Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Ramachandra CJ(1), Mehta A(1,)(2), Wong P(1,)(3,)(4), Shim W(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart Research Institute Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Cardiovascular Academic Clinical Program, DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disorders Program, DUKE-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (4)Department of Cardiology,
National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Activation of ErbB4 receptor signaling is instrumental in heart development, lack
of which results in embryonic lethality. However, mechanism governing its
intracellular signaling remains elusive. Using human pluripotent stem cells, we
show that ErbB4 is critical for cardiogenesis whereby its genetic knockdown
results in loss of cardiomyocytes. Phospho-proteome profiling and Western blot
studies attribute this loss to inactivation of p38<U+03B3> MAPK isoform which physically
interacts with NKx2.5 and GATA4 transcription factors. Post-cardiomyocyte
formation p38<U+03B3>/NKx2.5 downregulation is followed by p38a/MEF2c upregulation
suggesting stage-specific developmental roles of p38 MAPK isoforms. Knockdown of 
p38<U+03B3> MAPK similarly disrupts cardiomyocyte formation in spite of the presence of 
NKx2.5. Cell fractionation and NKx2.5 phosphorylation studies suggest inhibition 
of ErbB4-p38<U+03B3> signaling hinders NKx2.5 nuclear translocation during early
cardiogenesis. This study reveals a novel pathway that directly links ErbB4 and
p38<U+03B3> to the transcriptional machinery of NKx2.5-GATA4 complex which is critical
for cardiomyocyte formation during mammalian heart development. Stem Cells
2016;34:288-298.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26418945  [PubMed - in process]


73. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Dec;21(12):942-56. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav053. Epub 2015 Sep
27.

Cyclin E1 plays a key role in balancing between totipotency and differentiation
in human embryonic cells.

Krivega MV(1), Geens M(2), Heindryckx B(3), Santos-Ribeiro S(4), Tournaye H(5),
Van de Velde H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Reproduction and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium
krivega@gmail.com. (2)Research Group Reproduction and Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090
Brussels, Belgium. (3)Ghent Fertility and Stem Cell Team, Department for
Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. (4)Centre for Reproductive Medicine (CRG), Brussels University Hospital,
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. (5)Research Group Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium Centre for Reproductive Medicine (CRG), 
Brussels University Hospital, Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: We aimed to investigate if Cyclin E1 (CCNE1) plays a role in
human embryogenesis, in particular during the early developmental stages
characterized by a short cell cycle.
STUDY FINDING: CCNE1 is expressed in plenipotent human embryonic cells and plays 
a critical role during hESC derivation via the naïve state and, potentially,
normal embryo development.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: A short cell cycle due to a truncated G1 phase has been
associated with the high developmental capacity of embryonic cells. CCNE1 is a
critical G1/S transition regulator. CCNE1 overexpression can cause shortening of 
the cell cycle and it is constitutively expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells
and cancer cells.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: We investigated expression of CCNE1 in 
human preimplantation embryo development and embryonic stem cells (hESC).
Functional studies included CCNE1 overexpression in hESC and CCNE1 downregulation
in the outgrowths formed by plated human blastocysts. Analysis was performed by
immunocytochemistry and quantitative real-time PCR. Mann-Whitney statistical test
was applied.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The CCNE1 protein was ubiquitously and
constitutively expressed in the plenipotent cells of the embryo from the 4-cell
stage up to and including the full blastocyst. During blastocyst expansion, CCNE1
was downregulated in the trophectoderm (TE) cells. CCNE1 shortly co-localized
with NANOG in the inner cell mass (ICM) of expanding blastocysts, mimicking the
situation in naïve hESC. In the ICM of expanded blastocysts, which corresponds
with primed hESC, CCNE1 defined a subpopulation of cells different from
NANOG/POU5F1-expressing pluripotent epiblast (EPI) cells and
GATA4/SOX17-expressing primitive endoderm (PrE) cells. This CCNE1-positive cell
population was associated with visceral endoderm based on transthyretin
expression and marked the third cell lineage within the ICM, besides EPI and PrE,
which had never been described before. We also investigated the role of CCNE1 by 
plating expanded blastocysts for hESC derivation. As a result, all the cells
including TE cells re-gained CCNE1 and, consequently, NANOG expression,
resembling the phenotype of naïve hESC. The inhibition of CCNE1 expression with
siRNA blocked proliferation and caused degeneration of those plated cells.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The study is based on a limited number of
good-quality human embryos donated to research.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our study sheds light on the processes
underlying the high developmental potential of early human embryonic cells. The
CCNE1-positive plenipotent cell type corresponds with a phenotype that enables
early human embryos to recover after fragmentation, cryodamage or (single cell)
biopsy on day 3 for preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Knowledge on the
expression and function of genes responsible for this flexibility will help us to
better understand the undifferentiated state in stem cell biology and might
enable us to improve technologies in assisted reproduction.
LARGE SCALE DATA: NA STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This research is
supported by grants from the Fund for Scientific Research - Flanders
(FWO-Vlaanderen), the Methusalem (METH) of the VUB and Scientific Research Fond
Willy Gepts of UZ Brussel. There are no competing interests.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26416983  [PubMed - in process]


74. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Dec 1;309(11):H1947-63. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00050.2015. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Low-dose radiation affects cardiac physiology: gene networks and molecular
signaling in cardiomyocytes.

Coleman MA(1), Sasi SP(2), Onufrak J(2), Natarajan M(3), Manickam K(3), Schwab
J(2), Muralidharan S(2), Peterson LE(4), Alekseyev YO(5), Yan X(6), Goukassian
DA(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis School of Medicine, Radiation Oncology,
Sacramento, California; Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore,
California; (2)Cardiovascular Research Center, GeneSys Research Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts; (3)University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio,
Texas; (4)Center for Biostatistics, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, Texas; (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; and. (6)Cardiovascular
Research Center, GeneSys Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Cardiovascular Research 
Center, GeneSys Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts; and Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
david.goukassian@tufts.edu.

There are 160,000 cancer patients worldwide treated with particle radiotherapy
(RT). With the advent of proton, and high (H) charge (Z) and energy (E) HZE
ionizing particle RT, the cardiovascular diseases risk estimates are uncertain.
In addition, future deep space exploratory-type missions will expose humans to
unknown but low doses of particle irradiation (IR). We examined molecular
responses using transcriptome profiling in left ventricular murine cardiomyocytes
isolated from mice that were exposed to 90 cGy, 1 GeV proton ((1)H) and 15 cGy, 1
GeV/nucleon iron ((56)Fe) over 28 days after exposure. Unsupervised clustering
analysis of gene expression segregated samples according to the IR response and
time after exposure, with (56)Fe-IR showing the greatest level of gene
modulation. (1)H-IR showed little differential transcript modulation. Network
analysis categorized the major differentially expressed genes into cell cycle,
oxidative responses, and transcriptional regulation functional groups.
Transcriptional networks identified key nodes regulating expression. Validation
of the signal transduction network by protein analysis and gel shift assay showed
that particle IR clearly regulates a long-lived signaling mechanism for ERK1/2,
p38 MAPK signaling and identified NFATc4, GATA4, STAT3, and NF-<U+03BA>B as regulators
of the response at specific time points. These data suggest that the molecular
responses and gene expression to (56)Fe-IR in cardiomyocytes are unique and
long-lasting. Our study may have significant implications for the efforts of
National Aeronautics and Space Administration to develop heart disease risk
estimates for astronauts and for patients receiving conventional and particle RT 
via identification of specific HZE-IR molecular markers.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4698384 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26408534  [PubMed - in process]


75. Science. 2015 Sep 25;349(6255):aaa5612. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa5612.

The DNA damage response induces inflammation and senescence by inhibiting
autophagy of GATA4.

Kang C(1), Xu Q(1), Martin TD(1), Li MZ(1), Demaria M(2), Aron L(3), Lu T(3),
Yankner BA(3), Campisi J(2), Elledge SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Division of Genetics, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA. (3)Department of 
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
selledge@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Sep 25;349(6255):1448-9.

Cellular senescence is a terminal stress-activated program controlled by the p53 
and p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor proteins. A striking feature of senescence is the
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), a pro-inflammatory response
linked to tumor promotion and aging. We have identified the transcription factor 
GATA4 as a senescence and SASP regulator. GATA4 is stabilized in cells undergoing
senescence and is required for the SASP. Normally, GATA4 is degraded by
p62-mediated selective autophagy, but this regulation is suppressed during
senescence, thereby stabilizing GATA4. GATA4 in turn activates the transcription 
factor NF-<U+03BA>B to initiate the SASP and facilitate senescence. GATA4 activation
depends on the DNA damage response regulators ATM and ATR, but not on p53 or
p16(INK4a). GATA4 accumulates in multiple tissues, including the aging brain, and
could contribute to aging and its associated inflammation.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26404840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Science. 2015 Sep 25;349(6255):1448-9. doi: 10.1126/science.aad2501.

CELL BIOLOGY. GATA get a hold on senescence.

Cassidy LD(1), Narita M(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Robinson Way,
Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (2)University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. masashi.narita@cruk.cam.ac.uk.

Comment on
    Science. 2015 Sep 25;349(6255):aaa5612.

PMID: 26404812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Cancer. 2015 Sep 22;14(1):173. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0441-y.

BMP4 depletion by miR-200 inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of lung
adenocarcinoma cells.

Kim JS(1), Kurie JM(2), Ahn YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Tissue Injury Defense Research Center,
Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
jeongseonkim821@gmail.com. (2)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
jkurie@mdanderson.org. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea. yahn@ewha.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-200 (miR-200) suppresses the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of various cancer cells, including lung adenocarcinoma cells. We found
that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) was decreased in miR-200-overexpressing 
cells and epithelial-like lung cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the
mechanism and role of BMP4 depletion by miR-200 in murine lung adenocarcinoma
cells.
METHODS: BMP4 expression levels in murine lung cancer cells were measured by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. Promoter
and 3'-untranslated region (UTR) luciferase reporter assays were performed to
discover the mechanism of regulation of BMP4 by miR-200. Murine lung cancer cells
were transfected with Bmp4 shRNAs, which were then injected into syngeneic mice
to measure their tumorigenic and metastatic potential and cultured on Matrigel to
study the influence of BMP4 on 3-D acinus formation.
RESULTS: miR-200 down-regulated BMP4 via direct targeting of the GATA4 and GATA6 
transcription factors that stimulate Bmp4 transcription. BMP4 up-regulated JAG2, 
an upstream factor of miR-200; therefore, JAG2, miR-200, and BMP4 form a
regulatory loop. Bmp4 knockdown suppressed cancer cell growth, migration, and
invasion and inhibited tumorigenesis and metastasis of lung cancer cells when
injected into syngeneic mice. In addition, BMP4 was required for normal acinus
formation in Matrigel 3-D culture of murine lung cancer cells, which may be
mediated by MYH10, a downstream target of BMP4.
CONCLUSION: BMP4 functions as a pro-tumorigenic factor in a murine lung cancer
model, and its transcription is regulated by miR-200 and GATA4/6. Thus, we
propose that BMP4 and its antagonists may be suitable therapeutic targets for the
treatment of lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4580148
PMID: 26395571  [PubMed - in process]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Oct 30;466(4):670-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.090. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Alcohol exposure increases the expression of cardiac transcription factors
through ERK1/2-mediated histone3 hyperacetylation in H9c2 cells.

Gao W(1), Pan B(1), Liu L(2), Huang X(3), Liu Z(4), Tian J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing, PR China; Chongqing International Science
and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
PR China; Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational Medical Research in Cognitive
Development and Learning and Memory Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (3)Department
of Biomedical Science, Charlie E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL, USA. (4)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Davis
Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Medical Center,
Columbus, OH, USA. (5)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, PR China. Electronic address: jietian@cqmu.edu.cn.

Alcohol abuse during pregnancy may cause fetal cardiac developmental
abnormalities. Our previous studies showed that alcohol could induce histone
hyperacetylation and over-expression of cardiac transcription factors both in
vivo and in vitro. The objective of the present study was to investigate the role
of ERK1/2 signaling pathway in alcohol-induced histone hyperacetylation and
up-regulation of cardiac transcription factors in H9c2 cells. The Cardiac cell
line H9c2 was cultured with alcohol. U0126, a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2
pathway was employed to block the ERK1/2 signaling pathway. Western blotting
analysis showed that alcohol significantly enhanced the levels of phosphorylated 
ERK1/2 and induced hyperacetylation of histone3, which were both effectively
prevented with U0126. Real-time PCR showed that U0126 treatment significantly
decreased alcohol-induced over-expression of GATA4 and MEF2c, and the basal
expression level of GATA4, but did not affect MEF2c. ChIP assay showed that U0126
treatment significantly decreased alcohol-induced hyperacetylation of histone3
near the promoter regions of GATA4 and MEF2c. The basal acetylation level of
histone3 near the promoter region of GATA4 was affected by U0126 as well, but not
that near the promoter region of MEF2c. These data indicated that ERK1/2
signaling played an important role in mediating alcohol induced over-expression
of GATA4 and MEF2c, which is possibly through the up-regulation of acetylation of
histone3 near the gene promoters that affects the expression of GATA4 and MEF2c
in H9c2 cells. ERK1/2 pathway might be a potential target for the intervention of
alcohol induced congenital heart diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26392309  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Nov;88:101-10. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.09.010. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

MITF interacts with the SWI/SNF subunit, BRG1, to promote GATA4 expression in
cardiac hypertrophy.

Mehta G(1), Kumarasamy S(2), Wu J(1), Walsh A(1), Liu L(1), Williams K(1), Joe
B(2), de la Serna IL(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Department of
Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, 3035 Arlington Ave, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
(2)University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Program in
Physiological Genomics, Center for Hypertension and Personalized Medicine,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, 3035 Arlington Ave, Toledo, OH 43614, 
USA. (3)University of Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Department of
Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, 3035 Arlington Ave, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
Electronic address: Ivana.delaserna@utoledo.edu.

The transcriptional regulation of pathological cardiac hypertrophy involves the
interplay of transcription factors and chromatin remodeling enzymes. The
Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor (MITF) is highly expressed in
cardiomyocytes and is required for cardiac hypertrophy. However, the
transcriptional mechanisms by which MITF promotes cardiac hypertrophy have not
been elucidated. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that MITF promotes
cardiac hypertrophy by activating transcription of pro-hypertrophy genes through 
interactions with the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. In an in vivo model
of cardiac hypertrophy, expression of MITF and the BRG1 subunit of the SWI/SNF
complex increased coordinately in response to pressure overload. Expression of
MITF and BRG1 also increased in vitro when cardiomyocytes were stimulated with
angiotensin II or a ß-adrenergic agonist. Both MITF and BRG1 were required to
increase cardiomyocyte size and activate expression of hypertrophy markers in
response to ß-adrenergic stimulation. We detected physical interactions between
MITF and BRG1 in cardiomyocytes and found that they cooperate to regulate
expression of a pro-hypertrophic transcription factor, GATA4. Our data show that 
MITF binds to the E box element in the GATA4 promoter and facilitates recruitment
of BRG1. This is associated with enhanced expression of the GATA4 gene as
evidenced by increased Histone3 lysine4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) on the GATA4
promoter. Thus, in hypertrophic cardiomyoctes, MITF is a key transcriptional
activator of a pro-hypertrophic gene, GATA4, and this regulation is dependent
upon the BRG1 component of the SWI/SNF complex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4640968 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26388265  [PubMed - in process]


80. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Feb;26(1):81-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1559884. Epub 2015
Sep 18.

Gene Expression of FRAS1-Related Extracellular Matrix 1 Is Decreased in
Nitrofen-Induced Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia.

Takahashi T(1), Friedmacher F(1), Puri P(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, 
Dublin, Ireland.

Introduction The origin of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is considered to
lie in a malformation of the nonmuscular primordial diaphragm. It is known that
fetal diaphragmatic development requires the structural integrity of its
underlying mesenchymal tissue. Developmental mutations that inhibit the formation
of normal diaphragmatic mesenchyme have been shown to cause CDH. FRAS1-related
extracellular matrix 1 (FREM1) plays a critical role in the development of the
fetal diaphragm. It has been demonstrated that a deficiency of FREM1 can lead to 
CDH both in humans and mice. Furthermore, FREM1-deficient fetuses exhibit a
decreased level of mesenchymal cell proliferation in their developing diaphragms.
We hypothesized that FREM1 expression is decreased in developing diaphragms of
fetal rats with nitrofen-induced CDH. Material and Methods Timed-pregnant rats
were exposed to either nitrofen or vehicle on gestational day 9 (D9), and fetuses
were harvested on selected time-points D13, D15, and D18. Dissected diaphragms
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>72) were divided into control and nitrofen-exposed samples (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12 per
time-point and experimental group). Diaphragmatic gene expression levels of FREM1
were analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Immunofluorescence
staining for FREM1 was combined with the mesenchymal marker GATA4 to localize
FREM1 protein expression and tissue distribution in fetal diaphragms. Results In 
nitrofen-exposed fetuses, relative mRNA expression of FREM1 was significantly
reduced in pleuroperitoneal folds on D13 (0.30<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23 vs. 0.83<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.19; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05),
developing diaphragms on D15 (0.54<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.22 vs. 1.19<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.28; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and fully
muscularized diaphragms on D18 (0.49<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.37 vs. 0.97<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.53; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in
comparison with controls. Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed markedly
diminished diaphragmatic FREM1 immunofluorescence, which was associated with
reduced proliferation of diaphragmatic mesenchymal cells in nitrofen-exposed
fetuses on D13, D15, and D18 compared to controls. Conclusions Decreased
expression of FREM1 in the nitrofen-induced CDH model may disturb the formation
of the diaphragmatic mesenchyme, thus contributing to the development of
diaphragmatic defects.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26382659  [PubMed - in process]


81. Schizophr Res. 2015 Dec;169(1-3):447-52. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.08.035. Epub 
2015 Sep 14.

The association of DNA methylation and brain volume in healthy individuals and
schizophrenia patients.

Liu J(1), Siyahhan Julnes P(2), Chen J(2), Ehrlich S(3), Walton E(4), Calhoun
VD(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA; Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. Electronic 
address: jliu@mrn.org. (2)The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(3)Developmental Neuroscience Section, Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Germany; MGH/MIT/HMS Martinos Center
for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(4)Developmental Neuroscience Section, Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Germany. (5)The Mind Research
Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

Both methylation and brain volume patterns hold important biological information 
for the development and prognosis of schizophrenia (SZ). A combined study to
probe the association between them provides a new perspective to understanding
SZ. Genomic methylation of peripheral blood and regional brain volumes derived
from magnetic resonance imaging were analyzed using parallel independent
component analyses in this study. Nine methylation components and five brain
volumetric components were extracted for 94 SZ patients and 106 healthy controls.
After controlling for age, sex, race, and substance use, a component comprised
primarily of bilateral cerebellar volumes was significantly correlated to a
methylation component from 14 CpG sites in 13 genes. Both patients and healthy
controls demonstrated similar associations, but patients had significantly
smaller cerebellar volumes and dysmethylation in the associated epigenetic
component compared to controls. The 13 genes are enriched in cellular growth and 
proliferation with some genes involved in neuronal growth and cerebellum
development (GATA4, ADRA1D, EPHA3, and KCNK10), and these genes are prominently
associated with neurological and psychological disorders. Such findings suggest
that the methylation pattern of the genes coding for cellular growth may
influence the cerebellar development through regulating gene expression, and the 
alteration in the methylation of these genes in SZ patients may contribute to the
cerebellar volume reduction observed in patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4681600 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26381449  [PubMed - in process]


82. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 2):473-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.021. Epub 2015
Sep 12.

A novel mutation of GATA4 (K300T) associated with familial atrial septal defect.

Chen J(1), Qi B(2), Zhao J(3), Liu W(4), Duan R(5), Zhang M(6).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan province 410008, China. Electronic
address: chenjia@sklmg.edu.cn. (2)China Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin province 130031, China. Electronic address:
qiby14@mails.jlu.edu.cn. (3)The State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School
of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan province 410008,
China. Electronic address: zhaojuan@sklmg.edu.cn. (4)The State Key Laboratory of 
Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan province 410008, China. Electronic address: liuwei_nv@126.com. (5)The State
Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan province 410008, China. Electronic address:
duanranhui@sklmg.edu.cn. (6)China Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin province 130031, China. Electronic address:
zhangmingqiu62@126.com.

The GATA-binding protein 4 gene (GATA4) encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor that plays a key role in embryogenesis and cardiac development. Variants
in the GATA4 gene have been implicated in several congenital heart diseases
(CHD), such as the tetralogy of Fallot (ToF), atrial septal defect (ASD),
ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), and
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). We studied a four-generation Chinese ASD family and
identified a novel GATA4 mutation (c.A899C, p.K300T) in all surviving affected
members and two carriers with incomplete penetrance. Bioinformatics programs
(PolyPhen-2, SIFT, and MutationTaster) predicted the mutation to be deleterious. 
The lysine at the mutation position was highly conserved from Drosophila to
humans and was recognized as a methylation location in the GATA4 protein. The
involvement of the lysine methylation in cardiogenesis by attenuating the
transcriptional activity of GATA4 in mice has been previously examined. Our study
broadens the mutation spectrum of the GATA4 gene and reveals for the first time a
mutation at the methylation position of GATA4 associated with ASD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26376067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 1):303-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.016. Epub 2015 
Sep 14.

Comparative transcriptome analysis of atrial septal defect identifies
dysregulated genes during heart septum morphogenesis.

Wang W(1), Niu Z(1), Wang Y(1), Li Y(1), Zou H(1), Yang L(1), Meng M(1), Wei
C(1), Li Q(1), Duan L(1), Xie Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Cao Y(1), Han S(1), Hou Z(2),
Jiang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yan'an Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming 650051,
Yunnan, People's Republic of China; Kunming Yan'an Hospital, Kunming 650051,
Yunnan, People's Republic of China; Institute of Cardiovascular Surgery of Yunnan
Province, Kunming 650051, Yunnan, People's Republic of China. (2)Yan'an
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming 650051, Yunnan,
People's Republic of China; Kunming Yan'an Hospital, Kunming 650051, Yunnan,
People's Republic of China; Institute of Cardiovascular Surgery of Yunnan
Province, Kunming 650051, Yunnan, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
hzl579@163.com. (3)Yan'an Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University,
Kunming 650051, Yunnan, People's Republic of China; Kunming Yan'an Hospital,
Kunming 650051, Yunnan, People's Republic of China; Institute of Cardiovascular
Surgery of Yunnan Province, Kunming 650051, Yunnan, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: jianglihong_yayy@163.com.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of most common birth defects, causing fetal
loss and death in newborn all over the world. Atrial and ventricular septal
defects were the most common CHD subtypes in most districts. During the past
decades, several genes were identified to control atrial septum formation, and
mutations of these genes can cause cardiac septation defects. However, the
pathogenic mechanism of ASD on transcriptional levels has not been well
elucidated yet. Herein, we performed comparative transcriptome analysis between
normal and atrial septal defect (ASD) patients by Illumina RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq). Advanced bioinformatic analyses were employed to identify dysregulated
genes in ASD. The results indicated that cardiac specific transcriptional factors
(GATA4 and NKX2-5), extracellular signal molecules (VEGFA and BMP10) and cardiac 
sarcomeric proteins (MYL2, MYL3, MYH7, TNNT1 and TNNT3) were downregulated in ASD
which may affect heart atrial septum formation, cardiomyocyte proliferation and
cardiac muscle development. Importantly, cell cycle was dominant pathway among
downregulated genes, and decreased expression of the proteins included in cell
cycle may disturb cardiomyocyte growth and differentiation during atrial septum
formation. Our study provided evidences of understanding pathogenic mechanism of 
ASD and resource for validation of CHD genomic studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26375510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Endocrinology. 2015 Dec;156(12):4672-83. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1077. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

Prenatal Exposures of Male Rats to the Environmental Chemicals Bisphenol A and
Di(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate Impact the Sexual Differentiation Process.

Abdel-Maksoud FM(1), Leasor KR(1), Butzen K(1), Braden TD(1), Akingbemi BT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn, Auburn University, Alabama 36849.

The increasing incidence of reproductive anomalies, described as testicular
dysgenesis syndrome, is thought to be related to the exposure of the population
to chemicals in the environment. Bisphenol A (BPA) and di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate 
(DEHP), which have hormonal and antihormonal activity, have attracted public
attention due to their presence in consumer products. The present study
investigated the effects of BPA and DEHP on reproductive development.
Timed-pregnant female rats were exposed to BPA and DEHP by gavage from
gestational days 12 to 21. Results showed that prenatal exposures to test
chemicals exerted variable effects on steroidogenic factor 1 and GATA binding
protein 4 protein expression and increased (P < .05) sex-determining region Y-box
9 and antimüllerian hormone protein in the infantile rat testis compared with
levels in the control unexposed animals. Pituitary LHß and FSHß subunit protein
expression was increased (P < .05) in BPA- and DEHP-exposed prepubertal male rats
but were decreased (P < .05) in adult animals relative to control. Exposure to
both BPA and DEHP in utero inhibited (P < .05) global DNA hydroxymethylation in
the adult testis in association with altered DNA methyltransferase protein
expression. Together the present data suggest that altered developmental
programming in the testes associated with chemical exposures are related to the
disruption of sexual differentiation events and DNA methylation patterns. The
chemical-induced effects impact the development of steroidogenic capacity in the 
adult testis.

PMID: 26372177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 10;6:8243. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9243.

High-efficiency reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes requires
suppression of pro-fibrotic signalling.

Zhao Y(1), Londono P(1), Cao Y(1), Sharpe EJ(2), Proenza C(1,)(2), O'Rourke R(3),
Jones KL(3), Jeong MY(1), Walker LA(1), Buttrick PM(1), McKinsey TA(1), Song
K(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12800 E. 19th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
12801 E. 17th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (4)Charles C. Gates Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes by forced expression of
cardiomyogenic factors, GMT (GATA4, Mef2C, Tbx5) or GHMT (GATA4, Hand2, Mef2C,
Tbx5), has recently been demonstrated, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy
for cardiac repair. However, current approaches are inefficient. Here we
demonstrate that pro-fibrotic signalling potently antagonizes cardiac
reprogramming. Remarkably, inhibition of pro-fibrotic signalling using small
molecules that target the transforming growth factor-ß or Rho-associated kinase
pathways converts embryonic fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocyte-like cells,
with the efficiency up to 60%. Conversely, overactivation of these pro-fibrotic
signalling networks attenuates cardiac reprogramming. Furthermore, inhibition of 
pro-fibrotic signalling dramatically enhances the kinetics of cardiac
reprogramming, with spontaneously contracting cardiomyocytes emerging in less
than 2 weeks, as opposed to 4 weeks with GHMT alone. These findings provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying cardiac conversion of
fibroblasts and would enhance efforts to generate cardiomyocytes for clinical
applications.

PMCID: PMC4579788
PMID: 26354680  [PubMed - in process]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 22;112(38):11864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1516237112. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Akt1/protein kinase B enhances transcriptional reprogramming of fibroblasts to
functional cardiomyocytes.

Zhou H(1), Dickson ME(1), Kim MS(2), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148;
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9066. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for
Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Eric.Olson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):13131-2.

Conversion of fibroblasts to functional cardiomyocytes represents a potential
approach for restoring cardiac function after myocardial injury, but the
technique thus far has been slow and inefficient. To improve the efficiency of
reprogramming fibroblasts to cardiac-like myocytes (iCMs) by cardiac
transcription factors [Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GHMT)], we screened 192
protein kinases and discovered that Akt/protein kinase B dramatically accelerates
and amplifies this process in three different types of fibroblasts (mouse embryo,
adult cardiac, and tail tip). Approximately 50% of reprogrammed mouse embryo
fibroblasts displayed spontaneous beating after 3 wk of induction by Akt plus
GHMT. Furthermore, addition of Akt1 to GHMT evoked a more mature cardiac
phenotype for iCMs, as seen by enhanced polynucleation, cellular hypertrophy,
gene expression, and metabolic reprogramming. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1)
and phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) acted upstream of Akt whereas the
mitochondrial target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and forkhead box o3 (Foxo3a)
acted downstream of Akt to influence fibroblast-to-cardiomyocyte reprogramming.
These findings provide insights into the molecular basis of cardiac reprogramming
and represent an important step toward further application of this technique.

PMCID: PMC4586885
PMID: 26354121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Exp Biol. 2015 Nov;218(Pt 21):3468-77. doi: 10.1242/jeb.129486. Epub 2015 Sep
7.

The impact of high-salt exposure on cardiovascular development in the early chick
embryo.

Wang G(1), Zhang N(1), Wei YF(1), Jin YM(1), Zhang SY(1), Cheng X(1), Ma ZL(1),
Zhao SZ(1), Chen YP(2), Chuai M(3), Hocher B(4), Yang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of the Ministry of Education,
Division of Histology and Embryology, Medical College, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Department of Neonates, The first Affiliated Hospital
of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (3)Division of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. (4)Department of
Neonates, The first Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China Humboldt University of Berlin, University Hospital Charité, Center for
Cardiovascular Research & Institute for Pharmacology, Hessischestrasse 3-4,
Berlin D-10115, Germany yang_xuesong@126.com berthold.hocher@charite.de. (5)Key
Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of the Ministry of Education, Division of
Histology and Embryology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China Institute of Fetal-Preterm Labor Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, China yang_xuesong@126.com berthold.hocher@charite.de.

In this study, we show that high-salt exposure dramatically increases chick
mortality during embryo development. As embryonic mortality at early stages
mainly results from defects in cardiovascular development, we focused on heart
formation and angiogenesis. We found that high-salt exposure enhanced the risk of
abnormal heart tube looping and blood congestion in the heart chamber. In the
presence of high salt, both ventricular cell proliferation and apoptosis
increased. The high osmolarity induced by high salt in the ventricular
cardiomyocytes resulted in incomplete differentiation, which might be due to
reduced expression of Nkx2.5 and GATA4. Blood vessel density and diameter were
suppressed by exposure to high salt in both the yolk sac membrane (YSM) and
chorioallantoic membrane models. In addition, high-salt-induced suppression of
angiogenesis occurred even at the vasculogenesis stage, as blood island formation
was also inhibited by high-salt exposure. At the same time, cell proliferation
was repressed and cell apoptosis was enhanced by high-salt exposure in YSM
tissue. Moreover, the reduction in expression of HIF2 and FGF2 genes might cause 
high-salt-suppressed angiogenesis. Interestingly, we show that high-salt exposure
causes excess generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the heart and YSM
tissues, which could be partially rescued through the addition of antioxidants.
In total, our study suggests that excess generation of ROS might play an
important role in high-salt-induced defects in heart and angiogenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26347567  [PubMed - in process]


88. Cytotherapy. 2015 Nov;17(11):1627-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.07.012. Epub 2015 
Aug 31.

In vitro cardiomyocyte differentiation of umbilical cord blood cells: crucial
role for c-kit(+) cells.

Iachininoto MG(1), Capodimonti S(1), Podda MV(2), Valentini CG(1), Bianchi M(1), 
Leone AM(3), Teofili L(4), Leone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Human Physiology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. (4)Institute of Hematology, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: lteofili@rm.unicatt.it.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Although bone marrow c-kit(+) progenitor cells support
myocardial regeneration, the cardiomyocyte differentiation potential of umbilical
cord blood (UCB) c-kit(+) cells is unknown.
METHODS: UCB mononuclear cells (MNCs) and c-kit(+) cells purified by use of
immunomagnetic beads were used. Cardiomyocyte differentiation was induced with
(i) a-minimum essential medium (MEM) with cyclosporine A, (ii) a-MEM with bone
morphogenic protein 4 (BMP-4) and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) or (iii)
MEM with dexamethasone. The expression of cardiac markers (GATA4, GATA6, ß-myosin
heavy chain, a-sarcomeric actin and cardiac Troponin T) was investigated, and
whole-cell current and voltage-clamp recordings were performed.
RESULTS: Although c-kit(+) cells revealed an immature gene profile, with high
expression of CD34, CD133, aldehyde dehydrogenase-A1 and c-myc RNAs, purified
c-kit(+) cells did not succeed in differentiating into cardiomyocyte-like cells
in culture. In contrast, MNCs (either in a-MEM plus cyclosporine A or in a-MEM
plus BMP-4 and TGF-ß) produced large, adherent cells expressing several cardiac
genes and exhibiting an excitable phenotype. Cardiomyocyte-like cell formation
was prevented by removing the c-kit(+) cell fraction from MNCs. Furthermore,
after co-culturing carboxyfluorescein diacetate succynimidyl ester (CFSE)-tracked
c-kit(+) cells together with c-kit(-) cells, we found that cardiac Troponin
T--expressing cells were also CFSE(+).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that UCB contains progenitors endowed with differentiation
potential into cardiomyocytes: these cells reside in the c-kit(+) fraction and
require the presence of abundant accessory cells to accomplish the
differentiation. These preliminary observations provide the basis for consider
the storage of autologous UCB in patients with prenatal diagnosis of congenital
heart diseases potentially amenable by myocardial regenerative approaches.

Copyright © 2015 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26338480  [PubMed - in process]


89. World J Stem Cells. 2015 Aug 26;7(7):1064-77. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v7.i7.1064.

Simplified three-dimensional culture system for long-term expansion of embryonic 
stem cells.

McKee C(1), Perez-Cruet M(1), Chavez F(1), Chaudhry GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Christina McKee, Mick Perez-Cruet, Ferman Chavez, G Rasul Chaudhry, OU-WB
Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Oakland University, Rochester,
MI 48309, United States.

AIM: To devise a simplified and efficient method for long-term culture and
maintenance of embryonic stem cells requiring less frequent passaging.
METHODS: Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) labeled with enhanced yellow
fluorescent protein were cultured in three-dimensional (3-D) self-assembling
scaffolds and compared with traditional two-dimentional (2-D) culture techniques 
requiring mouse embryonic fibroblast feeder layers or leukemia inhibitory factor.
3-D scaffolds encapsulating ESCs were prepared by mixing ESCs with polyethylene
glycol tetra-acrylate (PEG-4-Acr) and thiol-functionalized dextran (Dex-SH).
Distribution of ESCs in 3-D was monitored by confocal microscopy. Viability and
proliferation of encapsulated cells during long-term culture were determined by
propidium iodide as well as direct cell counts and PrestoBlue (PB) assays.
Genetic expression of pluripotency markers (Oct4, Nanog, Klf4, and Sox2) in ESCs 
grown under 2-D and 3-D culture conditions was examined by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Protein expression of selected stemness markers was
determined by two different methods, immunofluorescence staining (Oct4 and Nanog)
and western blot analysis (Oct4, Nanog, and Klf4). Pluripotency of 3-D scaffold
grown ESCs was analyzed by in vivo teratoma assay and in vitro differentiation
via embryoid bodies into cells of all three germ layers.
RESULTS: Self-assembling scaffolds encapsulating ESCs for 3-D culture without the
loss of cell viability were prepared by mixing PEG-4-Acr and Dex-SH (1:1 v/v) to 
a final concentration of 5% (w/v). Scaffold integrity was dependent on the degree
of thiol substitution of Dex-SH and cell concentration. Scaffolds prepared using 
Dex-SH with 7.5% and 33% thiol substitution and incubated in culture medium
maintained their integrity for 11 and 13 d without cells and 22 ± 5 d and 37 ± 5 
d with cells, respectively. ESCs formed compact colonies, which progressively
increased in size over time due to cell proliferation as determined by confocal
microscopy and PB staining. 3-D scaffold cultured ESCs expressed significantly
higher levels (P < 0.01) of Oct4, Nanog, and Kl4, showing a 2.8, 3.0 and 1.8 fold
increase, respectively, in comparison to 2-D grown cells. A similar increase in
the protein expression levels of Oct4, Nanog, and Klf4 was observed in 3-D grown 
ESCs. However, when 3-D cultured ESCs were subsequently passaged in 2-D culture
conditions, the level of these pluripotent markers was reduced to normal levels. 
3-D grown ESCs produced teratomas and yielded cells of all three germ layers,
expressing brachyury (mesoderm), NCAM (ectoderm), and GATA4 (endoderm) markers.
Furthermore, these cells differentiated into osteogenic, chondrogenic, myogenic, 
and neural lineages expressing Col1, Col2, Myog, and Nestin, respectively.
CONCLUSION: This novel 3-D culture system demonstrated long-term maintenance of
mouse ESCs without the routine passaging and manipulation necessary for
traditional 2-D cell propagation.

PMCID: PMC4550630
PMID: 26328022  [PubMed]


90. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 15;406(2):196-202. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.020. Epub 2015
Aug 29.

PEG-PLA nanoparticles facilitate siRNA knockdown in adult zebrafish heart.

Diao J(1), Wang H(2), Chang N(1), Zhou XH(1), Zhu X(1), Wang J(2), Xiong JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic
Molecular Medicine, and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs,
Peking University, Beijing, China. (2)School of Life Sciences and Hefei National 
Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Beijing
Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine, and State Key Laboratory of
Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: jingwei_xiong@pku.edu.cn.

The remarkable regenerative capacity of the zebrafish has made it an important
model organism for studying heart regeneration. However, current loss-of-function
studies are limited by a lack of conditional-knockout and effective
gene-knockdown methods for the adult heart. Here, we report a novel siRNA
knockdown method facilitated by poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(D,L-lactide)
(PEG-PLA) nanoparticles. The siRNA-encapsulated nanoparticles successfully
entered cells and resulted in remarkable gene-specific knockdown in the adult
heart. This effect was demonstrated by down-regulation of the Aldh1a2 and Dusp6
proteins after intrapleural delivery of nanoparticle-encapsulated siRNAs.
Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Aldh1a2 was sufficient to inhibit
myocardial proliferation and decrease the numbers of Gata4-positive
cardiomyocytes after ventricular resection. Therefore, the results of this work
demonstrate that nanoparticle-facilitated siRNA delivery provides an alternative 
tool for loss-of-function studies of genes in the adult heart in particular and
other organs in general in the adult zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26327645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0136847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136847.
eCollection 2015.

Bnip3 Binds and Activates p300: Possible Role in Cardiac Transcription and
Myocyte Morphology.

Thompson JW(1), Wei J(1), Appau K(1), Wang H(1), Yu H(2), Spiga MG(1), Graham
RM(1), Webster KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology and the Vascular Biology
Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United 
States of America. (2)Department of Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Bnip3 is a hypoxia-regulated member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins that is
implicated in apoptosis, programmed necrosis, autophagy and mitophagy.
Mitochondria are thought to be the primary targets of Bnip3 although its
activities may extend to the ER, cytoplasm, and nucleus. Bnip3 is induced in the 
heart by ischemia and pressure-overload, and may contribute to cardiomyopathy and
heart failure. Only mitochondrial-dependent programmed death actions have been
described for Bnip3 in the heart. Here we describe a novel activity of Bnip3 in
cultured cardiac myocytes and transgenic mice overexpressing Bnip3 in the heart
(Bnip3-TG). In cultured myocytes Bnip3 bound and activated the acetyltransferase 
p300, increased acetylation of histones and the transcription factor GATA4, and
conferred p300 and GATA4-sensitive cellular morphological changes. In intact
Bnip3-TG hearts Bnip3 also bound p300 and GATA4 and conferred enhanced GATA4
acetylation. Bnip3-TG mice underwent age-dependent ventricular dilation and heart
failure that was partially prevented by p300 inhibition with curcumin. The
results suggest that Bnip3 regulates cardiac gene expression and perhaps myocyte 
morphology by activating nuclear p300 acetyltransferase activity and
hyperacetylating histones and p300-selective transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4552727
PMID: 26317696  [PubMed - in process]


92. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3306-17. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1087621.

Autophagy is involved in ethanol-induced cardia bifida during chick
cardiogenesis.

Li S(1), Wang G(1), Gao LR(1), Lu WH(1), Wang XY(1), Chuai M(2), Lee KK(3), Cao
L(4), Yang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Histology and Embryology ; Key Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine of the Ministry of Education, Medical College, Jinan University ;
Guangzhou , China. (2)b Division of Cell and Developmental Biology ; University
of Dundee ; Dundee , UK. (3)d Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of the
Ministry of Education, School of Biomedical Sciences, Chinese University of Hong 
Kong ; Shatin , Hong Kong. (4)c Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, China
Medical University ; Shenyang , China.

Excess alcohol consumption during pregnancy has been acknowledged to increase the
incidence of congenital disorders, especially the cardiovascular system. However,
the mechanism involved in ethanol-induced cardiac malformation in prenatal fetus 
is still unknown. We demonstrated that ethanol exposure during gastrulation in
the chick embryo increased the incidence of cardia bifida. Previously, we
reported that autophagy was involved in heart tube formation. In this context, we
demonstrated that ethanol exposure increased ATG7 and LC3 expression. mTOR was
found to be inhibited by ethanol exposure. We activated autophagy using exogenous
rapamycin (RAPA) and observed that it induced cardiac bifida and increased GATA5 
expression. RAPA beads implantation experiments revealed that RAPA restricted
ventricular myosin heavy chain (VMHC) expression. In vitro explant cultures of
anterior primitive streak demonstrated that both ethanol and RAPA treatments
could reduce cell differentiation and the spontaneous beating of cardiac
precursor cells. In addition, the bead experiments showed that RAPA inhibited
GATA5 expression during heart tube formation. Semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis
indicated that BMP2 expression was increased while GATA4 expression was
suppressed. In the embryos exposed to excess ethanol, BMP2, GATA4 and FGF8
expression was repressed. These genes are associated with cardiomyocyte
differentiation, while heart tube fusion is associated with increased Wnt3a but
reduced VEGF and Slit2 expression. Furthermore, the ethanol exposure also caused 
the production of excess ROS, which might damage the cardiac precursor cells of
developing embryos. In sum, our results revealed that disrupting autophagy and
excess ROS generation are responsible for inducing abnormal cardiogenesis in
ethanol-treated chick embryos.

PMID: 26317250  [PubMed - in process]


93. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Aug 26;11(8):e1004476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004476. 
eCollection 2015.

Pluripotency, Differentiation, and Reprogramming: A Gene Expression Dynamics
Model with Epigenetic Feedback Regulation.

Miyamoto T(1), Furusawa C(2), Kaneko K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), RIKEN, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Embryonic stem cells exhibit pluripotency: they can differentiate into all types 
of somatic cells. Pluripotent genes such as Oct4 and Nanog are activated in the
pluripotent state, and their expression decreases during cell differentiation.
Inversely, expression of differentiation genes such as Gata6 and Gata4 is
promoted during differentiation. The gene regulatory network controlling the
expression of these genes has been described, and slower-scale epigenetic
modifications have been uncovered. Although the differentiation of pluripotent
stem cells is normally irreversible, reprogramming of cells can be experimentally
manipulated to regain pluripotency via overexpression of certain genes. Despite
these experimental advances, the dynamics and mechanisms of differentiation and
reprogramming are not yet fully understood. Based on recent experimental
findings, we constructed a simple gene regulatory network including pluripotent
and differentiation genes, and we demonstrated the existence of pluripotent and
differentiated states from the resultant dynamical-systems model. Two
differentiation mechanisms, interaction-induced switching from an expression
oscillatory state and noise-assisted transition between bistable stationary
states, were tested in the model. The former was found to be relevant to the
differentiation process. We also introduced variables representing epigenetic
modifications, which controlled the threshold for gene expression. By assuming
positive feedback between expression levels and the epigenetic variables, we
observed differentiation in expression dynamics. Additionally, with numerical
reprogramming experiments for differentiated cells, we showed that pluripotency
was recovered in cells by imposing overexpression of two pluripotent genes and
external factors to control expression of differentiation genes. Interestingly,
these factors were consistent with the four Yamanaka factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4,
and Myc, which were necessary for the establishment of induced pluripotent stem
cells. These results, based on a gene regulatory network and expression dynamics,
contribute to our wider understanding of pluripotency, differentiation, and
reprogramming of cells, and they provide a fresh viewpoint on robustness and
control during development.

PMCID: PMC4550282
PMID: 26308610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Rep. 2015 Aug 25;12(8):1300-13. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.078. Epub 2015
Aug 13.

Deregulation of the Ras-Erk Signaling Axis Modulates the Enhancer Landscape.

Nabet B(1), Ó Broin P(2), Reyes JM(3), Shieh K(2), Lin CY(3), Will CM(4), Popovic
R(4), Ezponda T(4), Bradner JE(3), Golden AA(5), Licht JD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Driskill Graduate Program in Life Sciences,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA; Department of Mathematical
Sciences, Yeshiva University, New York, NY 10033, USA. (6)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: j-licht@northwestern.edu.

Unrestrained receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling and epigenetic deregulation
are root causes of tumorigenesis. We establish linkage between these processes by
demonstrating that aberrant RTK signaling unleashed by oncogenic HRas(G12V) or
loss of negative feedback through Sprouty gene deletion remodels histone
modifications associated with active typical and super-enhancers. However,
although both lesions disrupt the Ras-Erk axis, the expression programs, enhancer
signatures, and transcription factor networks modulated upon HRas(G12V)
transformation or Sprouty deletion are largely distinct. Oncogenic HRas(G12V)
elevates histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) levels at enhancers near the
transcription factor Gata4 and the kinase Prkcb, as well as their expression
levels. We show that Gata4 is necessary for the aberrant gene expression and
H3K27ac marking at enhancers, and Prkcb is required for the oncogenic effects of 
HRas(G12V)-driven cells. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that dynamic
reprogramming of the cellular enhancer landscape is a major effect of oncogenic
RTK signaling.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4551578 [Available on 2016-08-25]
PMID: 26279576  [PubMed - in process]


95. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;71(10):1229-36. doi: 10.1007/s00228-015-1915-y.
Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Effects of NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1 polymorphisms on stable warfarin
doses in Korean patients with mechanical cardiac valves.

Chung JE(1), Chang BC(2), Lee KE(1,)(3), Kim JH(1), Gwak HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, 52 Ewhayedae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-750, South Korea.
(2)Department of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery, Yonsei University Medical
Center, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National
University, 1 Chungdae-ro, Seowon-gu, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 361-763, South Korea.
(4)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, 52 Ewhayedae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-750, South Korea.
hsgwak@ewha.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, encoded by NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1
(NQO1), is an enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of quinones, including vitamin 
K. Given its potential role in vitamin K metabolism, this study aimed to
investigate the effects of NQO1 polymorphisms on stable warfarin doses.
METHODS: We tested a possible effect of gene polymorphisms on variability in
warfarin response using 206 Korean patients with mechanical cardiac valves.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of NQO1 with a minor allele frequency of
at least 15% were included. Also, genotypes of vitamin K epoxide reductase
complex subunit 1 (VKORC1), cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9, CYP4F2, gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase (GGCX), and GATA4 were determined.
RESULTS: NQO1 rs1800566 (C>T) and rs10517 (C>T) were significantly associated
with stable warfarin doses. Variant homozygote carriers required lower stable
warfarin doses than those with wild-type C allele in rs1800566 (4.85 ± 1.61 vs.
5.61 ± 1.94 mg; p = 0.033), whereas patients with wild homozygote required lower 
doses than those with T allele in rs10517 (5.11 ± 1.73 vs. 5.75 ± 1.98 mg; p =
0.017). Similar results were obtained from stratified analysis using VKORC1
variant homozygote carriers in both SNPs. Multivariate analysis showed that
rs10517 (C>T) increased contribution of gene variations to the overall warfarin
dose variability from 42.5 to 43.8%.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that NQO1 gene polymorphisms influence stable
warfarin doses in Korean patients.

PMID: 26257249  [PubMed - in process]


96. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2015 Aug;66(2):196-203. doi:
10.1097/FJC.0000000000000265.

TIEG1 Inhibits Angiotensin II-induced Cardiomyocyte Hypertrophy by Inhibiting
Transcription Factor GATA4.

Li Q(1), Shen P, Zeng S, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

The transforming growth factor (TGF-ß)-inducible early gene (TIEG1), a member of 
the Sp1/Krüppel-like family of transcription factors, plays an important role in 
regulating cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis in many human diseases,
including breast cancer, osteoporosis, and atherosclerosis. However, little is
known about the role of TIEG1 in the heart. In this study, we investigated the
role of TIEG1 in angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and
its underlying mechanism. Our results showed that TIEG1 expression was
downregulated in Ang II-induced hypertrophic cardiomyocytes. Gene silencing of
TIEG1 by RNA interference upregulated cellular surface area and ANF and BNP
messenger RNA levels, whereas TIEG1 overexpression inhibited the expression of
those genes. Mechanistically, TIEG1 could inhibit the expression and
transcriptional activity of transcription factor GATA4 in cardiomyocytes, which
was recognized as an important factor mediating cardiac gene transcription. In
summary, our data disclose a novel role of TIEG1 as an inhibitor in Ang
II-induced hypertrophic cardiomyocytes through GATA4 signal pathway.

PMID: 26252173  [PubMed - in process]


97. Pharmacogenomics. 2015;16(10):1101-8. doi: 10.2217/pgs.15.37. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms in c-Myc on stable warfarin doses in
patients with cardiac valve replacements.

Lee KE(1,)(2), Chang BC(3), Park S(1), Gwak HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy & Division of Life & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans 
University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-750, South Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National University, 1 Chungdae-ro, Seowon-gu,
Cheongju, Chungbuk 361-763, South Korea. (3)Department of Thoracic &
Cardiovascular Surgery, Yonsei University Medical Center, 250 Seongsanno,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

AIM: This study aimed to investigate an association between c-Myc SNPs and stable
warfarin doses.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The influences of genetic polymorphisms on dose requirements
were investigated by genotyping ten SNPs in 201 patients with stable warfarin
doses; VKORC1 (rs9923231), CYP2C9 (rs1057910), CYP4F2 (rs2108622), GATA4
(rs10090884), c-Myc (rs4645962, rs4645943, rs4645948 and rs4645974) and 8q24
(rs1447295 and rs16901979).
RESULTS: Around 44.3% of the overall interindividual variability in warfarin dose
requirements was explained by the multivariate regression model; VKORC1 genotype 
accounted for 26.4%, CYP2C9 genotype for 4.9%, age for 3.4%, c-Myc genotypes for 
5.2% (rs4645974 for 2.4% and rs4645943 for 2.8%), CYP4F2 genotype for 2.9% and
diuretic use for 1.5%.
CONCLUSION: Our results revealed that c-Myc could be a determinant of stable
warfarin doses.

PMID: 26249541  [PubMed - in process]


98. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 3;10(8):e0134093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134093.
eCollection 2015.

Generation of Functional Cardiomyocytes from Efficiently Generated Human iPSCs
and a Novel Method of Measuring Contractility.

Rajasingh S(1), Thangavel J(1), Czirok A(2), Samanta S(1), Roby KF(2), Dawn B(1),
Rajasingh J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas, United States of America. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States 
of America. (3)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Division of Cardiovascular
Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas,
United States of America.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived cardiomyocytes (iCMCs) would
provide an unlimited cell source for regenerative medicine and drug discoveries. 
The objective of our study is to generate functional cardiomyocytes from human
iPSCs and to develop a novel method of measuring contractility of CMCs. In a
series of experiments, adult human skin fibroblasts (HSF) and human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were treated with a combination of pluripotent
gene DNA and mRNA under specific conditions. The iPSC colonies were identified
and differentiated into various cell lineages, including CMCs. The contractile
activity of CMCs was measured by a novel method of frame-by-frame cross
correlation (particle image velocimetry-PIV) analysis. Our treatment regimen
transformed 4% of HSFs into iPSC colonies at passage 0, a significantly improved 
efficiency compared with use of either DNA or mRNA alone. The iPSCs were capable 
of differentiating both in vitro and in vivo into endodermal, ectodermal and
mesodermal cells, including CMCs with >88% of cells being positive for troponin T
(CTT) and Gata4 by flow cytometry. We report a highly efficient combination of
DNA and mRNA to generate iPSCs and functional iCMCs from adult human cells. We
also report a novel approach to measure contractility of iCMCs.

PMCID: PMC4523188
PMID: 26237415  [PubMed - in process]


99. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 29;16(8):17368-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms160817368.

Direct Reprogramming-The Future of Cardiac Regeneration?

Doppler SA(1), Deutsch MA(2), Lange R(3,)(4), Krane M(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich
80636, Germany. doppler@dhm.mhn.de. (2)Division of Experimental Surgery,
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische
Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany. deutsch@dhm.mhn.de. (3)Division
of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches
Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany.
lange@dhm.mhn.de. (4)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research)-Partner
Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich 80802, Germany. lange@dhm.mhn.de. (5)Division 
of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches
Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany.
krane@dhm.mhn.de. (6)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research)-Partner
Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich 80802, Germany. krane@dhm.mhn.de.

Today, the only available curative therapy for end stage congestive heart failure
(CHF) is heart transplantation. This therapeutic option is strongly limited by
declining numbers of available donor hearts and by restricted long-term
performance of the transplanted graft. The disastrous prognosis for CHF with its 
restricted therapeutic options has led scientists to develop different concepts
of alternative regenerative treatment strategies including stem cell
transplantation or stimulating cell proliferation of different cardiac cell types
in situ. However, first clinical trials with overall inconsistent results were
not encouraging, particularly in terms of functional outcome. Among other
approaches, very promising ongoing pre-clinical research focuses on direct
lineage conversion of scar fibroblasts into functional myocardium, termed "direct
reprogramming" or "transdifferentiation." This review seeks to summarize
strategies for direct cardiac reprogramming including the application of
different sets of transcription factors, microRNAs, and small molecules for an
efficient generation of cardiomyogenic cells for regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC4581198
PMID: 26230692  [PubMed - in process]


100. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;309(6):C425-36. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00058.2015. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

cAMP induces hypertrophy and alters DNA methylation in HL-1 cardiomyocytes.

Fang X(1), Robinson J(2), Wang-Hu J(2), Jiang L(2), Freeman DA(2), Rivkees SA(2),
Wendler CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child Health Research Institute, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida xiefanfang@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Child Health Research Institute, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.

cAMP is a highly regulated secondary messenger involved in many biological
processes. Chronic activation of the cAMP pathway by catecholamines results in
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis; however, the mechanism by which elevated cAMP
leads to cardiomyopathy is not fully understood. To address this issue, we
increased intracellular cAMP levels in HL-1 cardiomyocytes, a cell line derived
from adult mouse atrium, using either the stable cAMP analog
N(6),2'-O-dibutyryladenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (DBcAMP) or
phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors caffeine and theophylline. Elevated cAMP
levels increased cell size and altered expression levels of cardiac genes and
micro-RNAs associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), including Myh6,
Myh7, Myh7b, Tnni3, Anp, Bnp, Gata4, Mef2c, Mef2d, Nfatc1, miR208a, and miR208b. 
In addition, DBcAMP altered the expression of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) and 
Tet methylcytosine dioxygenases (Tets), enzymes that regulate genomic DNA
methylation levels. Changes in expression of DNA methylation genes induced by
elevated cAMP led to increased global DNA methylation in HL-1 cells. In contrast,
inhibition of DNMT activity with 5-azacytidine treatment decreased global DNA
methylation levels and blocked the increased expression of several HCM genes
(Myh7, Gata4, Mef2c, Nfatc1, Myh7b, Tnni3, and Bnp) observed with DBcAMP
treatment. These results demonstrate that cAMP induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy 
and altered HCM gene expression in vitro and that DNA methylation patterns
mediate the upregulation of HCM genes induced by cAMP. These data identify a
previously unknown mechanism by which elevated levels of cAMP lead to increased
expression of genes associated with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4572371 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26224577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Toxicology. 2015 Oct 2;336:10-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul
26.

Di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate exposure during pregnancy disturbs temporal sex
determination regulation in mice offspring.

Wang Y(1), Liu W(2), Yang Q(3), Yu M(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE),
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and
Environmental Engineering (MOE), School of Environmental Science and Technology, 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic
address: liu_wei@dlut.edu.cn. (3)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic address:
qingyang@dlut.edu.cn.

Animal researches and clinical studies have supported the relevance between
phthalates exposure and testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS). These disorders may
comprise common origin in fetal life, especially during sex determination and
differentiation, where the mechanism remains unclear. The present study evaluated
the disturbances in gene regulatory networks of sex determination in fetal mouse 
by in utero Di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) exposure. Temporal expression of
key sex determination genes were examined during the critical narrow time window,
using whole-mount in situ hybridization and quantitative-PCR. DEHP exposure
resulted in significant reduction in mRNA of Sry during sex determination from
gestation day (GD) 11.0 to 11.5 in male fetal mice, and the increasing of Sry
expression to threshold level on GD 11.5 was delayed. Meanwhile, Gadd45g and
Gata4, the upstream genes of Sry, and downstream gene Sox9 were also
significantly downregulated in expression. In fetal females, the expression of
Wnt4 and beta-catenin were up-regulated by DEHP exposure. Taken together, the
results suggest that the potential mechanism of gonadal development disorder by
DEHP may origin from repression of important male sex determination signaling
pathway, involving Gadd45g <U+2192> Gata4 <U+2192> Sry <U+2192> Sox9. The results would promote a
better understanding of the association between phthalate esters (PAEs) exposure 
and the reductive disorder.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26219507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Mar;231(3):576-86. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25101.

IL-6 Activates PI3K and PKC<U+03B6> Signaling and Determines Cardiac Differentiation in 
Rat Embryonic H9c2 Cells.

D'Amico MA(1), Ghinassi B(1), Izzicupo P(1), Di Ruscio A(2), Di Baldassarre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, Section of Human Morphology, G.
d'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy. (2)Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

INTRODUCTION: IL-6 influences several biological processes, including cardiac
stem cell and cardiomyocyte physiology. Although JAK-STAT3 activation is the
defining feature of IL-6 signaling, signaling molecules such as PI3K, PKCs, and
ERK1/2 are also activated and elicit different responses. Moreover, most studies 
on the specific role of these signaling molecules focus on the adult heart, and
few studies are available on the biological effects evoked by IL-6 in embryonic
cardiomyocytes.
AIM: The aim of this study was to clarify the biological response of embryonic
heart derived cells to IL-6 by analyzing the morphological modifications and the 
signaling cascades evoked by the cytokine in H9c2 cells.
RESULTS: IL-6 stimulation determined the terminal differentiation of H9c2 cells, 
as evidenced by the increased expression of cardiac transcription factors (NKX2.5
and GATA4), structural proteins (a-myosin heavy chain and cardiac Troponin T) and
the gap junction protein Connexin 43. This process was mediated by the rapid
modulation of PI3K, Akt, PTEN, and PKC<U+03B6> phosphorylation levels. PI3K recruitment 
was an upstream event in the signaling cascade and when PI3K was inhibited, IL-6 
failed to modify PKC<U+03B6>, PTEN, and Akt phosphorylation. Blocking PKC<U+03B6> activity
affected only PTEN and Akt. Finally, the overexpression of a constitutively
active form of PKC<U+03B6> in H9c2 cells largely mimicked the morphological and
molecular effects evoked by IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that IL-6 induces the cardiac
differentiation of H9c2 embryonic cells though a signaling cascade that involves 
PI3K, PTEN, and PKC<U+03B6> activities.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26205888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;33(11):3254-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.2111. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Genome-Wide Identification of MESP1 Targets Demonstrates Primary Regulation Over 
Mesendoderm Gene Activity.

Soibam B(1,)(2), Benham A(1), Kim J(2), Weng KC(3), Yang L(1), Xu X(4), Robertson
M(1), Azares A(1), Cooney AJ(4), Schwartz RJ(1,)(2), Liu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Heart Institute, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
USA. (3)The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A & M University
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

MESP1 is considered the first sign of the nascent cardiac mesoderm and plays a
critical role in the appearance of cardiac progenitors, while exhibiting a
transient expression in the developing embryo. We profiled the transcriptome of a
pure population of differentiating MESP1-marked cells and found that they chiefly
contribute to the mesendoderm lineage. High-throughput sequencing of endogenous
MESP1-bound DNA revealed that MESP1 preferentially binds to two variants of E-box
sequences and activates critical mesendoderm modulators, including Eomes, Gata4, 
Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Mixl1, T, Gsc, and Wnt3. These mesendoderm markers were enriched in
the MESP1 marked population before the appearance of cardiac progenitors and
myocytes. Further, MESP1-binding is globally associated with H(3)K(27)
acetylation, supporting a novel pivotal role of it in regulating target gene
epigenetics. Therefore, MESP1, the pioneer cardiac factor, primarily directs the 
appearance of mesendoderm, the intermediary of the earliest progenitors of
mesoderm and endoderm organogenesis.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26205879  [PubMed - in process]


104. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Oct;36(7):1551. doi: 10.1007/s00246-015-1226-1.

Erratum to: Germline Mutations in NKX2-5, GATA4, and CRELD1 are Rare in a Mexican
Sample of Down Syndrome Patients with Endocardial Cushion and Septal Heart
Defects.

Alcántara-Ortigoza MA(1), De Rubens-Figueroa J(2), Reyna-Fabian ME(3),
Estandía-Ortega B(3), González-Del Angel A(3), Molina-Álvarez B(4),
Velázquez-Aragón JA(3), Villagómez-Martínez S(5), Pereira-López GI(3),
Martínez-Cruz V(3), Álvarez-Gómez RM(6), Díaz-García L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto 
Nacional de Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C,
Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico.
malcantaraortigoza@gmail.com. (2)Departamento de Cardiología Pediátrica,
Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C,
Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto 
Nacional de Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C,
Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio de Citogenética, Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto
Nacional de Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C,
Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico.
(5)Unidad de Apoyo a la Investigación Clínica, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría,
Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C, Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 
04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico. (6)Unidad de Genómica y Secuenciación
Masiva, Subdirección de Investigación Básica, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología,
San Fernando Número 22, Sección XVI, Tlalpan, CP 14080, Mexico, Distrito Federal,
Mexico. (7)Departamento de Metodología de la Investigación, Instituto Nacional de
Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C, Insurgentes-Cuicuilco,
Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico.

Erratum for
    Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Apr;36(4):802-8.

PMID: 26205256  [PubMed]


105. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 22;10(7):e0133288. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133288.
eCollection 2015.

Integrative Analysis of the Developing Postnatal Mouse Heart Transcriptome.

Gan J(1), Sonntag HJ(2), Tang MK(1), Cai D(3), Lee KK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regeneration Thematic Research Programme, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
EH4 2XU, United Kingdom. (3)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of
Education, Ji Nan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. (4)Stem Cell and
Regeneration Thematic Research Programme, School of Biomedical Sciences, Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Key Laboratory for
Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of Education, Ji Nan University, Guangzhou,
510632, China.

In mammals, cardiomyocytes rapidly proliferate in the fetus and continue to do so
for a few more days after birth. These cardiomyocytes then enter into growth
arrest but the detailed molecular mechanisms involved have not been fully
elucidated. We have addressed this issue by comparing the transcriptomes of
2-day-old (containing dividing cardiomyocytes) with 13-day-old (containing growth
arrested cardiomyocytes) postnatal mouse hearts. We performed comparative
microarray analysis on the heart tissues and then conducted Functional
annotation, Gene ontology, KEGG pathway and Gene Set enrichment analyses on the
differentially expressed genes. The bioinformatics analysis revealed that gene
ontology categories associated with the "cell cycle", "DNA replication",
"chromosome segregation" and "microtubule cytoskeleton" were down-regulated.
Inversely, "immune response", "extracellular matrix", "cell differentiation" and 
"cell membrane" were up-regulated. Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) has revealed
that GATA4, MYH7 and IGF1R were the key drivers of the gene interaction networks.
In addition, Regulator Effects network analysis suggested that TASP1, TOB1,
C1orf61, AIF1, ROCK1, TFF2 and miR503-5p may be acting on the cardiomyocytes in
13-day-old mouse hearts to inhibit cardiomyocyte proliferation and G1/S phase
transition. RT-qPCR was used to validate genes which were differentially
expressed and genes that play a prominent role in the pathways and interaction
networks that we identified. In sum, our integrative analysis has provided more
insights into the transcriptional regulation of cardiomyocyte exit from the cell 
cycle during postnatal heart development. The results also pinpoint potential
regulators that could be used to induce growth arrested cardiomyocytes to
proliferate in the infarcted heart.

PMCID: PMC4511561
PMID: 26200114  [PubMed - in process]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(19):3312-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00229-15. Epub 2015 Jul 
20.

Orphan Nuclear Receptor Nur77 Inhibits Cardiac Hypertrophic Response to
Beta-Adrenergic Stimulation.

Yan G(1), Zhu N(2), Huang S(3), Yi B(1), Shang X(4), Chen M(1), Wang N(1), Zhang 
GX(3), Talarico JA(4), Tilley DG(4), Gao E(5), Sun J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Center for Translational
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA Department of Medicine, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Medicine, Changhai
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (4)Center for
Translational Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Center for Translational Medicine, Temple University School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA erhe.gao@temple.edu
jianxin.sun@jefferson.edu. (6)Center for Translational Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Department
of Medicine, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China erhe.gao@temple.edu jianxin.sun@jefferson.edu.

The orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 plays critical roles in cardiovascular
diseases, and its expression is markedly induced in the heart after
beta-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR) activation. However, the functional significance 
of Nur77 in ß-AR signaling in the heart remains unclear. By using Northern blot, 
Western blot, and immunofluorescent staining assays, we showed that Nur77
expression was markedly upregulated in cardiomyocytes in response to multiple
hypertrophic stimuli, including isoproterenol (ISO), phenylephrine (PE), and
endothelin-1 (ET-1). In a time- and dose-dependent manner, ISO increases Nur77
expression in the nuclei of cardiomyocytes. Overexpression of Nur77 markedly
inhibited ISO-induced cardiac hypertrophy by inducing nuclear translocation of
Nur77 in cardiomyocytes. Furthermore, cardiac overexpression of Nur77 by
intramyocardial injection of Ad-Nur77 substantially inhibited cardiac hypertrophy
and ameliorated cardiac dysfunction after chronic infusion of ISO in mice.
Mechanistically, we demonstrated that Nur77 functionally interacts with NFATc3
and GATA4 and inhibits their transcriptional activities, which are critical for
the development of cardiac hypertrophy. These results demonstrate for the first
time that Nur77 is a novel negative regulator for the ß-AR-induced cardiac
hypertrophy through inhibiting the NFATc3 and GATA4 transcriptional pathways.
Targeting Nur77 may represent a potentially novel therapeutic strategy for
preventing cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4561731
PMID: 26195821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Stem Cells. 2015 Oct;33(10):3100-13. doi: 10.1002/stem.2101. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Cardiac Repair With a Novel Population of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Resident in the 
Human Heart.

Zhang Y(1), Sivakumaran P(2), Newcomb AE(3,)(4,)(5), Hernandez D(1,)(2), Harris
N(2), Khanabdali R(3,)(2), Liu GS(6,)(7), Kelly DJ(1), Pébay A(6,)(7), Hewitt
AW(6,)(7), Boyle A(8), Harvey R(9), Morrison WA(3,)(2,)(10), Elliott DA(11),
Dusting GJ(3,)(6,)(2,)(7), Lim SY(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)O'Brien Institute Department, St. Vincent's
Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of
Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Vascular and Cardiac Surgery, The
Cardiovascular Research Centre (CvRC), Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy,
Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (7)Centre for Eye Research Australia & Royal
Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (8)School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
Australia. (9)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (10)AORTEC, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Cardiac Development, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, The Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Cardiac resident stem cells (CRSCs) hold much promise to treat heart disease but 
this remains a controversial field. Here, we describe a novel population of
CRSCs, which are positive for W8B2 antigen and were obtained from adult human
atrial appendages. W8B2(+) CRSCs exhibit a spindle-shaped morphology, are
clonogenic and capable of self-renewal. W8B2(+) CRSCs show high expression of
mesenchymal but not hematopoietic nor endothelial markers. W8B2(+) CRSCs
expressed GATA4, HAND2, and TBX5, but not C-KIT, SCA-1, NKX2.5, PDGFRa, ISL1, or 
WT1. W8B2(+) CRSCs can differentiate into cardiovascular lineages and secrete a
range of cytokines implicated in angiogenesis, chemotaxis, inflammation,
extracellular matrix remodeling, cell growth, and survival. In vitro, conditioned
medium collected from W8B2(+) CRSCs displayed prosurvival, proangiogenic, and
promigratory effects on endothelial cells, superior to that of other adult stem
cells tested, and additionally promoted survival and proliferation of neonatal
rat cardiomyocytes. Intramyocardial transplantation of human W8B2(+) CRSCs into
immunocompromised rats 1 week after myocardial infarction markedly improved
cardiac function (~40% improvement in ejection fraction) and reduced fibrotic
scar tissue 4 weeks after infarction. Hearts treated with W8B2(+) CRSCs showed
less adverse remodeling of the left ventricle, a greater number of proliferating 
cardiomyocytes (Ki67(+) cTnT(+) cells) in the remote region, higher myocardial
vascular density, and greater infiltration of CD163(+) cells (a marker for M2
macrophages) into the border zone and scar regions. In summary, W8B2(+) CRSCs are
distinct from currently known CRSCs found in human hearts, and as such may be an 
ideal cell source to repair myocardial damage after infarction.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26184084  [PubMed - in process]


108. Reproduction. 2015 Oct;150(4):383-94. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0226. Epub 2015 Jul 16.

Notch signaling represses GATA4-induced expression of genes involved in steroid
biosynthesis.

George RM(1), Hahn KL(1), Rawls A(1), Viger RS(2), Wilson-Rawls J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life SciencesArizona State University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, Arizona
85827-45012, USAReproductionMother and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du CHU
de Québec and Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction (CRBR), Quebec
City, Quebec, CanadaDepartment of ObstetricsGynecology, and Reproduction, Laval
University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4. (2)School of Life
SciencesArizona State University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, Arizona 85827-45012,
USAReproductionMother and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec and 
Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction (CRBR), Quebec City, Quebec,
CanadaDepartment of ObstetricsGynecology, and Reproduction, Laval University,
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4 School of Life SciencesArizona State
University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, Arizona 85827-45012, USAReproductionMother and 
Child Health, Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec and Centre de Recherche en
Biologie de la Reproduction (CRBR), Quebec City, Quebec, CanadaDepartment of
ObstetricsGynecology, and Reproduction, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec,
Canada G1K 7P4. (3)School of Life SciencesArizona State University, PO Box
874501, Tempe, Arizona 85827-45012, USAReproductionMother and Child Health,
Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec and Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction (CRBR), Quebec City, Quebec, CanadaDepartment of
ObstetricsGynecology, and Reproduction, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec,
Canada G1K 7P4 Jeanne.Wilson-Rawls@asu.edu.

Notch2 and Notch3 and genes of the Notch signaling network are dynamically
expressed in developing follicles, where they are essential for granulosa cell
proliferation and meiotic maturation. Notch receptors, ligands, and downstream
effector genes are also expressed in testicular Leydig cells, predicting a
potential role in regulating steroidogenesis. In this study, we sought to
determine if Notch signaling in small follicles regulates the proliferation
response of granulosa cells to FSH and represses the up-regulation steroidogenic 
gene expression that occurs in response to FSH as the follicle grows. Inhibition 
of Notch signaling in small preantral follicles led to the up-regulation of the
expression of genes in the steroid biosynthetic pathway. Similarly, progesterone 
secretion by MA-10 Leydig cells was significantly inhibited by constitutively
active Notch. Together, these data indicated that Notch signaling inhibits
steroidogenesis. GATA4 has been shown to be a positive regulator of steroidogenic
genes, including STAR protein, P450 aromatase, and 3B-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase. We observed that Notch downstream effectors HEY1, HEY2, and HEYL
are able to differentially regulate these GATA4-dependent promoters. These data
are supported by the presence of HEY/HES binding sites in these promoters. These 
studies indicate that Notch signaling has a role in the complex regulation of the
steroidogenic pathway.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMCID: PMC4560672 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26183893  [PubMed - in process]


109. Environ Sci Technol. 2015 Aug 18;49(16):10165-72. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b02267.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Naphthenic Acid Mixtures from Oil Sands Process-Affected Water Enhance
Differentiation of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells and Affect Development of the
Heart.

Mohseni P(1), Hahn NA(1), Frank RA(2), Hewitt LM(2), Hajibabaei M(1,)(3), Van Der
Kraak G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 
2W1, Canada. (2)Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada,
Burlington, Ontario L7S 1A1, Canada. (3)§Biodiversity Institute of Ontario,
University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.

Extraction of petrochemicals from the surface mining of oil sand deposits results
in generation of large volumes of oil sands process-affected water (OSPW).
Naphthenic acids (NA) are generally considered to be among the most toxic
components of OSPW. Previous studies have shown that NAs are toxic to aquatic
organisms, however knowledge of their effects on mammalian health and development
is limited. In the present study, we evaluated the developmental effects of an NA
extract prepared from fresh OSPW on differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESC). We found that treatment of differentiating cells with the NA extract at
noncytotoxic concentrations alters expression of various lineage specification
markers and development of the heart. Notably, expression of cardiac specific
markers such as Nkx2.5, Gata4, and Mef2c were significantly up-regulated.
Moreover, exposure to the NA extract enhanced differentiation of embryoid bodies 
and resulted in the early appearance of spontaneously beating clusters.
Interestingly, exposure of undifferentiated mouse ESCs to the NA extract did not 
change the expression level of pluripotency markers (i.e., Oct4, Nanog, and
Sox2). Altogether, these data identify some of the molecular pathways affected by
components within this NA extract during differentiation of mammalian cells.

PMID: 26182351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Appl Toxicol. 2016 May;36(5):726-40. doi: 10.1002/jat.3207. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Protein profiles of cardiomyocyte differentiation in murine embryonic stem cells 
exposed to perfluorooctane sulfonate.

Zhang YY(1), Tang LL(1), Zheng B(1), Ge RS(2), Zhu DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (2)Institute of Reproductive Biomedicine and the 2nd
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is a persistent organic contaminant that may
affect diverse systems in animals and humans, including the cardiovascular
system. However, little is known about the mechanism by which it affects the
biological systems. Herein, we used embryonic stem cell test procedure as a tool 
to assess the developmental cardiotoxicity of PFOS. The differentially expressed 
proteins were identified by quantitative proteomics that combines the stable
isotope labeling of amino acids with high-performance liquid
chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. Results of the
embryonic stem cell test procedure suggested that PFOS was a weak embryotoxic
chemical. Nevertheless, a few marker proteins related to cardiovascular
development (Brachyury, GATA4, MEF2C, a-actinin) were significantly reduced by
exposure to PFOS. In total, 176 differential proteins were identified by
proteomics analysis, of which 67 were upregulated and 109 were downregulated.
Gene ontology annotation classified these proteins into 13 groups by molecular
functions, 12 groups by cellular locations and 10 groups by biological processes.
Most proteins were mainly relevant to either catalytic activity (25.6%), nucleus 
localization (28.9%) or to cellular component organization (19.8%). Pathway
analysis revealed that 32 signaling pathways were affected, particularly these
involved in metabolism. Changes in five proteins, including L-threonine
dehydrogenase, X-ray repair cross-complementing 5, superoxide dismutase 2, and
DNA methyltransferase 3b and 3a were confirmed by Western blotting, suggesting
the reliability of the technique. These results revealed potential new targets of
PFOS on the developmental cardiovascular system. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26178269  [PubMed - in process]


111. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 1;406(1):63-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.07.007. Epub 2015
Jul 10.

Negative Fgf8-Bmp2 feed-back is regulated by miR-130 during early cardiac
specification.

Lopez-Sanchez C(1), Franco D(2), Bonet F(2), Garcia-Lopez V(3), Aranega A(2),
Garcia-Martinez V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Extremadura, 
06006 Badajoz, Spain. (2)Cardiovascular Development Group, Department of
Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, CU Las Lagunillas B3-362, 23071 Jaén,
Spain. (3)Pharmacy Services, Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Cáceres, Spain.
(4)Human Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Extremadura, 
06006 Badajoz, Spain. Electronic address: virginio@unex.es.

It is known that secreted proteins from the anterior lateral endoderm, FGF8 and
BMP2, are involved in mesodermal cardiac differentiation, which determines the
first cardiac field, defined by the expression of the earliest specific cardiac
markers Nkx-2.5 and Gata4. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for
early cardiac development still remain unclear. At present, microRNAs represent a
novel layer of complexity in the regulatory networks controlling gene expression 
during cardiovascular development. This paper aims to study the role of miR130
during early cardiac specification. Our model is focused on developing chick at
gastrula stages. In order to identify those regulatory factors which are involved
in cardiac specification, we conducted gain- and loss-of-function experiments in 
precardiac cells by administration of Fgf8, Bmp2 and miR130, through in vitro
electroporation technique and soaked beads application. Embryos were subjected to
in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry and qPCR procedures. Our results
reveal that Fgf8 suppresses, while Bmp2 induces, the expression of Nkx-2.5 and
Gata4. They also show that Fgf8 suppresses Bmp2, and vice versa. Additionally, we
observed that Bmp2 regulates miR-130 -a putative microRNA that targets Erk1/2
(Mapk1) 3'UTR, recognizing its expression in precardiac cells which overlap with 
Erk1/2 pattern. Finally, we evidence that miR-130 is capable to inhibit Erk1/2
and Fgf8, resulting in an increase of Bmp2, Nkx-2.5 and Gata4. Our data present
miR-130 as a necessary linkage in the control of Fgf8 signaling, mediated by
Bmp2, establishing a negative feed-back loop responsible to achieve early cardiac
specification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26165600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Jul 9;7(9):1229-43. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404669.

Cardiac LXRa protects against pathological cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction by
enhancing glucose uptake and utilization.

Cannon MV(1), Silljé HH(1), Sijbesma JW(2), Vreeswijk-Baudoin I(1), Ciapaite
J(3), van der Sluis B(4), van Deursen J(5), Silva GJ(6), de Windt LJ(6),
Gustafsson JÅ(7), van der Harst P(1), van Gilst WH(1), de Boer RA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Nuclear Medicine,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (3)Department Pediatrics, Center for Liver, Digestive and Metabolic 
Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (5)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. (6)Department of Cardiology, CARIM School for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. (7)Department of
Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA Department of
Biosciences and Nutrition, Novum, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(8)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands r.a.de.boer@umcg.nl.

Pathological cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by a shift in metabolic
substrate utilization from fatty acids to glucose, but the molecular events
underlying the metabolic remodeling remain poorly understood. Here, we
investigated the role of liver X receptors (LXRs), which are key regulators of
glucose and lipid metabolism, in cardiac hypertrophic pathogenesis. Using a
transgenic approach in mice, we show that overexpression of LXRa acts to protect 
the heart against hypertrophy, fibrosis, and dysfunction. Gene expression
profiling studies revealed that genes regulating metabolic pathways were
differentially expressed in hearts with elevated LXRa. Functionally, LXRa
overexpression in isolated cardiomyocytes and murine hearts markedly enhanced the
capacity for myocardial glucose uptake following hypertrophic stress. Conversely,
this adaptive response was diminished in LXRa-deficient mice. Transcriptional
changes induced by LXRa overexpression promoted energy-independent utilization of
glucose via the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, resulting in O-GlcNAc
modification of GATA4 and Mef2c and the induction of cytoprotective natriuretic
peptide expression. Our results identify LXRa as a key cardiac transcriptional
regulator that helps orchestrate an adaptive metabolic response to chronic
cardiac stress, and suggest that modulating LXRa may provide a unique opportunity
for intervening in myocyte metabolism.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4568954
PMID: 26160456  [PubMed - in process]


113. Eur J Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;94(10):444-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.06.009. Epub
2015 Jun 26.

A simplified protocol for the isolation and culture of cardiomyocytes and
progenitor cells from neonatal mouse ventricles.

Vidyasekar P(1), Shyamsunder P(1), Santhakumar R(1), Arun R(1), Verma RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stem cell and Molecular Biology laboratory, Department of Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 600 036, India. (2)Stem cell and 
Molecular Biology laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology Madras, Chennai, 600 036, India. Electronic address:
vermars@iitm.ac.in.

The neonatal heart is a very useful tool for the study of biochemical pathways
and properties of cardiomyocytes and as it has the potential to regenerate for a 
brief period of time from birth; it is also useful to study cardiac regeneration.
However, as the heart matures, this proficiency for regeneration is reduced. This
regenerative potential may be influenced by the microenvironment of the heart in 
the early stages of postnatal development and therefore, cell cultures derived at
this stage may contain functional cardiomyocytes and progenitor cells. The aim of
this study was to identify key steps in the isolation and culture of such early
stage-neonatal mouse hearts to allow maximum migration of cardiomyocytes from the
explant and their maintenance as functional, long term cultures. Explant cultures
of mouse ventricles preserved 3-dimensional structure and generated migrating
layers of cardiomyocytes that expressed alpha sarcomeric actin which could be
further sub-cultured by enzymatic dissociation. Western blotting demonstrated
expression of c-KIT, GATA4, alpha sarcomeric actin and connexin43 proteins after 
20 days of explant culture. ACTA1, GATA4, and CX43 continued to express in five
weeks old explant cultures while the c-KIT protein was expressed up to two
passages during sub-culture. Real time PCR and SQRT PCR also demonstrated gene
expression of cardiomyocyte markers in long term cultures. Migrating cells from
the explants assembled into contracting spheroids after subculture and expressed 
the c-KIT protein. Progenitor markers CD44, CD90, and extracellular proteins,
periostin and vimentin demonstrated the preservation of cellular heterogeneity in
such cultures. Supplementation with Hydrocortisone maintained a cardioprotective 
environment and reduced the non-myocyte population. This is an optimized and
efficient method for the generation of neonatal heart cultures that is not labor 
intensive and does not require supplementation with cytokines.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26153430  [PubMed - in process]


114. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2015;2015:597032. doi: 10.1155/2015/597032. Epub 2015 Jun
7.

MicroRNA-208a Silencing Attenuates Doxorubicin Induced Myocyte Apoptosis and
Cardiac Dysfunction.

Tony H(1), Yu K(1), Qiutang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430022, China.

AIMS: GATA4 depletion is a distinct mechanism by which doxorubicin leads to
cardiomyocyte apoptosis, and preservation of GATA4 mitigates doxorubicin induced 
myocyte apoptosis and cardiac dysfunction. We investigated a novel approach of
attenuating doxorubicin induced cardiac toxicity by silencing miR-208a, a heart
specific microRNA known to target GATA4.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eight-week-old female Balb/C mice were randomly assigned to 
sham, antagomir, and control groups. Antagomir group were pretreated with
miR-208a antagomir 4 days before doxorubicin administration. At day 0, control
and antagomir groups received 20<U+2009>mg/kg of doxorubicin, while sham mice received
phosphate buffered solution. Echocardiography was done at day 7, after which
animals were sacrificed and hearts harvested and assessed for apoptosis and
expression of miR-208a, GATA4, and BCL-2. Doxorubicin significantly upregulated
miR-208a, downregulated GATA4, and increased myocyte apoptosis, with resulting
decrease in cardiac function. In contrast, therapeutic silencing of miR-208a
salvaged GATA4 and BCL-2 and decreased apoptosis, with improvement in cardiac
function.
CONCLUSION: Doxorubicin upregulates miR-208a and promotes cardiomyocyte
apoptosis, while therapeutic silencing of miR-208a attenuates doxorubicin induced
myocyte apoptosis with subsequent improvement in cardiac function. These novel
results highlight the therapeutic potential of targeting miR-208a to prevent
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC4475537
PMID: 26137188  [PubMed - in process]


115. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2016 Feb 1;54(2):325-32. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2015-0328.

TBX20 loss-of-function mutation associated with familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhao CM, Bing-Sun, Song HM, Wang J, Xu WJ, Jiang JF, Qiu XB, Yuan F, Xu JH, Yang 
YQ.

BACKGROUND: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major cause of congestive heart
failure, sudden cardiac death and cardiac transplantation. Aggregating evidence
highlights the genetic origin of DCM. However, DCM is a genetically heterogeneous
disorder, and the genetic components underlying DCM in most cases remain unknown.
METHODS: The coding regions and splicing junction sites of the TBX20 gene were
sequenced in 120 unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available close
relatives of the index patient carrying an identified mutation and 300 unrelated 
ethnically matched healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for TBX20.
The functional characteristics of the mutant TBX20 were assayed in contrast to
its wild-type counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous TBX20 mutation, p.F256I, was identified in a family
with DCM transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion, which co-segregated with
DCM in the family with complete penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in
600 control chromosomes and the altered amino acid was completely conserved
evolutionarily among various species. Functional assays revealed that the mutant 
TBX20 had significantly diminished transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the
mutation markedly reduced the synergistic activation of TBX20 with NKX2-5 or
GATA4.
CONCLUSIONS: This study links TBX20 loss-of-function mutation to idiopathic DCM
in humans for the first time, providing novel insight into the molecular
mechanism underpinning DCM.

PMID: 26118961  [PubMed - in process]


116. Genes Dev. 2015 Jun 15;29(12):1239-55. doi: 10.1101/gad.257071.114.

Gata6 potently initiates reprograming of pluripotent and differentiated cells to 
extraembryonic endoderm stem cells.

Wamaitha SE(1), del Valle I(1), Cho LT(1), Wei Y(2), Fogarty NM(1), Blakeley
P(1), Sherwood RI(3), Ji H(2), Niakan KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mill Hill Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom; (2)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA; (3)Brigham and Women's
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Transcription factor-mediated reprograming is a powerful method to study cell
fate changes. In this study, we demonstrate that the transcription factor Gata6
can initiate reprograming of multiple cell types to induced extraembryonic
endoderm stem (iXEN) cells. Intriguingly, Gata6 is sufficient to drive iXEN cells
from mouse pluripotent cells and differentiated neural cells. Furthermore, GATA6 
induction in human embryonic stem (hES) cells also down-regulates pluripotency
gene expression and up-regulates extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) genes, revealing 
a conserved function in mediating this cell fate switch. Profiling
transcriptional changes following Gata6 induction in mES cells reveals step-wise 
pluripotency factor disengagement, with initial repression of Nanog and Esrrb,
then Sox2, and finally Oct4, alongside step-wise activation of ExEn genes.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and subsequent high-throughput sequencing analysis 
shows Gata6 enrichment near pluripotency and endoderm genes, suggesting that
Gata6 functions as both a direct repressor and activator. Together, this
demonstrates that Gata6 is a versatile and potent reprograming factor that can
act alone to drive a cell fate switch from diverse cell types.

© 2015 Wamaitha et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4495396
PMID: 26109048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Histol Histopathol. 2015 Dec;30(12):1487-98. doi: 10.14670/HH-11-644. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

Transcription factors GATA4 and TBX5 promote cardiomyogenic differentiation of
rat bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells.

Chen W(1), Zhang L(2), Shao SX(1), Wang HP(3), Cui SJ(1), Zhang YN(1), Kong
XZ(4), Yin Q(1), Zhang JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang
City, Hebei Province, China. (2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, China.
zhanglei@hebmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei North
University, Zhangjiakou City, Hebei Province, China. (4)Department of Neurology, 
the 1st Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, 
China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) have potential applications in cell
and gene therapies for cardiac disease. The cardiac-specific transcription
factors GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4) and T-Box protein 5 (TBX5) are considered 
to be pivotal in cardiogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of GATA4 and TBX5 on cardiomyogenic differentiation of BMSCs. The BMSCs
were initially isolated and identified. Vectors harboring cardiac transcription
factor genes GATA4 and TBX5 or empty vectors were transferred into BMSCs.
Cardiomyogenic cells differentiated from BMSCs were identified by expression of
cardiac-specific markers including cardiac troponin T, connexin 43, ß-myosin
heavy chain, and myosin light chain-2 using immunocytochemical staining, western 
blotting, and quantitative real-time PCR. The ultrastructures of the
differentiated cells were examined by transmission electron microscopy, which
were similar to those of fetal cardiomyocytes. The differentiated cells exhibited
L-type calcium current activities reflective of the electrophysiological
characteristics of cardiomyocytes. These findings indicate that exogenous
expression of cardiac-specific transcription factors GATA4 and TBX5 enhance
cardiomyogenic differentiation of BMSCs.

PMID: 26100648  [PubMed - in process]


118. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2052-64. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37120. Epub 2015 
Jun 11.

Inside the 8p23.1 duplication syndrome; eight microduplications of likely or
uncertain clinical significance.

Barber JC(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), Graham JM(3), Kramer N(3), Lachlan KL(4), Bateman 
MS(5), Collinson MN(5), Stadheim BF(6), Turner CL(7), Gauthier JN(8), Reimschisel
TE(8), Qureshi AM(9), Dabir TA(10), Humphreys MW(11), Marble M(12), Huang T(13), 
Beal SJ(5), Massiah J(5), Taylor EJ(5), Wynn SL(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK. (2)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane,
Washington. (3)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California. (4)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK. (5)Wessex Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, UK. (6)Department of
Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital (Heavitree), 
Exeter, UK. (8)Division of Developmental Medicine and the Centre for Child
Development, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(9)Center for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease, The Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio. (10)Medical Genetics Department, Belfast Health and Social Care 
Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland. (11)Northern Ireland
Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast City
Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland. (12)Children's Hospital of New Orleans, New 
Orleans, Louisiana. (13)School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine,
California. (14)Unique, Caterham, UK.

The 8p23.1 duplication syndrome (8p23.1 DS) is a recurrent genomic condition with
an estimated prevalence of 1 in 58,000. The core 3.68<U+2009>Mb duplication contains 32 
genes of which five are currently candidates for the phenotypic features. Here we
describe four patients and five families with eight microduplications of 8p23.1
ranging from 187 to 1082<U+2009>kb in size and one atypical duplication of 4<U+2009>Mb. These
indicate that a minimal region of overlap (MRO) in medial 8p23.1 can give rise to
features of 8p23.1 DS including developmental delay, dysmorphism, macrocephaly
and otitis media, but not congenital heart disease (CHD). This MRO spans 776<U+2009>kb
(chr8:10,167,881-10,943,836 hg19) and contains SOX7 and seven of the other 32
core 8p23.1 DS genes. In centromeric 8p23.1, microduplications including GATA4
can give rise to non-syndromic CHD but the clinical significance of two smaller
centromeric microduplications without GATA4 was uncertain due to severe
neurological profiles not usually found in 8p23.1 DS. The clinical significance
of three further 8p23.1 microduplications was uncertain due to additional genetic
factors without which the probands might not have come to medical attention.
Variable expressivity was indicated by the almost entirely unaffected parents in 
all five families and the mildly affected sibling in one. Intronic interruptions 
of six genes by microduplication breakpoint intervals had no apparent additional 
clinical consequences. Our results suggest that 8p23.1 DS is an oligogenetic
condition largely caused by the duplication and interactions of the SOX7 and
GATA4 transcription factors.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26097203  [PubMed - in process]


119. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:270428. doi: 10.1155/2015/270428. Epub 2015 May 21.

Inhibition of G9a Histone Methyltransferase Converts Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem
Cells to Cardiac Competent Progenitors.

Yang J(1), Kaur K(1), Ong LL(1), Eisenberg CA(1), Eisenberg LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Departments of Physiology and Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

The G9a histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 was examined for its ability
to expand the cardiac capacity of bone marrow cells. Inhibition of G9a histone
methyltransferase by gene specific knockdown or BIX01294 treatment was sufficient
to induce expression of precardiac markers Mesp1 and brachyury in bone marrow
cells. BIX01294 treatment also allowed bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) 
to express the cardiac transcription factors Nkx2.5, GATA4, and myocardin when
subsequently exposed to the cardiogenic stimulating factor Wnt11. Incubation of
BIX01294-treated MSCs with cardiac conditioned media provoked formation of phase 
bright cells that exhibited a morphology and molecular profile resembling similar
cells that normally form from cultured atrial tissue. Subsequent aggregation and 
differentiation of BIX01294-induced, MSC-derived phase bright cells provoked
their cardiomyogenesis. This latter outcome was indicated by their widespread
expression of the primary sarcomeric proteins muscle a-actinin and titin.
MSC-derived cultures that were not initially treated with BIX01294 exhibited
neither a commensurate burst of phase bright cells nor stimulation of sarcomeric 
protein expression. Collectively, these data indicate that BIX01294 has utility
as a pharmacological agent that could enhance the ability of an abundant and
accessible stem cell population to regenerate new myocytes for cardiac repair.

PMCID: PMC4454756
PMID: 26089912  [PubMed]


120. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;66:30-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.06.008.
Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Gata4, Tbx5 and Baf60c induce differentiation of adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells into beating cardiomyocytes.

Li Q(1), Guo ZK(2), Chang YQ(3), Yu X(3), Li CX(3), Li H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue Regeneration, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China; Nursing school, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. (2)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue 
Regeneration, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. Electronic 
address: gzk@xxmu.edu.cn. (3)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue Regeneration,
Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. (4)Department of Human
Anatomy, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, PR China.

The adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ADMSCs) are extensively
utilized in tissue engineering, regenerative medicine and cell therapy. ADMSCs
can differentiate into cardiomyocytes, and it has been shown that over-expression
of a cocktail of factors can induce ectopic heart formation and program
cardiogenesis in ESCs. However, which genes are responsible for differentiation
of ADMSCs into beating cardiomyocyte-like cells remains unknown. In this study we
have shown that the combination of Gata4, Tbx5 and Baf60c is sufficient for
inducing ADMSCs to form cardiomyocytes. It also appears that, while Gata4 and
Baf60c are key inducers of myocardial differentiation, Tbx5 is essential for the 
ability of cardiac cells to contract. These findings provide additional
experimental references for myocardial tissue engineering in the emerging field
of cell-based therapy of heart diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26071180  [PubMed - in process]


121. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;29(7):1006-24. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1103. Epub 2015 Jun 
10.

FOXO1/3 and PTEN Depletion in Granulosa Cells Promotes Ovarian Granulosa Cell
Tumor Development.

Liu Z(1), Ren YA(1), Pangas SA(1), Adams J(1), Zhou W(1), Castrillon DH(1),
Wilhelm D(1), Richards JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology (Z.L., Y.A.R., S.A.P., J.A.,
J.S.R.), Pathology and Immunology (S.A.P.), and Obstetrics and Gynecology (J.A.),
Baylor College of Medicine, and Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology
(W.Z.), The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030; Department of Pathology (D.H.C.), The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical School, Dallas, Texas 75390; and Department of Anatomy and Developmental 
Biology (D.W.), Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia.

The forkhead box (FOX), FOXO1 and FOXO3, transcription factors regulate multiple 
functions in mammalian cells. Selective inactivation of the Foxo1 and Foxo3 genes
in murine ovarian granulosa cells severely impairs follicular development and
apoptosis causing infertility, and as shown here, granulosa cell tumor (GCT)
formation. Coordinate depletion of the tumor suppressor Pten gene in the Foxo1/3 
strain enhanced the penetrance and onset of GCT formation. Immunostaining and
Western blot analyses confirmed FOXO1 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
depletion, maintenance of globin transcription factor (GATA) 4 and nuclear
localization of FOXL2 and phosphorylated small mothers against decapentaplegic
(SMAD) 2/3 in the tumor cells, recapitulating results we observed in human adult 
GCTs. Microarray and quantitative PCR analyses of mouse GCTs further confirmed
expression of specific genes (Foxl2, Gata4, and Wnt4) controlling granulosa cell 
fate specification and proliferation, whereas others (Emx2, Nr0b1, Rspo1, and
Wt1) were suppressed. Key genes (Amh, Bmp2, and Fshr) controlling follicle
growth, apoptosis, and differentiation were also suppressed. Inhbb and Grem1 were
selectively elevated, whereas reduction of Inha provided additional evidence that
activin signaling and small mothers against decapentaplegic (SMAD) 2/3
phosphorylation impact GCT formation. Unexpectedly, markers of Sertoli/epithelial
cells (SRY [sex determining region Y]-box 9/keratin 8) and alternatively
activated macrophages (chitinase 3-like 3) were elevated in discrete
subpopulations within the mouse GCTs, indicating that Foxo1/3/Pten depletion not 
only leads to GCTs but also to altered granulosa cell fate decisions and immune
responses. Thus, analyses of the Foxo1/3/Pten mouse GCTs and human adult GCTs
provide strong evidence that impaired functions of the FOXO1/3/PTEN pathways lead
to dramatic changes in the molecular program within granulosa cells, chronic
activin signaling in the presence of FOXL2 and GATA4, and tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC4484779 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26061565  [PubMed - in process]


122. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 10;10(6):e0127903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127903.
eCollection 2015.

A Novel Alpha Cardiac Actin (ACTC1) Mutation Mapping to a Domain in Close Contact
with Myosin Heavy Chain Leads to a Variety of Congenital Heart Defects,
Arrhythmia and Possibly Midline Defects.

Augière C(1), Mégy S(2), El Malti R(3), Boland A(4), El Zein L(1), Verrier B(2), 
Mégarbané A(5), Deleuze JF(2), Bouvagnet P(6).

Author information: 
(1)EA 4173, Université Lyon 1 and Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, France. (2)IBCP, UMR 
5305 CNRS and Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France. (3)Laboratoire Cardiogénétique
Malformation, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Bron, France. (4)Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France. (5)Unité de
Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut,
Lebanon; Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. (6)EA 4173, Université Lyon 1
and Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, France; Laboratoire Cardiogénétique Malformation,
Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France;
Service de Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Louis Pradel, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Bron, France.

BACKGROUND: A Lebanese Maronite family presented with 13 relatives affected by
various congenital heart defects (mainly atrial septal defects), conduction
tissue anomalies and midline defects. No mutations were found in GATA4 and
NKX2-5.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A set of 399 poly(AC) markers was used to perform a linkage 
analysis which peaked at a 2.98 lod score on the long arm of chromosome 15. The
haplotype analysis delineated a 7.7 meganucleotides genomic interval which
included the alpha-cardiac actin gene (ACTC1) among 36 other protein coding
genes. A heterozygous missense mutation was found (c.251T>C, p.(Met84Thr)) in the
ACTC1 gene which changed a methionine residue conserved up to yeast. This
mutation was absent from 1000 genomes and exome variant server database but
segregated perfectly in this family with the affection status. This mutation and 
2 other ACTC1 mutations (p.(Glu101Lys) and p.(Met125Val)) which result also in
congenital heart defects are located in a region in close apposition to a myosin 
heavy chain head region by contrast to 3 other alpha-cardiac actin mutations
(p.(Ala297Ser),p.(Asp313His) and p.(Arg314His)) which result in diverse
cardiomyopathies and are located in a totally different interaction surface.
CONCLUSIONS: Alpha-cardiac actin mutations lead to congenital heart defects,
cardiomyopathies and eventually midline defects. The consequence of an ACTC1
mutation may in part be dependent on the interaction surface between actin and
myosin.

PMCID: PMC4464657
PMID: 26061005  [PubMed - in process]


123. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 5;10(6):e0125384. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125384.
eCollection 2015.

Forward Programming of Cardiac Stem Cells by Homogeneous Transduction with MYOCD 
plus TBX5.

Belian E(1), Noseda M(1), Abreu Paiva MS(1), Leja T(1), Sampson R(1), Schneider
MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London W14 0NN, United Kingdom.

Adult cardiac stem cells (CSCs) express many endogenous cardiogenic transcription
factors including members of the Gata, Hand, Mef2, and T-box family. Unlike its
DNA-binding targets, Myocardin (Myocd)-a co-activator not only for serum response
factor, but also for Gata4 and Tbx5-is not expressed in CSCs. We hypothesised
that its absence was a limiting factor for reprogramming. Here, we sought to
investigate the susceptibility of adult mouse Sca1+ side population CSCs to
reprogramming by supplementing the triad of GATA4, MEF2C, and TBX5 (GMT), and
more specifically by testing the effect of the missing co-activator, Myocd.
Exogenous factors were expressed via doxycycline-inducible lentiviral vectors in 
various combinations. High throughput quantitative RT-PCR was used to test
expression of 29 cardiac lineage markers two weeks post-induction. GMT induced
more than half the analysed cardiac transcripts. However, no protein was detected
for the induced sarcomeric genes Actc1, Myh6, and Myl2. Adding MYOCD to GMT
affected only slightly the breadth and level of gene induction, but, importantly,
triggered expression of all three proteins examined (a-cardiac actin, atrial
natriuretic peptide, sarcomeric myosin heavy chains). MYOCD + TBX was the most
effective pairwise combination in this system. In clonal derivatives homogenously
expressing MYOCD + TBX at high levels, 93% of cardiac transcripts were
up-regulated and all five proteins tested were visualized.IN SUMMARY: (1) GMT
induced cardiac genes in CSCs, but not cardiac proteins under the conditions
used. (2) Complementing GMT with MYOCD induced cardiac protein expression,
indicating a more complete cardiac differentiation program. (3) Homogeneous
transduction with MYOCD + TBX5 facilitated the identification of differentiating 
cells and the validation of this combinatorial reprogramming strategy. Together, 
these results highlight the pivotal importance of MYOCD in driving CSCs toward a 
cardiac muscle fate.

PMCID: PMC4457652
PMID: 26047103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Mar 15;7(3):558-73. eCollection 2015.

In vitro comparative study of two decellularization protocols in search of an
optimal myocardial scaffold for recellularization.

Perea-Gil I(1), Uriarte JJ(2), Prat-Vidal C(1), Gálvez-Montón C(1), Roura S(1),
Llucià-Valldeperas A(1), Soler-Botija C(1), Farré R(3), Navajas D(4), Bayes-Genis
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)ICREC (Heart Failure and Cardiac Regeneration) Research Lab, Health Sciences
Research Institute Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP). Cardiology Service, Hospital
Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol Badalona, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Biophysics and 
Bioengineering Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona Barcelona,
Spain ; CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias Madrid, Spain. (3)Biophysics and
Bioengineering Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona Barcelona,
Spain ; CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias Madrid, Spain ; Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer Barcelona, Spain. (4)Biophysics
and Bioengineering Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona Barcelona, 
Spain ; CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias Madrid, Spain ; Institute for
Bioengineering of Catalonia Barcelona, Spain. (5)ICREC (Heart Failure and Cardiac
Regeneration) Research Lab, Health Sciences Research Institute Germans Trias i
Pujol (IGTP). Cardiology Service, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol
Badalona, Barcelona, Spain ; Department of Medicine, Autonomous University of
Barcelona (UAB) Barcelona, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Selection of a biomaterial-based scaffold that mimics native
myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) architecture can facilitate functional cell
attachment and differentiation. Although decellularized myocardial ECM
accomplishes these premises, decellularization processes may variably distort or 
degrade ECM structure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two decellularization protocols (DP) were tested on
porcine heart samples (epicardium, mid myocardium and endocardium). One protocol,
DP1, was detergent-based (SDS and Triton X-100), followed by DNase I treatment.
The other protocol, DP2, was focused in trypsin and acid with Triton X-100
treatments. Decellularized myocardial scaffolds were reseeded by embedding them
in RAD16-I peptidic hydrogel with adipose tissue-derived progenitor cells
(ATDPCs).
RESULTS: Both protocols yielded acellular myocardial scaffolds (~82% and ~94% DNA
reduction for DP1 and DP2, respectively). Ultramicroscopic assessment of
scaffolds was similar for both protocols and showed filamentous ECM with
preserved fiber disposition and structure. DP1 resulted in more biodegradable
scaffolds (P = 0.04). Atomic force microscopy revealed no substantial ECM
stiffness changes post-decellularization compared to native tissue. The Young's
modulus did not differ between heart layers (P = 0.69) or decellularization
protocols (P = 0.15). After one week, recellularized DP1 scaffolds contained
higher cell density (236 ± 106 and 98 ± 56 cells/mm(2) for recellularized DP1 and
DP2 scaffolds, respectively; P = 0.04). ATDPCs in both DP1 and DP2 scaffolds
expressed the endothelial marker isolectin B4, but only in the DP1 scaffold
ATDPCs expressed the cardiac markers GATA4, connexin43 and cardiac troponin T.
CONCLUSIONS: In our hands, DP1 produced myocardial scaffolds with higher cell
repopulation and promotes ATDPCs expression of endothelial and cardiomyogenic
markers.

PMCID: PMC4448195
PMID: 26045895  [PubMed]


125. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Dec;36(8):1642-6. doi: 10.1007/s00246-015-1210-9. Epub 2015
Jun 3.

Identification of Copy Number Variations in Isolated Tetralogy of Fallot.

Aguayo-Gómez A(1), Arteaga-Vázquez J(2), Svyryd Y(1), Calderón-Colmenero J(3),
Zamora-González C(4), Vargas-Alarcón G(5), Mutchinick OM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (2)Department of Genetics, Instituto
Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición "Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F.,
Mexico. jazminarteaga@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(4)Congenital Heart Defects Adults Clinic, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología
Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (5)Department of Molecular Biology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(6)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. osvaldo@unam.mx.

Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) is one of the most common and severe congenital heart
defects (CHD). Recently, unbalanced structural genomic variants or copy number
variations (CNVs) were proposed to be involved in the etiology of many complex
diseases, including CHDs. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency 
of CNVs in a region with a high density of CNVs, 22q11.2, and other regions with 
CHD-related genes in a sample of 52 Mexican mestizo patients with isolated ToF
and negative fluorescence in situ hybridization staining for 22q11. CNVs were
studied using two multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits,
SALSA P250-B1® (DiGeorge gene region) and SALSA MLPA P311-A1® CHD-related gene
regions (GATA4, NKX2-5, TBX5, BMP4, and CRELD1). The MLPA assay detected a de
novo CNV deletion of the probes located in exons 2 and 7 of the TBX1 gene in one 
of the 52 patients studied; this result was confirmed by real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. This deletion was not present in the patient's parents
and 104 chromosomes from healthy control subjects. Our results clearly suggest a 
possible etiologic association between the TBX1 deletion and the ToF in our
patient.

PMID: 26036351  [PubMed - in process]


126. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0128105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128105.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Roles of GATA4/6 in the Postnatal Heart Identified through Temporally
Controlled, Cardiomyocyte-Specific Gene Inactivation by Adeno-Associated Virus
Delivery of Cre Recombinase.

Prendiville TW(1), Guo H(2), Lin Z(1), Zhou P(1), Stevens SM(1), He A(3),
VanDusen N(1), Chen J(1), Zhong L(4), Wang DZ(5), Gao G(4), Pu WT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America. (2)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Anatomy,
School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(4)Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard
Stem Cell Institute, 1350 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America. (6)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Gene Therapy Center, University 
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of
America.

GATA4 and GATA6 are central cardiac transcriptional regulators. The postnatal,
stage-specific function of the cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 have
not been evaluated. In part, this is because current Cre-loxP approaches to
cardiac gene inactivation require time consuming and costly breeding of
Cre-expressing and "floxed" mouse lines, often with limited control of the extent
or timing of gene inactivation. We investigated the stage-specific functions of
GATA4 and GATA6 in the postnatal heart by using adeno-associated virus serotype 9
to control the timing and extent of gene inactivation by Cre. Systemic delivery
of recombinant, adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) expressing Cre from the cardiac
specific Tnnt2 promoter was well tolerated and selectively and efficiently
recombined floxed target genes in cardiomyocytes. AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre efficiently
inactivated Gata4 and Gata6. Neonatal Gata4/6 inactivation caused severe, rapidly
lethal systolic heart failure. In contrast, Gata4/6 inactivation in adult heart
caused only mild systolic dysfunction but severe diastolic dysfunction. Reducing 
the dose of AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre generated mosaics in which scattered cardiomyocytes
lacked Gata4/6. This mosaic knockout revealed that Gata4/6 are required cell
autonomously for physiological cardiomyocyte growth. Our results define novel
roles of GATA4 and GATA6 in the neonatal and adult heart. Furthermore, our data
demonstrate that evaluation of gene function hinges on controlling the timing and
extent of gene inactivation. AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre is a powerful tool for controlling
these parameters.

PMCID: PMC4449121
PMID: 26023924  [PubMed - in process]


127. J Hepatol. 2015 Sep;63(3):697-704. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.04.030. Epub 2015 May
27.

Gut microbiota inhibit Asbt-dependent intestinal bile acid reabsorption via
Gata4.

Out C(1), Patankar JV(2), Doktorova M(1), Boesjes M(1), Bos T(1), de Boer S(1),
Havinga R(1), Wolters H(1), Boverhof R(3), van Dijk TH(3), Smoczek A(4), Bleich
A(4), Sachdev V(5), Kratky D(5), Kuipers F(1), Verkade HJ(1), Groen AK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Liver, Digestive, and Metabolic Diseases,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Centre for Molecular Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Center for Liver, Digestive, and Metabolic 
Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Zentrales Tierlaboratorium und Institut für
Versuchstierkunde, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Liver, Digestive, and
Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Center for Liver, 
Digestive, and Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
a.k.groen@umcg.nl.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Regulation of bile acid homeostasis in mammals is a complex
process regulated via extensive cross-talk between liver, intestine and
intestinal microbiota. Here we studied the effects of gut microbiota on bile acid
homeostasis in mice.
METHODS: Bile acid homeostasis was assessed in four mouse models. Germfree mice, 
conventionally-raised mice, Asbt-KO mice and intestinal-specific Gata4-iKO mice
were treated with antibiotics (bacitracin, neomycin and vancomycin; 100 mg/kg)
for five days and subsequently compared with untreated mice.
RESULTS: Attenuation of the bacterial flora by antibiotics strongly reduced fecal
excretion and synthesis of bile acids, but increased the expression of the bile
acid synthesis enzyme CYP7A1. Similar effects were seen in germfree mice.
Intestinal bile acid absorption was increased and accompanied by increases in
plasma bile acid levels, biliary bile acid secretion and enterohepatic cycling of
bile acids. In the absence of microbiota, the expression of the intestinal bile
salt transporter Asbt was strongly increased in the ileum and was also expressed 
in more proximal parts of the small intestine. Most of the effects of antibiotic 
treatment on bile acid homeostasis could be prevented by genetic inactivation of 
either Asbt or the transcription factor Gata4.
CONCLUSIONS: Attenuation of gut microbiota alters Gata4-controlled expression of 
Asbt, increasing absorption and decreasing synthesis of bile acids. Our data
support the concept that under physiological conditions microbiota stimulate
Gata4, which suppresses Asbt expression, limiting the expression of this
transporter to the terminal ileum. Our studies expand current knowledge on the
bacterial control of bile acid homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26022694  [PubMed - in process]


128. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;24(2):228-36. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.105. Epub 2015 May
27.

A systematic variant screening in familial cases of congenital heart defects
demonstrates the usefulness of molecular genetics in this field.

El Malti R(1), Liu H(1,)(2), Doray B(3), Thauvin C(4), Maltret A(5), Dauphin
C(6), Gonçalves-Rocha M(7), Teboul M(8), Blanchet P(9), Roume J(10), Gronier
C(11), Ducreux C(12), Veyrier M(12), Marçon F(13), Acar P(14), Lusson JR(6), Levy
M(5), Beyler C(15), Vigneron J(16), Cordier-Alex MP(17), Heitz F(18), Sanlaville 
D(17,)(19), Bonnet D(5,)(20), Bouvagnet P(1,)(2,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (2)EA 4173
Université Lyon 1, France and Hôpital Nord Ouest, Lyon, France. (3)Service de
Génétique Médicale, CHU Saint Denis, Saint Denis, France. (4)Centre de Génétique,
Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU Dijon and EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. 
(5)Service de Cardiologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(6)Service de Cardiologie, Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(7)Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhaes,
Porto, Portugal. (8)Laboratoire de Biologie Clinique, Nancy, France. (9)Unité
Fonctionnelle Génétique Prénatale et Foetopathologique, CHRU, Montpellier,
France. (10)Unité de Génétique Médicale, Centre Intercommunal Poissy-St-Germain
en Laye, Poissy, France. (11)Cardiologie Pédiatrique et Ftale, Strasbourg,
France. (12)Service de Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (13)Cardiologie Infantile, Hôpital Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France.
(14)Pédiatrie Cardiologie, Hôpital d'Enfants, Toulouse, France. (15)Unité de
Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. (16)Unité
Fonctionnelle de Génétique, Maternité A Pinard, Nancy, France. (17)Service de
Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (18)Clinique Pasteur, Toulouse,
France. (19)CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292 and INSERM U1028, Université Lyon 1, Lyon,
France. (20)UMR_S 765 INSERM and Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

The etiology of congenital heart defect (CHD) combines environmental and genetic 
factors. So far, there were studies reporting on the screening of a single gene
on unselected CHD or on familial cases selected for specific CHD types. Our goal 
was to systematically screen a proband of familial cases of CHD on a set of
genetic tests to evaluate the prevalence of disease-causing variant
identification. A systematic screening of GATA4, NKX2-5, ZIC3 and Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) P311 Kit was setup on the proband
of 154 families with at least two cases of non-syndromic CHD. Additionally, ELN
screening was performed on families with supravalvular arterial stenosis.
Twenty-two variants were found, but segregation analysis confirmed unambiguously 
the causality of 16 variants: GATA4 (1 ×), NKX2-5 (6 ×), ZIC3 (3 ×), MLPA (2 ×)
and ELN (4 ×). Therefore, this approach was able to identify the causal variant
in 10.4% of familial CHD cases. This study demonstrated the existence of a de
novo variant even in familial CHD cases and the impact of CHD variants on adult
cardiac condition even in the absence of CHD. This study showed that the
systematic screening of genetic factors is useful in familial CHD cases with up
to 10.4% elucidated cases. When successful, it drastically improved genetic
counseling by discovering unaffected variant carriers who are at risk of
transmitting their variant and are also exposed to develop cardiac complications 
during adulthood thus prompting long-term cardiac follow-up. This study provides 
an important baseline at dawning of the next-generation sequencing era.

PMCID: PMC4717196 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26014430  [PubMed - in process]


129. Cytotechnology. 2015 May 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Both BMP4 and serum have significant roles in differentiation of embryonic stem
cells to primitive and definitive endoderm.

Taha MF(1), Javeri A, Majidizadeh T, Valojerdi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Shahrak-e-Pajoohesh, 15th Km, Tehran-Karaj Highway,
P.O. Box 14965-161, Tehran, Iran, mftaha@nigeb.ac.ir.

Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells is a heterogeneous process which is 
influenced by different parameters, including growth and differentiation factors.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of bone morphogenetic 
protein-4 (BMP4) signaling on differentiation of mouse ES cells to endodermal
lineages. For this purpose, differentiation of the ES cells was induced by
embryoid body (EB) formation through hanging drop method. During the suspension
stage, EBs were treated with BMP4 in a medium containing either fetal bovine
serum (FBS) or knockout serum replacement (KoSR). After plating, EBs showed
differentiation to a heterogeneous population of specialized cell types. Two
weeks after plating, all the experimental groups expressed three germ layer
markers and some primitive and definitive endoderm-specific genes. Quantitative
real-time PCR analysis showed higher expression levels of Sox17, Pdx1, Cdx2 and
Villin mRNAs in the KoSR plus BMP4 condition and higher Gata4 and Afp expression 
levels in the FBS plus BMP4 condition. Formation of visceral endoderm and
derivatives of definitive endoderm was detected in the BMP4 treated EBs. In
conclusion, we demonstrated that both BMP4 signaling and serum composition have
significant roles in differentiation of mouse ES cells towards endodermal
lineages.

PMID: 26008149  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


130. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Aug 15;193:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.05.019. Epub
2015 May 8.

Stimulation of cardiomyogenesis from mouse embryonic stem cells by nuclear
translocation of cardiotrophin-1.

Mascheck L(1), Sharifpanah F(1), Tsang SY(2), Wartenberg M(3), Sauer H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Justus Liebig University Gießen, Germany. (2)School 
of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Partner 
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, SAR, China. (3)Clinic of Internal Medicine I, Cardiology Division,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. (4)Department of Physiology, Justus 
Liebig University Gießen, Germany. Electronic address:
heinrich.sauer@physiologie.med.uni-giessen.de.

BACKGROUND: Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) controls cardiomyogenesis of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the signaling pathway underlying the action of CT-1 on
cardiac cell differentiation.
METHODS: Protein expression was analyzed by western blot technique and cardiac
areas by immunohistochemistry. Calcium, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric 
oxide (NO) were assessed by microfluorometry using fluo-4, H2DCF, and DAF-2DA,
respectively. Gene inactivation of CT-1 was achieved by siRNA technology.
RESULTS: CT-1 as well as its receptor gp 130 were transiently upregulated during 
differentiation of ES cells. Exogenous CT-1 enhanced cardiomyogenesis, increased 
the cardiac transcription factors MEF2c, Nkx-2.5, TEAD3 and GATA4, the cardiac
proteins a-actinin, MLC2a, MYH7, MLC1a, MLC2v and HCN4 as well as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB),
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). CT-1
downregulation by small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited cardiomyogenesis and
decreased VEGF, PDGF-BB, FGF-2 and ANP expression. CT-1 raised intracellular
calcium which was abolished by the intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA, AM and
thapsigargin. Moreover, CT-1 treatment increased ROS, followed by NO generation
and NOS3 activation. During ES cell differentiation CT-1 was translocated to the 
cell nucleus. Exogenous CT-1 induced nuclear translocation of endogenous CT-1,
which was inhibited by BAPTA, the NOS inhibitor L-N(G)-Nitroarginine methyl ester
(l-NAME), the radical scavenger N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)-glycine (NMPG) as well as
the janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitor AG490 and the PI3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
LY294002.
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear translocation of CT-1 regulates cardiomyogenesis of ES cells
and involves calcium, NO, ROS as well as CT-1 regulated signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26005169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Nat Commun. 2015 May 18;6:6930. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7930.

PDGFRa demarcates the cardiogenic clonogenic Sca1+ stem/progenitor cell in adult 
murine myocardium.

Noseda M(1), Harada M(1), McSweeney S(1), Leja T(1), Belian E(1), Stuckey DJ(2), 
Abreu Paiva MS(1), Habib J(3), Macaulay I(4), de Smith AJ(5), al-Beidh F(1),
Sampson R(1), Lumbers RT(1), Rao P(6), Harding SE(1), Blakemore AI(7), Jacobsen
SE(4), Barahona M(8), Schneider MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (2)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Centre 
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging (CABI), University College London, London WC1E
6DD, UK. (3)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Department of Biomedical
Engineering, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK. (4)Haematopoietic Stem
Cell Biology, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (5)1] Department of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(6)1] Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 
2AZ, UK. (8)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult hearts represent an attractive therapeutic
target for heart regeneration, though (inter)-relationships among reported cells 
remain obscure. Using single-cell qRT-PCR and clonal analyses, here we define
four subpopulations of cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult mouse myocardium
all sharing stem cell antigen-1 (Sca1), based on side population (SP) phenotype, 
PECAM-1 (CD31) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFRa) expression.
SP status predicts clonogenicity and cardiogenic gene expression (Gata4/6, Hand2 
and Tbx5/20), properties segregating more specifically to PDGFRa(+) cells. Clonal
progeny of single Sca1(+) SP cells show cardiomyocyte, endothelial and smooth
muscle lineage potential after cardiac grafting, augmenting cardiac function
although durable engraftment is rare. PDGFRa(-) cells are characterized by
Kdr/Flk1, Cdh5, CD31 and lack of clonogenicity. PDGFRa(+)/CD31(-) cells derive
from cells formerly expressing Mesp1, Nkx2-5, Isl1, Gata5 and Wt1, distinct from 
PDGFRa(-)/CD31(+) cells (Gata5 low; Flk1 and Tie2 high). Thus, PDGFRa demarcates 
the clonogenic cardiogenic Sca1(+) stem/progenitor cell.

PMCID: PMC4479024
PMID: 25980517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2607-21. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3775. Epub 2015 May
12.

Exogenous Nkx2.5- or GATA-4-transfected rabbit bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
and myocardial cell co-culture on the treatment of myocardial infarction in
rabbits.

Li P(1), Zhang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Hebei, Shijiazhuang 050017, P.R. China. (2)Department of Histology and
Embryology, Hebei Medical University, Hebei, Shijiazhuang 050017, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the effects of Nkx2.5 or GATA-4
transfection with myocardial extracellular environment co-culture on the
transformation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) into differentiated 
cardiomyocytes. Nkx2.5 or GATA-4 were transfected into myocardial extracellular
environment co-cultured BMSCs, and then injected into the periphery of infarcted 
myocardium of a myocardial infarction rabbit model. The effects of these gene
transfections and culture on the infarcted myocardium were observed and the
results may provide an experimental basis for the efficient myocardial cell
differentiation of BMSCs. The present study also suggested that these cells may
provide a source and clinical basis for myocardial injury repair via stem cell
transplantation. The present study examined whether Nkx2.5 or GATA-4 exogenous
gene transfection with myocardial cell extracellular environment co-culture were 
able to induce the differentiation of BMSCs into cardiac cells. In addition, the 
effect of these transfected BMSCs on the repair of the myocardium following
myocardial infarction was determined using New Zealand rabbit models. The results
demonstrated that myocardial cell differentiation was significantly less
effective following exogenous gene transfection of Nkx2.5 or GATA-4 alone
compared with that of transfection in combination with extracellular environment 
co-culture. In addition, the results of the present study showed that exogenous
gene transfection of Nkx2.5 or GATA-4 into myocardial cell extracellular
environment co-cultured BMSCs was able to significantly enhance the ability to
repair, mitigating the death of myocardial cells and activation of the myocardium
in rabbits with myocardial infarction compared with those of the rabbits
transplanted with untreated BMSCs. In conclusion, the exogenous Nkx2.5 and GATA-4
gene transfection into myocardial extracellular environment co-cultured BMSCs
induced increased differentiation into myocardial cells compared with that of
gene transfection alone. Furthermore, significantly enhanced reparative effects
were observed in the myocardium of rabbits following treatment with Nkx2.5-or
GATA-4-transfected myocardial cell extracellular environment co-cultured BMSCs
compared with those treated with untreated BMSCs.

PMCID: PMC4464300
PMID: 25975979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jul;36(1):282-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2206. Epub 2015 May
11.

A novel TBX5 loss-of-function mutation associated with sporadic dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Zhou W(1), Zhao L(2), Jiang JQ(3), Jiang WF(4), Yang YQ(4), Qiu XB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200030, P.R. China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) represents the most prevalent form of primary
cardiomyopathy, and is the most common reason for heart transplantation and a
major cause of congestive heart failure. Aggregating evidence demonstrates that
genetic defects are associated with DCM, and a great number of mutations in >50
genes have been linked to DCM. However, DCM is a genetically heterogeneous
disorder and the genetic components underpinning DCM in a significant proportion 
of patients remain unknown. In the present study, the coding exons and flanking
exon-intron boundaries of the T-Box 5 (TBX5) gene, which encodes a T-box
transcription factor required for normal cardiac development, were sequenced in
146 unrelated patients with sporadic DCM. The functional characteristics of the
mutant TBX5 were assayed in contrast to its wild-type counterpart by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX5
mutation, p.A143T, was identified in a patient with sporadic DCM. The missense
mutation, which was absent in 400 control chromosomes, altered the amino acid
that was completely conserved evolutionarily among species. Biological analyses
revealed that the A143T mutation of TBX5 was associated with significantly
decreased transcriptional activity on the promoter of the target gene atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF), when compared to its wild-type counterpart.
Furthermore, the A143T mutation abolished the synergistic activation of the ANF
promoter between TBX5 and GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4), another crucial
transcriptional factor for heart development. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first report on the association of a TBX5 loss-of-function mutation with
an enhanced susceptibility to sporadic DCM, providing novel insight into the
molecular mechanisms of the pathogenesis of DCM and suggesting potential
implications for the prenatal prophylaxis and personalized treatment of this
commonest primary myocardial disease.

PMID: 25963046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2015 May 8;10(5):e0123542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123542.
eCollection 2015.

Targeted Disruption of ALK Reveals a Potential Role in Hypogonadotropic
Hypogonadism.

Witek B(1), El Wakil A(1), Nord C(2), Ahlgren U(2), Eriksson M(2),
Vernersson-Lindahl E(3), Helland Å(4), Alexeyev OA(3), Hallberg B(5), Palmer
RH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (2)Umeå Center
for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (3)Institution for Medical
Biosciences/Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (4)Department of Oncology, 
Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (6)Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Molecular Biology,
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Mice lacking ALK activity have previously been reported to exhibit subtle
behavioral phenotypes. In this study of ALK of loss of function mice we present
data supporting a role for ALK in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in male mice. We 
observed lower level of serum testosterone at P40 in ALK knock-out males,
accompanied by mild disorganization of seminiferous tubules exhibiting decreased 
numbers of GATA4 expressing cells. These observations highlight a role for ALK in
testis function and are further supported by experiments in which chemical
inhibition of ALK activity with the ALK TKI crizotinib was employed. Oral
administration of crizotinib resulted in a decrease of serum testosterone levels 
in adult wild type male mice, which reverted to normal levels after cessation of 
treatment. Analysis of GnRH expression in neurons of the hypothalamus revealed a 
significant decrease in the number of GnRH positive neurons in ALK knock-out mice
at P40 when compared with control littermates. Thus, ALK appears to be involved
in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism by regulating the timing of pubertal onset and
testis function at the upper levels of the hypothalamic-pituitary gonadal axis.

PMCID: PMC4425494
PMID: 25955180  [PubMed - in process]


135. Biomaterials. 2015 Jul;55:84-95. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.03.030. Epub
2015 Apr 10.

Carbon nanotubes enhance intercalated disc assembly in cardiac myocytes via the
ß1-integrin-mediated signaling pathway.

Sun H(1), Lü S(2), Jiang XX(3), Li X(2), Li H(3), Lin Q(3), Mou Y(3), Zhao Y(3), 
Han Y(3), Zhou J(4), Wang C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences and Tissue Engineering Research Center, Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, 27 Taiping Rd, Beijing 100850, PR China; Chengdu Military General
Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan Province 610083, PR China. (2)Affiliated Hospital of
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China. (3)Department of
Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and
Tissue Engineering Research Center, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, 27
Taiping Rd, Beijing 100850, PR China. (4)Department of Advanced Interdisciplinary
Studies, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Tissue Engineering Research
Center, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, 27 Taiping Rd, Beijing 100850, PR
China. Electronic address: sisun819@yahoo.com. (5)Department of Advanced
Interdisciplinary Studies, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Tissue
Engineering Research Center, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, 27 Taiping Rd,
Beijing 100850, PR China. Electronic address: wcy2000_te@yahoo.com.

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) offer a new paradigm for constructing functional cardiac 
patches and repairing myocardial infarction (MI). However, little is known about 
how CNTs enhance the mechanical integrity and electrophysiological function of
cardiac myocytes. To address this issue, we investigated the regularity and
precise mechanism of the influence of CNTs on the assembly of intercalated disc
(IDs). Here, single walled CNTs incorporated into collagen substrates were
utilized as growth supports for neonatal cardiomyocytes, which enhanced
cardiomyocyte adhesion and maturation. Furthermore, through the use of
immunohistochemical staining, western blotting, transmission electron microscopy,
and intracellular calcium transient measurement, we discovered that the addition 
of CNTs remarkably increased ID-related protein expression and enhanced ID
assembly and functionality. On that basis, we further explored the underlying
mechanism for how CNTs enhanced ID assembly through the use of
immunohistochemical staining and western blotting. We found that the
ß1-integrin-mediated signaling pathway mediated CNT-induced upregulation of
electrical and mechanical junction proteins. Notably, CNTs remarkably accelerated
gap junction formation via activation of the ß1-integrin-mediated FAK/ERK/GATA4
pathway. These findings provide valuable insight into the mechanistic effects
that CNTs have on neonatal cardiomyocyte performance and will have a significant 
impact on the future of nanomedical research.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Endocrinology. 2015 Jul;156(7):2503-17. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1815. Epub 2015 May 
1.

Adrenal Development in Mice Requires GATA4 and GATA6 Transcription Factors.

Tevosian SG(1), Jiménez E(1), Hatch HM(1), Jiang T(1), Morse DA(1), Fox SC(1),
Padua MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences (S.G.T., E.J., H.M.H., T.J., S.C.F.,
M.B.P.), College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32610-0144; and Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology
(D.A.M.), College of Health and Human Performance, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32611-8200.

The adrenal glands consist of an outer cortex and an inner medulla, and their
primary purposes include hormone synthesis and secretion. The adrenal cortex
produces a complex array of steroid hormones, whereas the medulla is part of the 
sympathetic nervous system and produces the catecholamines epinephrine and
norepinephrine. In the mouse, GATA binding protein (GATA) 4 and GATA6
transcription factors are coexpressed in several embryonic tissues, including the
adrenal cortex. To explore the roles of GATA4 and GATA6 in mouse adrenal
development, we conditionally deleted these genes in adrenocortical cells using
the Sf1Cre strain of animals. We report here that mice with Sf1Cre-mediated
double deletion of Gata4 and Gata6 genes lack identifiable adrenal glands,
steroidogenic factor 1-positive cortical cells and steroidogenic gene expression 
in the adrenal location. The inactivation of the Gata6 gene alone
(Sf1Cre;Gata6(flox/flox)) drastically reduced the adrenal size and corticosterone
production in the adult animals. Adrenocortical aplasia is expected to result in 
the demise of the animal within 2 weeks after birth unless glucocorticoids are
provided. In accordance, Sf1Cre;Gata4(flox/flox)Gata6(flox/flox) females depend
on steroid supplementation to survive after weaning. Surprisingly,
Sf1Cre;Gata4(flox/flox)Gata6(flox/flox) males appear to live normal lifespans as 
vital steroidogenic synthesis shifts to their testes. Our results reveal a
requirement for GATA factors in adrenal development and provide a novel tool to
characterize the transcriptional network controlling adrenocortical cell fates.

PMCID: PMC4475720 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25933105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 May 1;16:141. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0578-0.

VISIONET: intuitive visualisation of overlapping transcription factor networks,
with applications in cardiogenic gene discovery.

Nim HT(1,)(2), Furtado MB(3), Costa MW(4), Rosenthal NA(5,)(6,)(7), Kitano
H(8,)(9,)(10,)(11), Boyd SE(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. hieu.nim@monash.edu. (2)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. hieu.nim@monash.edu.
(3)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. milena.furtado@monash.edu. (4)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
mauro.dacosta@monash.edu. (5)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu.
(6)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu. (7)National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, W12 0NN, UK.
nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu. (8)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash 
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. kitano@sbi.jp. (9)Australian
Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800,
Australia. kitano@sbi.jp. (10)Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Inc.,
Higashigotanda, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. kitano@sbi.jp. (11)Okinawa Institute of 
Science and Technology, Onna, Onna-son, Kunigami, Okinawa, Japan. kitano@sbi.jp. 
(12)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. sarah.boyd@monash.edu. (13)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
sarah.boyd@monash.edu.

BACKGROUND: Existing de novo software platforms have largely overlooked a
valuable resource, the expertise of the intended biologist users. Typical data
representations such as long gene lists, or highly dense and overlapping
transcription factor networks often hinder biologists from relating these results
to their expertise.
RESULTS: VISIONET, a streamlined visualisation tool built from experimental
needs, enables biologists to transform large and dense overlapping transcription 
factor networks into sparse human-readable graphs via numerically filtering. The 
VISIONET interface allows users without a computing background to interactively
explore and filter their data, and empowers them to apply their specialist
knowledge on far more complex and substantial data sets than is currently
possible. Applying VISIONET to the Tbx20-Gata4 transcription factor network led
to the discovery and validation of Aldh1a2, an essential developmental gene
associated with various important cardiac disorders, as a healthy adult cardiac
fibroblast gene co-regulated by cardiogenic transcription factors Gata4 and
Tbx20.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate with experimental validations the utility of VISIONET
for expertise-driven gene discovery that opens new experimental directions that
would not otherwise have been identified.

PMCID: PMC4426166
PMID: 25929466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. BMC Med Genet. 2015 Feb 18;16:7. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0152-7.

c.620C>T mutation in GATA4 is associated with congenital heart disease in South
India.

Mattapally S(1), Nizamuddin S(2), Murthy KS(3), Thangaraj K(4), Banerjee
SK(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal 
Road, Hyderabad, 500 007, India. mattapallysaidulu@gmail.com. (2)CSIR-Centre for 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, 500 007, India.
snizam@ccmb.res.in. (3)Innova Children's Heart Hospital, Tarnaka, Hyderabad,
500017, India. konasmurthy@gmail.com. (4)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, 500 007, India. thangs@ccmb.res.in. (5)Division
of Pharmacology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road,
Hyderabad, 500 007, India. skbanerjee@thsti.res.in. (6)Current Address: Drug
Discovery Research Center, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 
(THSTI), Gurgaon, HR-122016, Haryana, India. skbanerjee@thsti.res.in.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) usually refer to abnormalities in
the structure and/or function of the heart that arise before birth. GATA4 plays
an important role in embryonic heart development, hence the aim of this study was
to find the association of GATA4 mutations with CHD among the south Indian CHD
patients.
METHOD: GATA4 gene was sequenced in 100 CHD patients (ASD, VSD, TOF and SV) and
200 controls. Functional significance of the observed GATA4 mutations was
analyzed using PolyPhen, SIFT, PMut, Plink, Haploview, ESE finder 3.0 and
CONSITE.
RESULTS: We observed a total of 19 mutations, of which, one was in 5' UTR, 10 in 
intronic regions, 3 in coding regions and 5 in 3' UTR. Of the above mutations,
one was associated with Atrial Septal Defect (ASD), two were found to be
associated with Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and three (rs804280, rs4841587 and
rs4841588) were strongly associated with Ventricular Septal Defect (VSD).
Interestingly, one promoter mutation (-490 to 100 bp) i.e., 620 C>T (rs61277615, 
p-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008514), one splice junction mutation (G>A rs73203482;
p-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.6e-3, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.508) and one intronic mutation rs4841587
(p-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.6e-3, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.758) were the most significant findings of this study. 
In silico analysis also proves that some of the mutations reported above are
pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: The present study found that GATA4 genetic variations are associated 
with ASD, TOF and VSD in South Indian patients. In silico analysis provides
further evidence that some of the observed mutations are pathogenic.

PMCID: PMC4422155
PMID: 25928801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1596-610. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1026485.

Destabilization of pluripotency in the absence of Mad2l2.

Pirouz M(1), Rahjouei A, Shamsi F, Eckermann KN, Salinas-Riester G, Pommerenke C,
Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Cell Biology ; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry ; Goettingen ; Germany.

The induction and maintenance of pluripotency requires the expression of several 
core factors at appropriate levels (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, Prdm14). A subset of these 
proteins (Oct4, Sox2, Prdm14) also plays crucial roles for the establishment of
primordial germ cells (PGCs). Here we demonstrate that the Mad2l2 (MAD2B, Rev7)
gene product is not only required by PGCs, but also by pluripotent embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), depending on the growth conditions. Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs were unstable 
in LIF/serum medium, and differentiated into primitive endoderm. However, they
could be stably propagated using small molecule inhibitors of MAPK signaling.
Several components of the MAPK cascade were up- or downregulated even in
undifferentiated Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs. Global levels of repressive histone H3
variants were increased in mutant ESCs, and the epigenetic signatures on
pluripotency-, primitive endoderm-, and MAPK-related loci differed. Thus, H3K9me2
repressed the Nanog promoter, while the promoter of Gata4 lost H3K27me3 and
became de-repressed in LIF/serum condition. Promoters associated with genes
involved in MAPK signaling also showed misregulation of these histone marks. Such
epigenetic modifications could be indirect consequences of mutating Mad2l2.
However, our previous observations suggested the histone methyltransferases as
direct (G9a) or indirect (Ezh2) targets of Mad2l2. In effect, the intricate
balance necessary for pluripotency becomes perturbed in the absence of Mad2l2.

PMCID: PMC4614513 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25928475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1852(8):1619-29. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.04.016. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

scaRNAs regulate splicing and vertebrate heart development.

Patil P(1), Kibiryeva N(2), Uechi T(1), Marshall J(2), O'Brien JE Jr(2), Artman
M(3), Kenmochi N(1), Bittel DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Science Research Center, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(2)Ward Family Heart Center, Children's Mercy Hospital, University of
Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Mercy Hospital, University of Missouri-Kansas City School 
of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA.

Alternative splicing (AS) plays an important role in regulating mammalian heart
development, but a link between misregulated splicing and congenital heart
defects (CHDs) has not been shown. We reported that more than 50% of genes
associated with heart development were alternatively spliced in the right
ventricle (RV) of infants with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF). Moreover, there was a
significant decrease in the level of 12 small cajal body-specific RNAs (scaRNAs) 
that direct the biochemical modification of specific nucleotides in spliceosomal 
RNAs. We sought to determine if scaRNA levels influence patterns of AS and heart 
development. We used primary cells derived from the RV of infants with TOF to
show a direct link between scaRNA levels and splice isoforms of several genes
that regulate heart development (e.g., GATA4, NOTCH2, DAAM1, DICER1, MBNL1 and
MBNL2). In addition, we used antisense morpholinos to knock down the expression
of two scaRNAs (scarna1 and snord94) in zebrafish and saw a corresponding
disruption of heart development with an accompanying alteration in splice
isoforms of cardiac regulatory genes. Based on these combined results, we
hypothesize that scaRNA modification of spliceosomal RNAs assists in fine tuning 
the spliceosome for dynamic selection of mRNA splice isoforms. Our results are
consistent with disruption of splicing patterns during early embryonic
development leading to insufficient communication between the first and second
heart fields, resulting in conotruncal misalignment and TOF. Our findings
represent a new paradigm for determining the mechanisms underlying congenital
cardiac malformations.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25916634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Apr 22;11(4):e1004851. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004851.
eCollection 2015.

GATA-Dependent Glutaminolysis Drives Appressorium Formation in Magnaporthe oryzae
by Suppressing TOR Inhibition of cAMP/PKA Signaling.

Marroquin-Guzman M(1), Wilson RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska, United States of America.

Fungal plant pathogens are persistent and global food security threats. To invade
their hosts they often form highly specialized infection structures, known as
appressoria. The cAMP/ PKA- and MAP kinase-signaling cascades have been
functionally delineated as positive-acting pathways required for appressorium
development. Negative-acting regulatory pathways that block appressorial
development are not known. Here, we present the first detailed evidence that the 
conserved Target of Rapamycin (TOR) signaling pathway is a powerful inhibitor of 
appressorium formation by the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae. We determined
TOR signaling was activated in an M. oryzae mutant strain lacking a functional
copy of the GATA transcription factor-encoding gene ASD4. <U+0394>asd4 mutant strains
could not form appressoria and expressed GLN1, a glutamine synthetase-encoding
orthologue silenced in wild type. Inappropriate expression of GLN1 increased the 
intracellular steady-state levels of glutamine in <U+0394>asd4 mutant strains during
axenic growth when compared to wild type. Deleting GLN1 lowered glutamine levels 
and promoted appressorium formation by <U+0394>asd4 strains. Furthermore, glutamine is
an agonist of TOR. Treating <U+0394>asd4 mutant strains with the specific TOR kinase
inhibitor rapamycin restored appressorium development. Rapamycin was also shown
to induce appressorium formation by wild type and <U+0394>cpka mutant strains on
non-inductive hydrophilic surfaces but had no effect on the MAP kinase mutant
<U+0394>pmk1. When taken together, we implicate Asd4 in regulating intracellular
glutamine levels in order to modulate TOR inhibition of appressorium formation
downstream of cPKA. This study thus provides novel insight into the metabolic
mechanisms that underpin the highly regulated process of appressorium
development.

PMCID: PMC4406744
PMID: 25901357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 21;10(4):e0123519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123519.
eCollection 2015.

Effect of miR-20b on Apoptosis, Differentiation, the BMP Signaling Pathway and
Mitochondrial Function in the P19 Cell Model of Cardiac Differentiation In Vitro.

Zhu S(1), Hu X(2), Yu Z(2), Peng Y(2), Zhu J(2), Liu X(2), Li M(2), Han S(2), Zhu
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, China. (2)State key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of miR-20b on apoptosis, differentiation, the
BMP signaling pathway and mitochondrial function in the P19 cell model of cardiac
differentiation in vitro.
METHODS: A miR-20b over-expression vector, a miR-20b silencing vector and their
corresponding empty vectors were constructed and transfected into P19 cells,
separately. Stably miR-20b overexpressing and silenced P19 cell lines were
successfully selected by blasticidin and puromycin, separately. The cells were
induced to undergo apoptosis in FBS-free-a-MEM. The induced cells were examined
by flow cytometry and measurement of their caspase-3 activities. Quantitative
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to
evaluate the relative expression of marker genes of cardiomyocytes during
differentiation, such as cTnT, GATA4 and ANP. QRT-PCR was also used to detect the
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number. We investigated the cellular ATP
production using a luciferase-based luminescence assay. The reactive oxygen
species (ROS) was determined by DCFDA (2', 7'-Dichlorofluorescein diacetate) and 
the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) was elucidated by a JC-1 fluorescent
probe, both using fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometer. The expression of
BMP signaling pathway-related proteins were analyzed by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Stably miR-20b overexpressing and silenced P19 cell lines were
successfully obtained. MiR-20b overexpression increased apoptosis and promoted
differentiation in P19 cells by promoting the activation of the BMP signaling
pathway. In addition, miR-20b overexpression induced mitochondrial impairment in 
P19 cells during differentiation, which was characterized by lower MMP, raised
ATP synthesis and increased ROS levels. The effects of miR-20b silencing were the
exact opposite to those of overexpression.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these results suggested that miR-20b was very important
in apoptosis, differentiation and mitochondrial function of P19 cells. MiR-20b
may represent a new therapeutic target for congenital heart diseases and provide 
new insights into the mechanisms of cardiac diseases.

PMCID: PMC4405592
PMID: 25898012  [PubMed - in process]


143. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Mar 26;6:50. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0044-y.

Human umbilical cord blood-derived mononuclear cells improve murine ventricular
function upon intramyocardial delivery in right ventricular chronic pressure
overload.

Oommen S(1,)(2,)(3), Yamada S(4,)(5), Cantero Peral S(6,)(7,)(8,)(9), Campbell
KA(10,)(11), Bruinsma ES(12), Terzic A(13,)(14,)(15,)(16), Nelson
TJ(17,)(18,)(19,)(20).

Author information: 
(1)General Internal Medicine and Transplant Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. oommen.saji@mayo.edu. (2)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. oommen.saji@mayo.edu. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
oommen.saji@mayo.edu. (4)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. yamada.satsuki@mayo.edu. (5)Division of Cardiovascular
Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. yamada.satsuki@mayo.edu. (6)General
Internal Medicine and Transplant Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
canteroPeral.susana@mayo.edu. (7)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. canteroPeral.susana@mayo.edu. (8)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
canteroPeral.susana@mayo.edu. (9)Autonomous University of Barcelona, Program of
Doctorate of Internal Medicine, Barcelona, Spain. canteroPeral.susana@mayo.edu.
(10)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
campbell.katherine@mayo.edu. (11)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
campbell.katherine@mayo.edu. (12)General Internal Medicine and Transplant Center,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. bruinsma.elizabeth@mayo.edu. (13)Center for
Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. terzic.andre@mayo.edu.
(14)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. terzic.andre@mayo.edu. (15)Division of Cardiovascular
Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. terzic.andre@mayo.edu. (16)Department 
of Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. terzic.andre@mayo.edu.
(17)General Internal Medicine and Transplant Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA. nelson.timothy@mayo.edu. (18)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA. nelson.timothy@mayo.edu. (19)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
nelson.timothy@mayo.edu. (20)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First
Street, SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. nelson.timothy@mayo.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Stem cell therapy has emerged as potential therapeutic strategy for
damaged heart muscles. Umbilical cord blood (UCB) cells are the most prevalent
stem cell source available, yet have not been fully tested in cardiac
regeneration. Herein, studies were performed to evaluate the cardiovascular
safety and beneficial effect of mononuclear cells (MNCs) isolated from human
umbilical cord blood upon intramyocardial delivery in a murine model of right
ventricle (RV) heart failure due to pressure overload.
METHODS: UCB-derived MNCs were delivered into the myocardium of a diseased RV
cardiac model. Pulmonary artery banding (PAB) was used to produce pressure
overload in athymic nude mice that were then injected intramyocardially with
UCB-MNCs (0.4×10^6 cells/heart). Cardiac functions were then monitored by
telemetry, echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and pathologic
analysis of heart samples to determine the ability for cell-based repair.
RESULTS: The cardio-toxicity studies provided evidence that UCB cell
transplantation has a safe therapeutic window between 0.4 to 0.8 million
cells/heart without altering QT or ST-segments or the morphology of
electrocardiograph waves. The PAB cohort demonstrated significant changes in RV
chamber dilation and functional defects consistent with severe pressure overload.
Using cardiac MRI analysis, UCB-MNC transplantation in the setting of PAB
demonstrated an improvement in RV structure and function in this surgical mouse
model. The RV volume load in PAB-only mice was 24.09±3.9 compared to 11.05±2.09
in the cell group (mm3, P-value<0.005). The analysis of pathogenic gene
expression (BNP, ANP, Acta1, Myh7) in the cell-transplanted group showed a
significant reversal with respect to the diseased PAB mice with a robust increase
in cardiac progenitor gene expression such as GATA4, Kdr, Mef2c and Nkx2.5.
Histological analysis indicated significant fibrosis in the RV in response to PAB
that was reduced following UCB-MNC's transplantation along with concomitant
increased Ki-67 expression and CD31 positive vessels as a marker of angiogenesis 
within the myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that human UCB-derived MNCs promote an
adaptive regenerative response in the right ventricle upon intramyocardial
transplantation in the setting of chronic pressure overload heart failure.

PMCID: PMC4416353
PMID: 25890300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Mar 7;16:74. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0460-0.

Inferring dynamic gene regulatory networks in cardiac differentiation through the
integration of multi-dimensional data.

Gong W(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N(2), Li T(3), Garry DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165
CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114, USA. gongx030@umn.edu. (2)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. koyano@umn.edu. (3)AccuraScience LLC, 5721 Merle Hay Road, Suite #16B,
Johnston, IA, 50131, USA. toli@us.accurascience.com. (4)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. garry@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Decoding the temporal control of gene expression patterns is key to
the understanding of the complex mechanisms that govern developmental decisions
during heart development. High-throughput methods have been employed to
systematically study the dynamic and coordinated nature of cardiac
differentiation at the global level with multiple dimensions. Therefore, there is
a pressing need to develop a systems approach to integrate these data from
individual studies and infer the dynamic regulatory networks in an unbiased
fashion.
RESULTS: We developed a two-step strategy to integrate data from (1) temporal
RNA-seq, (2) temporal histone modification ChIP-seq, (3) transcription factor
(TF) ChIP-seq and (4) gene perturbation experiments to reconstruct the dynamic
network during heart development. First, we trained a logistic regression model
to predict the probability (LR score) of any base being bound by 543 TFs with
known positional weight matrices. Second, four dimensions of data were combined
using a time-varying dynamic Bayesian network model to infer the dynamic networks
at four developmental stages in the mouse [mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs),
mesoderm (MES), cardiac progenitors (CP) and cardiomyocytes (CM)]. Our method not
only infers the time-varying networks between different stages of heart
development, but it also identifies the TF binding sites associated with promoter
or enhancers of downstream genes. The LR scores of experimentally verified ESCs
and heart enhancers were significantly higher than random regions (p <10(-100)), 
suggesting that a high LR score is a reliable indicator for functional TF binding
sites. Our network inference model identified a region with an elevated LR score 
approximately -9400 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site of Nkx2-5,
which overlapped with a previously reported enhancer region (-9435 to -8922 bp). 
TFs such as Tead1, Gata4, Msx2, and Tgif1 were predicted to bind to this region
and participate in the regulation of Nkx2-5 gene expression. Our model also
predicted the key regulatory networks for the ESC-MES, MES-CP and CP-CM
transitions.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel method to systematically integrate
multi-dimensional -omics data and reconstruct the gene regulatory networks. This 
method will allow one to rapidly determine the cis-modules that regulate key
genes during cardiac differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4359553
PMID: 25887857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Ovarian Res. 2015 Apr 13;8:24. doi: 10.1186/s13048-015-0151-5.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome is accompanied by repression of gene signatures
associated with biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids, cholesterol and lipids.

Salilew-Wondim D(1), Wang Q(2,)(3), Tesfaye D(4), Schellander K(5), Hoelker M(6),
Hossain MM(7), Tsang BK(8,)(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Endenicher Allee 15, Bonn, 53115, Germany. dsal@itw.uni-bonn.de.
(2)Reproductive Biology Unit and Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology and Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Interdisciplinary
School of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, ON, Canada.
qwang@ohri.ca. (3)Chronic Disease Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
The Ottawa Hospital (General Campus), Critical Care Wing, 3rd Floor, Room W3107, 
501 Smyth Road, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, ON, Canada. qwang@ohri.ca. (4)Institute of
Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn,
Endenicher Allee 15, Bonn, 53115, Germany. dtes@itz.uni-bonn.de. (5)Institute of 
Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn,
Endenicher Allee 15, Bonn, 53115, Germany. ksch@itw.uni-bonn.de. (6)Institute of 
Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn,
Endenicher Allee 15, Bonn, 53115, Germany. mhoe@itz.uni-bonn.de. (7)Department of
Animal Breeding and Genetics, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh,
2202, Bangladesh. mmhabg@gmail.com. (8)Reproductive Biology Unit and Division of 
Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Cellular &
Molecular Medicine, Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, ON, Canada. btsang@ohri.ca. (9)Chronic Disease Program, 
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, The Ottawa Hospital (General Campus),
Critical Care Wing, 3rd Floor, Room W3107, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, ON,
Canada. btsang@ohri.ca. (10)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, World Class
University Major in Biomodulation, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-921, South Korea. btsang@ohri.ca.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a spectrum of heterogeneous
disorders of reproduction and metabolism in women with potential systemic sequel 
such as diabetes and obesity. Although, PCOS is believed to be caused by genetic 
abnormalities, the genetic background that can be associated with PCOS phenotypes
remains unclear due to the complexity of the trait. In this study, we used a rat 
model which exhibits reproductive and metabolic abnormalities similar to the
human PCOS to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlining this complex syndrome.
METHODS: Female Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly assigned to DHT and control
(CTL) groups. Rats in the DHT group were implanted with a silicone capsule
continuous-releasing 83 µg 5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) per day for 12 weeks to
mimic the hyperandrogenic state in women with PCOS. The animals were euthanized
at 15 weeks of age and the pairs of ovaries were excised and the ovarian cortex
tissues were used for gene expression analysis. Total RNA was from the ovarian
cortex was amplified, labeled and hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip® Rat
Genome 230 2.0 Array. A linear model system for microarray data analysis was used
to identify genes affected in DHT treated rat ovaries and the molecular pathway
of those genes were analyzed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and
Integrated Discovery (DAVID) analysis tool.
RESULTS: A total of 573 gene transcripts, including CPA1, CDH1, INSL3, AMH,
ALDH1B1, INHBA, CYP17A1, RBP4, GAS6, GAS7 and GATA4, were activated while 430
others including HSD17B7, HSD3B6, STAR, HMGCS1, HMGCR, CYP51, CYP11A1 and CYP19A1
were repressed in DHT-treated ovaries. Functional annotation of the dysregulated 
genes revealed that biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids, cholesterol and
lipids to be the most top functions enriched by the repressed genes. However,
cell differentiation/proliferation, transcriptional regulation, neurogenesis,
cell adhesion and blood vessel development processes were enriched by activated
genes.
CONCLUSION: The dysregulation of genes associated with biosynthesis and
metabolism of steroids, cholesterol and lipids, cell
differentiation/proliferation in DHT- treated ovaries could be a molecular clue
for abnormal steroidogenesis, estrous cycle irregularity, abnormal
folliculogenesis, anovulation and lipid metabolism in PCOS patients.

PMCID: PMC4414284
PMID: 25887459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1616-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1222.

Testicular steroidogenic cells to the rescue.

Heikinheimo M(1), Pihlajoki M, Schrade A, Kyrönlahti A, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology (M.H., D.B.W.), Washington
University School of Medicine and St Louis Children's Hospital, St Louis,
Missouri 63110; and Children's Hospital (M.H., M.P., A.S., A.K.), University of
Helsinki and Helsinki Central Hospital, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

PMID: 25886071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 17;10(4):e0123318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123318.
eCollection 2015.

Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1-induced osteopontin expression facilitates
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Mohamed IA(1), Gadeau AP(2), Fliegel L(3), Lopaschuk G(4), Mlih M(1), Abdulrahman
N(1), Fillmore N(4), Mraiche F(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. (2)University of Bordeaux,
Adaptation Cardiovasculaire à L'ischémie, UMR1034, Pessac, France. (3)Department 
of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (4)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Enhanced expression and activity of the Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) has
been implicated in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in various experimental models. The 
upregulation of NHE1 was correlated with an increase in osteopontin (OPN)
expression in models of cardiac hypertrophy (CH), and the mechanism for this
remains to be delineated. To determine whether the expression of active
NHE1-induces OPN and contributes to the hypertrophic response in vitro,
cardiomyocytes were infected with the active form of the NHE1 adenovirus or
transfected with OPN silencing RNA (siRNA-OPN) and characterized for
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Expression of NHE1 in cardiomyocytes resulted in a
significant increase in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy markers: cell surface area,
protein content, ANP mRNA and expression of phosphorylated-GATA4. NHE1 activity
was also significantly increased in cardiomyocytes expressing active NHE1.
Interestingly, transfection of cardiomyocytes with siRNA-OPN significantly
abolished the NHE1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. siRNA-OPN also
significantly reduced the activity of NHE1 in cardiomyocytes expressing NHE1
(68.5±0.24%; P<0.05), confirming the role of OPN in the NHE1-induced hypertrophic
response. The hypertrophic response facilitated by NHE1-induced OPN occurred
independent of the extracellular-signal-regulated kinases and Akt, but required
p90-ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK). The ability of OPN to facilitate the NHE1-induced 
hypertrophic response identifies OPN as a potential therapeutic target to reverse
the hypertrophic effect induced by the expression of active NHE1.

PMCID: PMC4401699
PMID: 25884410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jun;35(6):1545-53. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2178. Epub 2015 Apr
9.

GATA4 transgenic mice as an in vivo model of congenital heart disease.

Han H(1), Chen Y(1), Liu G(1), Han Z(1), Zhao Z(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital,
Beijing 100044, P.R. China.

Our previous study indicated that 8 patients from a family with a history of
congenital heart disease had simple atrial septal defect (ASD) and carried the
same mutation at codon 310 in the GATA4 gene. In the present study, to identify
the functional defects caused by this mutation in an in vivo model, the transgene
DNA constructs were microinjected into mice to generate a transgenic mouse model.
The mice were genotyped using PCR and DNA sequencing. Protein expression was
measured by western blot analysis. qPCR was used to determine the copy number of 
the transgenes. The heart tissue was fixed and sectioned by conventional
procedures. The Vevo 2000 system was used to perform echocardiography on the
mice. The expression of GATA4 target genes was measured using the real-time PCR
system. The incidence of ASD in the heterozygous transgenic mice was found to be 
greater than that in the wild-type control mice (P<0.05). In addition, the
expression of a-myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) in the heart tissues from the
homozygous mice was lower than that in the heart tissues from their wild-type
littermates (P<0.05). In conclusion, these results suggest that the introduction 
of GATA4 M310V negatively affects the normal expression of a-MHC. In accordance
with previous findings on GATA4 mutation screening and in vitro experiments, this
study confirms that GATA4 M310V mutation may lead to the development of the
congenital heart defect, ASD.

PMCID: PMC4432925
PMID: 25873328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;405(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2389-z. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

ZAK induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and brain natriuretic peptide expression
via p38/JNK signaling and GATA4/c-Jun transcriptional factor activation.

Hsieh YL(1), Tsai YL, Shibu MA, Su CC, Chung LC, Pai P, Kuo CH, Yeh YL,
Viswanadha VP, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung,
Taiwan.

Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is an adaptive response of heart to various stress
conditions. During the period of stress accumulation, transition from
physiological hypertrophy to pathological hypertrophy results in the promotion of
heart failure. Our previous studies found that ZAK, a sterile alpha motif and
leucine zipper containing kinase, was highly expressed in infarcted human hearts 
and demonstrated that overexpression of ZAK induced cardiac hypertrophy. This
study evaluates, cellular events associated with the expression of two
doxycycline (Dox) inducible Tet-on ZAK expression systems, a Tet-on ZAK WT
(wild-type), and a Tet-on ZAK DN (mutant, Dominant-negative form) in H9c2
myoblast cells; Tet-on ZAK WT was found to increase cell size and hypertrophic
marker BNP in a dose-dependent manner. To ascertain the mechanism of ZAK-mediated
hypertrophy, expression analysis with various inhibitors of the related upstream 
and downstream proteins was performed. Tet-on ZAK WT expression triggered the p38
and JNK pathway and also activated the expression and nuclear translocation of
p-GATA4 and p-c-Jun transcription factors, without the involvement of p-ERK or
NFATc3. However, Tet-on ZAK DN showed no effect on the p38 and JNK signaling
cascade. The results showed that the inhibitors of JNK1/2 and p38 significantly
suppressed ZAK-induced BNP expression. The results show the role of ZAK and/or
the ZAK downstream events such as JNK and p38 phosphorylation, c-Jun, and GATA-4 
nuclear translocation in cardiac hypertrophy. ZAK and/or the ZAK downstream p38, 
and JNK pathway could therefore be potential targets to ameliorate cardiac
hypertrophy symptoms in ZAK-overexpressed patients.

PMID: 25869677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Endocrinology. 2015 Jul;156(7):2693-703. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1964. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

MEF2 Cooperates With Forskolin/cAMP and GATA4 to Regulate Star Gene Expression in
Mouse MA-10 Leydig Cells.

Daems C(1), Di-Luoffo M(1), Paradis É(1), Tremblay JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction (C.D., M.D.-L., E.P., J.J.T.), Mother and Child Health, Centre de
Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Québec City, Québec,
Canada G1V 4G2; and Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction (J.J.T.), 
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine,
Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada G1V 0A6.

In Leydig cells, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR) participates in
cholesterol shuttling from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane, the
rate-limiting step in steroidogenesis. Steroid hormone biosynthesis and
steroidogenic gene expression are regulated by LH, which activates various
signaling pathways and transcription factors, including cAMP/Ca(2+)/CAMK
(Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase)-myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2). The 4 MEF2
transcription factors are essential regulators of cell differentiation and
organogenesis in numerous tissues. Recently, MEF2 was identified in Sertoli and
Leydig cells of the testis. Here, we report that MEF2 regulates steroidogenesis
in mouse MA-10 Leydig cells by acting on the Star gene. In MA-10 cells depleted
of MEF2 using siRNAs (small interfering RNAs), STAR protein levels, Star mRNA
levels, and promoter activity were significantly decreased. On its own, MEF2 did 
not activate the mouse Star promoter but was found to cooperate with
forskolin/cAMP. By chromatin immunoprecipitation and DNA precipitation assays, we
confirmed MEF2 binding to a consensus element located at -232 bp of the Star
promoter. Mutation or deletion of the MEF2 element reduced but did not abrogate
the MEF2/cAMP cooperation, indicating that MEF2 cooperates with other DNA-bound
transcription factor(s). We identified GATA4 (GATA binding protein 4) as a
partner for MEF2 in Leydig cells, because mutation of the GATA element abrogated 
the MEF2/cAMP cooperation on a reporter lacking a MEF2 element. MEF2 and GATA4
interact as revealed by coimmunoprecipitation, and MEF2 and GATA4
transcriptionally cooperate on the Star promoter. Altogether, our results define 
MEF2 as a novel regulator of steroidogenesis and Star transcription in Leydig
cells and identify GATA4 as a key partner for MEF2-mediated action.

PMID: 25860031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;31(4):448-51.

[Wnt3a combined with bone morphogenetic protein 9 induce C3H10T1/2 cells
differentiation into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu S(1), Geng X(1), Fang S(1), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key
Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing
400014, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of Wnt3a alone and combined with bone
morphogenetic protein 9 (BMP9) on the differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells into
cardiomyocyte-like cells.
METHODS: Recombinant adenovirus GFP, BMP9 and Wnt3a were amplified with human
embryo kidney 293 cell line (HEK293 cells) and transferred into C3H10T1/2 cells. 
Three weeks after transfection, the cell morphology and the expression of green
fluorescent protein in cells transfected with GFP, BMP9 and Wnt3a were observed
by an inverted microscope and a fluorescence microscope. Flow cytometry was
performed to detect cell transfection efficiency. The expressions of
cardiac-specific proteins connexin 43 (Cx43), cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and genes
GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4), myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) were analyzed 
by Western blotting, immunofluorescence and real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: High-titer recombinant adenovirus was generated with HEK293 cells. The
expressions of Cx43, cTnT, GATA4 and MEF2C were similar among Wnt3a group, GFP
group and control group, but they significantly increased in cells when
co-induced by Wnt3a and BMP9 for 3 weeks. The expressions of Cx43, cTnT, GATA4
and MEF2C showed no significant difference between BMP9 group and Wnt3a and BMP9 
co-induction group.
CONCLUSION: Wnt3a can not promote the differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells into
cardiomyocyte-like cells by itself, but co-induction by Wnt3a and BMP9 can
promote the differentiation.

PMID: 25854560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2015;79(8):1257-65. doi:
10.1080/09168451.2015.1025690. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

De novo transcriptome sequencing to identify the sex-determination genes in
Hyriopsis schlegelii.

Shi J(1), Hong Y, Sheng J, Peng K, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Life Sciences , Nanchang University , Nanchang , China.

This study presents the first analysis of expressed transcripts in the spermary
and ovary of Hyriopsis schlegelii (H. schlegelii). A total of 132,055 unigenes
were obtained and 31,781 of these genes were annotated. In addition, 19,511
upregulated and 25,911 downregulated unigenes were identified in the spermary.
Ten sex-determination genes were selected and further analyzed by real-time PCR. 
In addition, mammalian genes reported to govern sex-determination pathways,
including Sry, Dmrt1, Dmrt2, Sox9, GATA4, and WT1 in males and Wnt4, Rspo1,
Foxl2, and ß-catenin in females, were also identified in H. schlegelii. These
results suggest that H. schlegelii and mammals use similar gene regulatory
mechanisms to control sex determination. Moreover, genes associated with dosage
compensation mechanisms, such as Msl1, Msl2, and Msl3, and hermaphrodite
phenotypes, such as Tra-1, Tra-2a, Tra-2ß, Fem1A, Fem1B, and Fem1C, were also
identified in H. schlegelii. The identification of these genes indicates that
diverse regulatory mechanisms regulate sexual polymorphism in H. schlegelii.

PMID: 25848829  [PubMed - in process]


153. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Mar 6;10:1841-54. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S75124. eCollection
2015.

Peptide-enhanced mRNA transfection in cultured mouse cardiac fibroblasts and
direct reprogramming towards cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Lee K(1), Yu P(2), Lingampalli N(3), Kim HJ(3), Tang R(3), Murthy N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA ; UC
Berkeley and UCSF Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering, Berkeley/San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA.

The treatment of myocardial infarction is a major challenge in medicine due to
the inability of heart tissue to regenerate. Direct reprogramming of endogenous
cardiac fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes via the delivery of
transcription factor mRNAs has the potential to regenerate cardiac tissue and to 
treat heart failure. Even though mRNA delivery to cardiac fibroblasts has the
therapeutic potential, mRNA transfection in cardiac fibroblasts has been
challenging. Herein, we develop an efficient mRNA transfection in cultured mouse 
cardiac fibroblasts via a polyarginine-fused heart-targeting peptide and
lipofectamine complex, termed C-Lipo and demonstrate the partial direct
reprogramming of cardiac fibroblasts towards cardiomyocyte cells. C-Lipo enabled 
the mRNA-induced direct cardiac reprogramming due to its efficient transfection
with low toxicity, which allowed for multiple transfections of Gata4, Mef2c, and 
Tbx5 (GMT) mRNAs for a period of 2 weeks. The induced cardiomyocyte-like cells
had a-MHC promoter-driven GFP expression and striated cardiac muscle structure
from a-actinin immunohistochemistry. GMT mRNA transfection of cultured mouse
cardiac fibroblasts via C-Lipo significantly increased expression of the
cardiomyocyte marker genes, Actc1, Actn2, Gja1, Hand2, and Tnnt2, after 2 weeks
of transfection. Moreover, this study provides the first direct evidence that the
stoichiometry of the GMT reprogramming factors influence the expression of
cardiomyocyte marker genes. Our results demonstrate that mRNA delivery is a
potential approach for cardiomyocyte generation.

PMCID: PMC4358644
PMID: 25834424  [PubMed - in process]


154. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2145-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37086. Epub 2015
Apr 1.

Duplication of HEY2 in cardiac and neurologic development.

Jordan VK(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), Lalani SR(2), Scott DA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX.

HEY2 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that plays an
important role in the developing mammalian heart and brain. In humans,
nonsynonymous mutations in HEY2 have been described in patients with atrial
ventricular septal defects, and a subset of individuals with chromosomal
deletions involving HEY2 have cardiac defects and cognitive impairment. Less is
known about the potential effects of HEY2 overexpression. Here, we describe a
female child with tetralogy of Fallot who developed severe right ventricular
outflow tract obstruction due to a combination of infundibular and valvular
pulmonary stenosis. She was also noted to have hypotonia, lower extremity
weakness, fine motor delay and speech delay. A copy number variation (CNV)
detection analysis followed by real-time quantitative PCR analysis revealed a
single gene duplication of HEY2. This is the only duplication involving HEY2
identified in our database of over 70,000 individuals referred for CNV analysis. 
In the developing heart, overexpression of HEY2 is predicted to cause decreased
expression of the cardiac transcription factor GATA4 which, in turn, has been
shown to cause tetralogy of Fallot. In mice, misexpression of Hey2 in the
developing brain leads to inhibition of neurogenesis and promotion of
gliogenesis. Hence, duplication of HEY2 may be a contributing factor to both the 
congenital heart defects and the neurodevelopmental problems evident in our
patient. These results suggest that individuals with HEY2 duplications should be 
screened for congenital heart defects and monitored closely for evidence of
developmental delay and/or cognitive impairment.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4545384 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25832314  [PubMed - in process]


155. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 1;10(4):e0122230. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122230.
eCollection 2015.

Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1 induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy involves activation 
of p90 ribosomal s6 kinase.

Jaballah M(1), Mohamed IA(1), Alemrayat B(1), Al-Sulaiti F(1), Mlih M(1), Mraiche
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar.

Studies using pharmacological and genetic approaches have shown that increased
activity/expression of the Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) play a critical role
in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy. Despite the importance of NHE1 in
cardiac hypertrophy, severe cerebrovascular side effects were associated with the
use of NHE1 inhibitors when administered to patients with myocardial infarctions.
p90 ribosomal S6 Kinase (RSK), a downstream regulator of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway, has also been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy. We
hypothesized that RSK plays a role in the NHE1 induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophic
response. Infection of H9c2 cardiomyoblasts with the active form of the NHE1
adenovirus induced hypertrophy and was associated with an increase in the
phosphorylation of RSK (P<0.05). Parameters of hypertrophy such as cell area,
protein content and atrial natriuretic mRNA expression were significantly reduced
in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts infected with active NHE1 in the presence of dominant
negative RSK (DN-RSK) (P<0.05). These results confirm that NHE1 lies upstream of 
RSK. Increased phosphorylation and activation of GATA4 at Ser261 was correlated
with increased RSK phosphorylation. This increase was reversed upon inhibition of
RSK or NHE1. These findings demonstrate for the first time that the NHE1 mediated
hypertrophy is accounted for by increased activation and phosphorylation of RSK, 
which subsequently increased the phosphorylation of GATA4; eventually activating 
fetal gene transcriptional machinery.

PMCID: PMC4382094
PMID: 25830299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Genet. 2015 May;47(5):496-504. doi: 10.1038/ng.3250. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Muscle connective tissue controls development of the diaphragm and is a source of
congenital diaphragmatic hernias.

Merrell AJ(1), Ellis BJ(2), Fox ZD(1), Lawson JA(1), Weiss JA(2), Kardon G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)1] Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah,
USA. [2] Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah, USA.

The diaphragm is an essential mammalian skeletal muscle, and defects in diaphragm
development are the cause of congenital diaphragmatic hernias (CDHs), a common
and often lethal birth defect. The diaphragm is derived from multiple embryonic
sources, but how these give rise to the diaphragm is unknown, and, despite the
identification of many CDH-associated genes, the etiology of CDH is incompletely 
understood. Using mouse genetics, we show that the pleuroperitoneal folds (PPFs),
which are transient embryonic structures, are the source of the diaphragm's
muscle connective tissue and regulate muscle development, and we show that the
striking migration of PPF cells controls diaphragm morphogenesis. Furthermore,
Gata4 mosaic mutations in PPF-derived muscle connective tissue fibroblasts result
in the development of localized amuscular regions that are biomechanically weaker
and more compliant, leading to CDH. Thus, the PPFs and muscle connective tissue
are critical for diaphragm development, and mutations in PPF-derived fibroblasts 
are a source of CDH.

PMCID: PMC4414795
PMID: 25807280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 May 1;106(2):261-71. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv108. Epub 2015 Mar 
13.

Targeted inhibition of ANKRD1 disrupts sarcomeric ERK-GATA4 signal transduction
and abrogates phenylephrine-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Zhong L(1), Chiusa M(1), Cadar AG(2), Lin A(1), Samaras S(3), Davidson JM(4), Lim
CC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Ave, Preston Research Building, Rm 332, Nashville, TN
37232, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Ave, Preston Research Building, Rm
332, Nashville, TN 37232, USA Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA
Research Service, Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Ave, Preston Research Building, Rm
332, Nashville, TN 37232, USA Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA
chee.lim@vanderbilt.edu.

AIMS: Accumulating evidence suggest that sarcomere signalling complexes play a
pivotal role in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by communicating stress signals to the 
nucleus to induce gene expression. Ankyrin repeat domain 1 (ANKRD1) is a
transcriptional regulatory protein that also associates with sarcomeric titin;
however, the exact role of ANKRD1 in the heart remains to be elucidated. We
therefore aimed to examine the role of ANKRD1 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophic
signalling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, we found that ANKRD1
is part of a sarcomeric signalling complex that includes ERK1/2 and cardiac
transcription factor GATA4. Treatment with hypertrophic agonist phenylephrine
(PE) resulted in phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and GATA4 followed by nuclear
translocation of the ANKRD1/ERK/GATA4 complex. Knockdown of Ankrd1 attenuated
PE-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and GATA4, inhibited nuclear translocation
of the ANKRD1 complex, and prevented cardiomyocyte growth. Mice lacking Ankrd1
are viable with normal cardiac function. Chronic PE infusion in wild-type mice
induced significant cardiac hypertrophy with reactivation of the cardiac fetal
gene program which was completely abrogated in Ankrd1 null mice. In contrast,
ANKRD1 does not play a role in haemodynamic overload as Ankrd1 null mice
subjected to transverse aortic constriction developed cardiac hypertrophy
comparable to wild-type mice.
CONCLUSION: Our study reveals a novel role for ANKRD1 as a selective regulator of
PE-induced signalling whereby ANKRD1 recruits and localizes GATA4 and ERK1/2 in a
sarcomeric macro-molecular complex to enhance GATA4 phosphorylation with
subsequent nuclear translocation of the ANKRD1 complex to induce hypertrophic
gene expression.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4481572 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25770146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jun;404(1-2):211-20. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2380-8. Epub 
2015 Mar 11.

Na(+)/H (+) exchanger isoform 1 induced osteopontin expression in cardiomyocytes 
involves NFAT3/Gata4.

Mlih M(1), Abdulrahman N, Gadeau AP, Mohamed IA, Jaballah M, Mraiche F.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.

Osteopontin (OPN), a multifunctional glycophosphoprotein, has been reported to
contribute to the development and progression of cardiac remodeling and
hypertrophy. Cardiac-specific OPN knockout mice were protected against
hypertrophy and fibrosis mediated by Ang II. Recently, transgenic mice expressing
the active form of the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) developed
spontaneous hypertrophy in association with elevated levels of OPN. The mechanism
by which active NHE1 induces OPN expression and contributes to the hypertrophic
response remains unclear. To validate whether expression of the active form of
NHE1 induces OPN, cardiomyocytes were stimulated with Ang II, a known inducer of 
both OPN and NHE1. Ang II induced hypertrophy and increased OPN protein
expression (151.6 ± 28.19 %, P < 0.01) and NHE1 activity in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts.
Ang II-induced hypertrophy and OPN protein expression were regressed in the
presence of an NHE1 inhibitor, EMD 87580, or a calcineurin inhibitor, FK506. In
addition, our results indicated that activation of NHE1-induced NFAT3
translocation into the nucleus and a significant activation of the transcription 
factor Gata4 (NHE1: 149 ± 28 % of control, P < 0.05). NHE1-induced activation of 
Gata4 was inhibited by FK506. In summary, our results suggest that activation of 
NHE1 induces hypertrophy through the activation of NFAT3/Gata4 and OPN
expression.

PMID: 25758355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Apr 1;184:350-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.091. Epub
2015 Feb 25.

Cardiac tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloprotease 4 dictates cardiomyocyte
contractility and differentiation of embryonic stem cells into cardiomyocytes:
Road to therapy.

Chaturvedi P(1), Kalani A(2), Familtseva A(2), Kamat PK(2), Metreveli N(2), Tyagi
SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, USA. Electronic address: p0chat03@louisville.edu. (2)Department
of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: TIMP4 (Tissue Inhibitors of Matrix Metalloprotease 4), goes down in
failing hearts and mice lacking TIMP4 show poor regeneration capacity after
myocardial infarction (MI). This study is based on our previous observation that 
administration of cardiac inhibitor of metalloproteinase (~TIMP4) attenuates
oxidative stress and remodeling in failing hearts. Therefore, we hypothesize that
TIMP4 helps in cardiac regeneration by augmenting contractility and inducing the 
differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells into cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: To validate this hypothesis, we transfected mouse cardiomyocytes with
TIMP4 and TIMP4-siRNA and performed contractility studies in the TIMP4
transfected cardiomyocytes as compared to siRNA-TIMP4 transfected cardiomyocytes.
We evaluated the calcium channel gene serca2a (sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
ATPase2a) and mir122a which tightly regulates serca2a to explain the changes in
contractility. We treated mouse embryonic stem cells with cardiac extract and
cardiac extract minus TIMP4 (using TIMP4 monoclonal antibody) to examine the
effect of TIMP4 on differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells.
RESULTS: Contractility was augmented in the TIMP4 transfected cardiomyocytes as
compared to siRNA-TIMP4 transfected cardiomyocytes. There was elevated expression
of serca2a in the TIMP4 transformed myocytes and down regulation of mir122a. The 
cells treated with cardiac extract containing TIMP4 showed cardiac phenotype in
terms of Ckit+, GATA4+ and Nkx2.5 expression.
CONCLUSION: This is a novel report suggesting that TIMP4 augments contractility
and induces differentiation of progenitor cells into cardiac phenotype. In view
of the failure of MMP9 inhibitors for cardiac therapy, TIMP4 provides an
alternative approach, being an indigenous molecule and a natural inhibitor of
MMP9.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4417452
PMID: 25745981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 4;11(3):e1005019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005019.
eCollection 2015.

Licensing of primordial germ cells for gametogenesis depends on genital ridge
signaling.

Hu YC(1), Nicholls PK(1), Soh YQ(2), Daniele JR(2), Junker JP(3), van Oudenaarden
A(3), Page DC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Hubrecht Institute-KNAW (Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences) and University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands. (4)Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America.

In mouse embryos at mid-gestation, primordial germ cells (PGCs) undergo licensing
to become gametogenesis-competent cells (GCCs), gaining the capacity for meiotic 
initiation and sexual differentiation. GCCs then initiate either oogenesis or
spermatogenesis in response to gonadal cues. Germ cell licensing has been
considered to be a cell-autonomous and gonad-independent event, based on
observations that some PGCs, having migrated not to the gonad but to the adrenal 
gland, nonetheless enter meiosis in a time frame parallel to ovarian germ cells
-- and do so regardless of the sex of the embryo. Here we test the hypothesis
that germ cell licensing is cell-autonomous by examining the fate of PGCs in
Gata4 conditional mutant (Gata4 cKO) mouse embryos. Gata4, which is expressed
only in somatic cells, is known to be required for genital ridge initiation. PGCs
in Gata4 cKO mutants migrated to the area where the genital ridge, the precursor 
of the gonad, would ordinarily be formed. However, these germ cells did not
undergo licensing and instead retained characteristics of PGCs. Our results
indicate that licensing is not purely cell-autonomous but is induced by the
somatic genital ridge.

PMCID: PMC4349450
PMID: 25739037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 Dec;35(12):1473-80. doi: 10.1002/jat.3134. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Toxicity induced by Basic Violet 14, Direct Red 28 and Acid Red 26 in zebrafish
larvae.

Shen B(1,)(2), Liu HC(3), Ou WB(4,)(5), Eilers G(6), Zhou SM(7), Meng FG(4), Li
CQ(3), Li YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(2)Jiaxing Entry-exit Inspection & Quarantine Bureau, Jiaxing, 314001, China.
(3)Hunter Biotechnology, Inc., Transfarland, Hangzhou, 311231, China. (4)Yangtze 
Delta Region Institute of Tsinghua University, Jiaxing, 314006, China. (5)College
of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 310018, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, 02115, USA. (7)College of Biological and Chemical Engineering,
Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 314001, China.

Basic Violet 14, Direct Red 28 and Acid Red 26 are classified as carcinogenic
dyes in the European textile ecology standard, despite insufficient toxicity
data. In this study, the toxicity of these dyes was assessed in a zebrafish
model, and the underlying toxic mechanisms were investigated. Basic Violet 14 and
Direct Red 28 showed acute toxicity with a LC50 value at 60.63 and 476.84 µg
ml(-1) , respectively, whereas the LC50 of Acid Red 26 was between 2500 and 2800 
µg ml(-1) . Treatment with Basic Violet 14, Direct Red 28 and Acid Red 26
resulted in common developmental abnormalities including delayed yolk sac
absorption and swimming bladder deflation. Hepatotoxicity was observed in
zebrafish treated with Basic Violet 14, and cardiovascular toxicity was found in 
zebrafish treated with Acid Red 26 at concentrations higher than 2500 µg ml(-1) .
Basic Violet 14 also caused significant up-regulation of GCLC gene expression in 
a dose-dependent manner whereas Acid Red 26 induced significant up-regulation of 
NKX2.5 and down-regulation of GATA4 at a high concentration in a dose-dependent
manner. These results suggest that Basic Violet 14, Direct Red 28 and Acid Red 26
induce developmental and organ-specific toxicity, and oxidative stress may play a
role in the hepatotoxicity of Basic Violet 14, the suppressed GATA4 expression
may have a relation to the cardiovascular toxicity of Acid Red 26.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25727789  [PubMed - in process]


162. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Apr 1;23(7):1601-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Feb 7.

Structure-activity study for (bis)ureidopropyl- and (bis)thioureidopropyldiamine 
LSD1 inhibitors with 3-5-3 and 3-6-3 carbon backbone architectures.

Nowotarski SL(1), Pachaiyappan B(2), Holshouser SL(2), Kutz CJ(2), Li Y(2), Huang
Y(1), Sharma SK(3), Casero RA Jr(1), Woster PM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, John Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD 21231, United States. (2)Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences,
Medical University of South Carolina, 70 President St., Charleston, SC 29425,
United States. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College
of Pharmacy, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI 48202, United
States. (4)Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, Medical
University of South Carolina, 70 President St., Charleston, SC 29425, United
States. Electronic address: woster@musc.edu.

Methylation at specific histone lysine residues is a critical post-translational 
modification that alters chromatin architecture, and dysregulated lysine
methylation/demethylation is associated with the silencing of tumor suppressor
genes. The enzyme lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) complexed to specific
transcription factors catalyzes the oxidative demethylation of mono- and
dimethyllysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me and H3K4me2, respectively). We have
previously reported potent (bis)urea and (bis)thiourea LSD1 inhibitors that
increase cellular levels of H3K4me and H3K4me2, promote the re-expression of
silenced tumor suppressor genes and suppress tumor growth in vitro. Here we
report the design additional (bis)urea and (bis)thiourea LSD1 inhibitors that
feature 3-5-3 or 3-6-3 carbon backbone architectures. Three of these compounds
displayed single-digit IC50 values in a recombinant LSD1 assay. In addition,
compound 6d exhibited an IC50 of 4.2µM against the Calu-6 human lung
adenocarcinoma line, and 4.8µM against the MCF7 breast tumor cell line, in an MTS
cell viability assay. Following treatment with 6b-6d, Calu-6 cells exhibited a
significant increase in the mRNA expression for the silenced tumor suppressor
genes SFRP2, HCAD and p16, and modest increases in GATA4 message. The compounds
described in this paper represent the most potent epigenetic modulators in this
series, and have potential for use as antitumor agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4396983
PMID: 25725609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 27;459(1):166-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.094. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

TBX5 loss-of-function mutation contributes to familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhang XL(1), Qiu XB(2), Yuan F(2), Wang J(3), Zhao CM(3), Li RG(2), Xu L(2), Xu
YJ(2), Shi HY(2), Hou XM(2), Qu XK(2), Xu YW(4), Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China. 
Electronic address: xuyawei69@163.com. (5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department
of Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department of Central Laboratory,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
Electronic address: dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

The cardiac T-box transcription factor TBX5 is crucial for proper cardiovascular 
development, and mutations in TBX5 have been associated with various congenital
heart diseases and arrhythmias in humans. However, whether mutated TBX5
contributes to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) remains unclear. In this study, the
coding exons and flanking introns of the TBX5 gene were sequenced in 190
unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available family members of the index
patient carrying an identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched
healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for TBX5. The functional
characteristics of the mutant TBX5 were explored in contrast to its wild-type
counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a
novel heterozygous TBX5 mutation, p.S154A, was identified in a family with DCM
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which co-segregated with DCM in the
family with complete penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in 400 control 
chromosomes and the altered amino acid was completely conserved evolutionarily
across various species. Functional assays revealed that the mutant TBX5 had
significantly decreased transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation
markedly diminished the synergistic activation of TBX5 with NKX2-5 or GATA4,
other two transcription factors causatively linked to DCM. This study firstly
associates TBX5 loss-of-function mutation with enhanced susceptibility to DCM,
providing novel insight into the molecular mechanisms of DCM, and suggesting the 
potential implications in the development of new treatment strategies for this
common form of myocardial disorder.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 13;10(2):e0117747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117747.
eCollection 2015.

The regulation of troponins I, C and ANP by GATA4 and Nkx2-5 in heart of
hibernating thirteen-lined ground squirrels, Ictidomys tridecemlineatus.

Luu BE(1), Tessier SN(1), Duford DL(1), Storey KB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry & Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6, Canada.

Hibernation is an adaptive strategy used by various mammals to survive the winter
under situations of low ambient temperatures and limited or no food availability.
The heart of hibernating thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys
tridecemlineatus) has the remarkable ability to descend to low, near 0°C
temperatures without falling into cardiac arrest. We hypothesized that the
transcription factors GATA4 and Nkx2-5 may play a role in cardioprotection by
facilitating the expression of key downstream targets such as troponin I,
troponin C, and ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide). This study measured relative
changes in transcript levels, protein levels, protein post-translational
modifications, and transcription factor binding over six stages: euthermic
control (EC), entrance into torpor (EN), early torpor (ET), late torpor (LT),
early arousal (EA), and interbout arousal (IA). We found differential regulation 
of GATA4 whereby transcript/protein expression, post-translational modification
(phosphorylation of serine 261), and DNA binding were enhanced during the
transitory phases (entrance and arousal) of hibernation. Activation of GATA4 was 
paired with increases in cardiac troponin I, troponin C and ANP protein levels
during entrance, while increases in p-GATA4 DNA binding during early arousal was 
paired with decreases in troponin I and no changes in troponin C and ANP protein 
levels. Unlike its binding partner, the relative mRNA/protein expression and DNA 
binding of Nkx2-5 did not change during hibernation. This suggests that either
Nkx2-5 does not play a substantial role or other regulatory mechanisms not
presently studied (e.g. posttranslational modifications) are important during
hibernation. The data suggest a significant role for GATA4-mediated gene
transcription in the differential regulation of genes which aid cardiac-specific 
challenges associated with torpor-arousal.

PMCID: PMC4334527
PMID: 25679215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015 Mar 1;569:45-53. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.02.001. Epub 
2015 Feb 9.

Cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5 interacts with p53 and modulates its
activity.

Kojic S(1), Nestorovic A(2), Rakicevic L(2), Protic O(3), Jasnic-Savovic J(2),
Faulkner G(4), Radojkovic D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: snezanakojic@imgge.bg.ac.rs.
(2)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. (3)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic
Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia; Faculty of Medicine,
Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy(1). (4)CRIBI, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.

Transcription factor Nkx2.5, essential for heart development, regulates
cardiomyocyte-specific gene expression through combinatorial interactions with
other cardiac-restricted (GATA4 and dHAND) or ubiquitous (p300) transcription
regulators. Here we demonstrate that Nkx2.5 and p53 synergistically activate the 
promoter of the striated muscle stress responsive transcriptional cofactor
Ankrd2, involved in coordination of proliferation and apoptosis during myogenic
differentiation. Moreover, the p53 protein is able to interact with both wild
type Nkx2.5 and its mutant <U+0394>Nkx2.5 (aa 1-198) found in patients with diverse
cardiac malformations. Nkx2.5 interaction site of p53 maps to the C terminal
region, while p53 binding site on Nkx2.5 lies outside its C terminus. In
addition, overexpression of Nkx2.5 has a modulatory, promoter dependent effect on
p53 transactivation, while the mutant significantly abolished p53 activity on the
Mdm2, p21(WAF1/CIP1) and Bax promoters. Their physical interaction contributes to
the observed behavior in the case of the Mdm2 promoter. Our data provide a new
evidence for the role of p53 in cardiac function through interaction with Nkx2.5.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25677450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1860-72. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1931. Epub 2015 Feb 
10.

GATA4 is a key regulator of steroidogenesis and glycolysis in mouse Leydig cells.

Schrade A(1), Kyrönlahti A, Akinrinade O, Pihlajoki M, Häkkinen M, Fischer S,
Alastalo TP, Velagapudi V, Toppari J, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital (A.S., A.K., O.A., M.P., T.-P.A., M.H.), University of
Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland; Institute of Biomedicine (O.A.), University of
Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland; School of Pharmacy (M.H.), University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio 70211, Finland; Institute of Applied Biotechnology
(S.F.), University of Applied Sciences Biberach, Biberach 88400, Germany;
Metabolomics Unit (V.V.), Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of
Helsinki 00014, Helsinki, Finland; Departments of Physiology and Pediatrics
(J.T.), University of Turku, Turku 20520, Finland; and Departments of Pediatrics 
(A.S., M.P., D.B.W., M.H.) and Developmental Biology (D.B.W.), Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

Transcription factor GATA4 is expressed in somatic cells of the mammalian testis.
Gene targeting studies in mice have shown that GATA4 is essential for proper
differentiation and function of Sertoli cells. The role of GATA4 in Leydig cell
development, however, remains controversial, because targeted mutagenesis
experiments in mice have not shown a consistent phenotype, possibly due to
context-dependent effects or compensatory responses. We therefore undertook a
reductionist approach to study the function of GATA4 in Leydig cells. Using
microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR, we identified a set of genes that
are down-regulated or up-regulated after small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated
silencing of Gata4 in the murine Leydig tumor cell line mLTC-1. These same genes 
were dysregulated when primary cultures of Gata4(flox/flox) adult Leydig cells
were subjected to adenovirus-mediated cre-lox recombination in vitro. Among the
down-regulated genes were enzymes of the androgen biosynthetic pathway (Cyp11a1, 
Hsd3b1, Cyp17a1, and Srd5a). Silencing of Gata4 expression in mLTC-1 cells was
accompanied by reduced production of sex steroid precursors, as documented by
mass spectrometric analysis. Comprehensive metabolomic analysis of
GATA4-deficient mLTC-1 cells showed alteration of other metabolic pathways,
notably glycolysis. GATA4-depleted mLTC-1 cells had reduced expression of
glycolytic genes (Hk1, Gpi1, Pfkp, and Pgam1), lower intracellular levels of ATP,
and increased extracellular levels of glucose. Our findings suggest that GATA4
plays a pivotal role in Leydig cell function and provide novel insights into
metabolic regulation in this cell type.

PMCID: PMC4398762 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25668067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1873-86. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1907. Epub 2015 Feb 
10.

Combined loss of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in male mice disrupts 
testicular development and confers adrenal-like function in the testes.

Padua MB(1), Jiang T, Morse DA, Fox SC, Hatch HM, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610.

The roles of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in testis development were
examined by simultaneously ablating Gata4 and Gata6 with Sf1Cre (Nr5a1Cre). The
deletion of both genes resulted in a striking testicular phenotype. Embryonic
Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) (conditional double mutant) testes were
smaller than control organs and contained irregular testis cords and fewer
gonocytes. Gene expression analysis revealed significant down-regulation of Dmrt1
and Mvh. Surprisingly, Amh expression was strongly up-regulated and remained high
beyond postnatal day 7, when it is normally extinguished. Neither DMRT1 nor GATA1
was detected in the Sertoli cells of the mutant postnatal testes. Furthermore,
the expression of the steroidogenic genes Star, Cyp11a1, Hsd3b1, and Hsd17b3 was 
low throughout embryogenesis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a prominent
reduction in cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1)- and
3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-positive (3ßHSD) cells, with few
17a-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase-positive (CYP17A1) cells present. In contrast, in
postnatal Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) testes, the expression of the
steroidogenic markers Star, Cyp11a1, and Hsd3b6 was increased, but a dramatic
down-regulation of Hsd17b3, which is required for testosterone synthesis, was
observed. The genes encoding adrenal enzymes Cyp21a1, Cyp11b1, Cyp11b2, and Mcr2 
were strongly up-regulated, and clusters containing numerous CYP21A2-positive
cells were localized in the interstitium. These data suggest a lack of testis
functionality, with a loss of normal steroidogenic testis function, concomitant
with an expansion of the adrenal-like cell population in postnatal conditional
double mutant testes. Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) animals of both
sexes lack adrenal glands; however, despite this deficiency, males are viable in 
contrast to the females of the same genotype, which die shortly after birth.

PMCID: PMC4398756 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25668066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117689. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117689.
eCollection 2015.

DMSO efficiently down regulates pluripotency genes in human embryonic stem cells 
during definitive endoderm derivation and increases the proficiency of hepatic
differentiation.

Czysz K(1), Minger S(1), Thomas N(1).

Author information: 
(1)GE Healthcare Life Sciences, The Maynard Centre, Cardiff, Wales, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Definitive endoderm (DE) is one of the three germ layers which during
in vivo vertebrate development gives rise to a variety of organs including liver,
lungs, thyroid and pancreas; consequently efficient in vitro initiation of stem
cell differentiation to DE cells is a prerequisite for successful cellular
specification to subsequent DE-derived cell types [1, 2]. In this study we
present a novel approach to rapidly and efficiently down regulate pluripotency
genes during initiation of differentiation to DE cells by addition of dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) to Activin A-based culture medium and report its effects on the 
downstream differentiation to hepatocyte-like cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) were differentiated to
DE using standard methods in medium supplemented with 100ng/ml of Activin A and
compared to cultures where DE specification was additionally enhanced with
different concentrations of DMSO. DE cells were subsequently primed to generate
hepatic-like cells to investigate whether the addition of DMSO during formation
of DE improved subsequent expression of hepatic markers. A combination of flow
cytometry, real-time quantitative reverse PCR and immunofluorescence was applied 
throughout the differentiation process to monitor expression of pluripotency
(POUF5/OCT4 & NANOG), definitive endoderm (SOX17, CXCR4 & GATA4) and hepatic (AFP
& ALB) genes to generate differentiation stage-specific signatures.
RESULTS: Addition of DMSO to the Activin A-based medium during DE specification
resulted in rapid down regulation of the pluripotency genes OCT4 and NANOG,
accompanied by an increase expression of the DE genes SOX17, CXCR4 and GATA4.
Importantly, the expression level of ALB in DMSO-treated cells was also higher
than in cells which were differentiated to the DE stage via standard Activin A
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4320104
PMID: 25659159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 May;21(5):410-23. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav004. Epub 2015 Jan 
29.

Exogenous supplementation of Activin A enhances germ cell differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Duggal G(1), Heindryckx B(2), Warrier S(1), Taelman J(1), Van der Jeught M(1),
Deforce D(3), Chuva de Sousa Lopes S(4), De Sutter P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 
185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (2)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent
University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
bjorn.heindryckx@ugent.be. (3)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Harelbekestraat 72, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. (4)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De
Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) derived in the presence of Activin A (ActA)
demonstrate an increased differentiation propensity toward the germ cell lineage.
In addition, mouse epiblast stem cells and mouse epiblast-like cells are poised
toward germ cell differentiation and are derived in the presence of ActA. We
therefore investigated whether supplementation with ActA enhances in vitro hESC
differentiation toward germ cell lineage. ActA up-regulated early primordial germ
cell (PGC) genes STELLA/DPPA3 (developmental pluripotency associated 3) and
tyrosine kinase receptor cKIT in both ActA-derived and standard-derived hESCs
indicating its role in priming hESCs toward the PGC lineage. Indeed, ActA plus
bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4) strongly increased germ cell differentiation
potential of hESCs based on the high expression of late PGC markers DAZL (deleted
in azoospermia-like) and VASA/DDX4 (DEAD-box polypeptide 4) at mRNA and protein
level. Hence, the combination of ActA with BMP4 provides an additional boost for 
hESCs to develop into postmigratory germ cells. Together with increased VASA
expression in the presence of ActA and BMP4, we also observed up-regulation of
endoderm-specific genes GATA4 (GATA binding protein 4) and GATA6. Finally, we
were able to further mature these in vitro-derived PGC-like cells (PGCLCs) by
culturing them in in vitro maturation (IVM) medium, resulting in the formation of
germ cell-like clusters and induction of meiotic gene expression. In conclusion, 
we demonstrate for the first time a synergism between ActA and BMP4 in
facilitating germ cell-directed differentiation of hESCs, which is enhanced by
extended culture in IVM medium, as shown by cytoplasmic VASA-expressing PGCLCs.
We propose a novel relationship between the endoderm and germ cell lineage during
hESC differentiation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25634576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Apr 1;308(7):R627-35. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00346.2014. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

IGF-2R-Gaq signaling and cardiac hypertrophy in the low-birth-weight lamb.

Wang KC(1), Tosh DN(1), Zhang S(1), McMillen IC(1), Duffield JA(1), Brooks DA(2),
Morrison JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Early Origins of Adult Health Research Group, School of Pharmacy and Medical
Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; and. (2)Mechanisms in Cell Biology and
Disease Research Group, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute
for Health Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (3)Early Origins of Adult Health Research Group, School of Pharmacy
and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South
Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; and Janna.Morrison@unisa.edu.au.

The cardiac insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (IGF-2R) can induce
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in a heterotrimeric G protein receptor-coupled manner
involving aq (Gaq) or as (Gas). We have previously shown increased left
ventricular weight and cardiac IGF-2 and IGF-2R gene expression in
low-birth-weight (LBW) compared with average-birth-weight (ABW) lambs. Here, we
have investigated the cardiac expression of IGF-2 gene variants, the degree of
histone acetylation, and the abundance of proteins in the IGF-2R downstream
signaling pathway in ABW and LBW lambs. Samples from the left ventricle of ABW
and LBW lambs were collected at 21 days of age. There was increased
phospho-CaMKII protein with decreased HDAC 4 abundance in the LBW compared with
ABW lambs. There was increased GATA 4 and decreased phospho-troponin I abundance 
in LBW compared with ABW lambs, which are markers of pathological cardiac
hypertrophy and impaired or reduced contractility, respectively. There was
increased histone acetylation of H3K9 at IGF-2R promoter and IGF-2R intron 2
differentially methylated region in the LBW lamb. In conclusion, histone
acetylation of IGF-2R may lead to increased IGF-2R mRNA expression and
subsequently mediate Gaq signaling early in life via CaMKII, resulting in an
increased risk of left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiovascular disease in
adult life.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4385999
PMID: 25632020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 21;15:3. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0053-1.

Epigenetic regulation of histone modifications and Gata6 gene expression induced 
by maternal diet in mouse embryoid bodies in a model of developmental
programming.

Sun C, Denisenko O, Sheth B, Cox A, Lucas ES, Smyth NR, Fleming TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Mailpoint 840,
Level D Lab & Path Block, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road, Southampton
SO16 6YD, UK. tpf@soton.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Dietary interventions during pregnancy alter offspring fitness. We
have shown mouse maternal low protein diet fed exclusively for the
preimplantation period (Emb-LPD) before return to normal protein diet (NPD) for
the rest of gestation, is sufficient to cause adult offspring cardiovascular and 
metabolic disease. Moreover, Emb-LPD blastocysts sense altered nutrition within
the uterus and activate compensatory cellular responses including stimulated
endocytosis within extra-embryonic trophectoderm and primitive endoderm (PE)
lineages to protect fetal growth rate. However, these responses associate with
later disease. Here, we investigate epigenetic mechanisms underlying nutritional 
programming of PE that may contribute to its altered phenotype, stabilised during
subsequent development. We use embryonic stem (ES) cell lines established
previously from Emb-LPD and NPD blastocysts that were differentiated into
embryoid bodies (EBs) with outer PE-like layer.
RESULTS: Emb-LPD EBs grow to a larger size than NPD EBs and express reduced Gata6
transcription factor (regulator of PE differentiation) at mRNA and protein
levels, similar to Emb-LPD PE derivative visceral yolk sac tissue in vivo in
later gestation. We analysed histone modifications at the Gata6 promoter in
Emb-LPD EBs using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. We found significant
reduction in histone H3 and H4 acetylation and RNA polymerase II binding compared
with NPD EBs, all markers of reduced transcription. Other histone modifications, 
H3K4Me2, H3K9Me3 and H3K27Me3, were unaltered. A similar but generally
non-significant histone modification pattern was found on the Gata4 promoter.
Consistent with these changes, histone deacetylase Hdac-1, but not Hdac-3, gene
expression was upregulated in Emb-LPD EBs.
CONCLUSIONS: First, these data demonstrate ES cells and EBs retain and propagate 
nutritional programming adaptations in vitro, suitable for molecular analysis of 
mechanisms, reducing animal use. Second, they reveal maternal diet induces
persistent changes in histone modifications to regulate Gata6 expression and PE
growth and differentiation that may affect lifetime health.

PMCID: PMC4305257
PMID: 25609498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):216-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.305696.

Stoichiometry of transcription factors is critical for cardiac reprogramming.

Muraoka N(1), Ieda M(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cardiology (N.M., M.I.), Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; and Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo,
Japan (M.I.). (2)From the Department of Cardiology (N.M., M.I.), Keio University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; and Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST,
Tokyo, Japan (M.I.). mieda@z8.keio.jp.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):237-44.

PMID: 25593268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 1;182:349-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.12.043. Epub
2014 Dec 23.

Exosomes secreted from GATA-4 overexpressing mesenchymal stem cells serve as a
reservoir of anti-apoptotic microRNAs for cardioprotection.

Yu B(1), Kim HW(1), Gong M(1), Wang J(1), Millard RW(2), Wang Y(1), Ashraf M(1), 
Xu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology & Cell
Biophysics, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address: Meifeng.xu@uc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Exosomes play an important role in intercellular signaling and exert 
regulatory function by carrying bioactive molecules. This study investigated (1) 
the cardioprotective capabilities of exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) overexpressing GATA-4 (MSC(GATA-4)) and (2) its underlying regulatory
mechanisms for expression of target proteins in recipient cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Exosomes were isolated and purified from MSC(GATA-4)
(Exo(GATA-4)) and control MSCs (Exo(Null)). Cell injury was investigated in
primary cultured rat neonatal cardiomyocytes (CM) and in the rat heart. Exosomes 
contributed to increased CM survival, reduced CM apoptosis, and preserved
mitochondrial membrane potential in CM cultured under a hypoxic environment.
Direct intramyocardial transplantation of exosomes at the border of an ischemic
region following ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery
significantly restored cardiac contractile function and reduced infarct size.
Real-time PCR revealed that several anti-apoptotic miRs were highly expressed in 
Exo(GATA-4). Rapid internalization of Exo(GATA-4) by CM was documented using
time-lapse imaging. Subsequent expression of these miRs, particularly miR-19a was
higher in CM and in the myocardium treated with Exo(GATA-4) compared to those
treated with Exo(Null). The enhanced protective effects observed in CM were
diminished by the inhibition of miR-19a. The expression level of PTEN, a
predicted target of miR-19a, was reduced in CM treated with Exo(GATA-4), which
resulted in the activation of the Akt and ERK signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Exo(GATA-4) upon transplantation in the damaged tissue mediate
protection by releasing multiple miRs responsible for activation of the cell
survival signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4382384
PMID: 25590961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Epigenetics. 2015;10(2):167-77. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2014.998536.

DNA methylation abnormalities in congenital heart disease.

Serra-Juhé C(1), Cuscó I, Homs A, Flores R, Torán N, Pérez-Jurado LA.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental and Health Sciences ; Universitat Pompeu Fabra ; 
Barcelona , Spain.

Congenital heart defects represent the most common malformation at birth,
occurring also in ~50% of individuals with Down syndrome. Congenital heart
defects are thought to have multifactorial etiology, but the main causes are
largely unknown. We have explored the global methylation profile of fetal heart
DNA in comparison to blood DNA from control subjects: an absolute correlation
with the type of tissue was detected. Pathway analysis revealed a significant
enrichment of differential methylation at genes related to muscle contraction and
cardiomyopathies in the developing heart DNA. We have also searched for abnormal 
methylation profiles on developing heart-tissue DNA of syndromic and
non-syndromic congenital heart defects. On average, 3 regions with aberrant
methylation were detected per sample and 18 regions were found differentially
methylated between groups. Several epimutations were detected in candidate genes 
involved in growth regulation, apoptosis and folate pathway. A likely pathogenic 
hypermethylation of several intragenic sites at the MSX1 gene, involved in
outflow tract morphogenesis, was found in a fetus with isolated heart
malformation. In addition, hypermethylation of the GATA4 gene was present in
fetuses with Down syndrome with or without congenital heart defects, as well as
in fetuses with isolated heart malformations. Expression deregulation of the
abnormally methylated genes was detected. Our data indicate that epigenetic
alterations of relevant genes are present in developing heart DNA in fetuses with
both isolated and syndromic heart malformations. These epimutations likely
contribute to the pathogenesis of the malformation by cis-acting effects on gene 
expression.

PMCID: PMC4622722
PMID: 25587870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Feb 15;331(2):369-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.12.016. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Silencing of nodal modulator 1 inhibits the differentiation of P19 cells into
cardiomyocytes.

Zhang H(1), Xu C(2), Yang R(3), Chen H(4), Kong X(1), Qian L(1), Sheng Y(1), Sun 
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Yancheng City No. 1 People<U+05F3>s Hospital, Yancheng, Jiangsu 224001,
China. (3)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address:
yr@njmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China.
Electronic address: huanhuanchen@hotmail.com.

Nodal modulator 1 (NOMO1), a highly conserved transmembrane protein, has been
identified as a part of a protein complex that participates in the Nodal
signaling pathway, a critical determinant of heart and visceral organ formation. 
We previously found that the NOMO1 gene was substantially downregulated in human 
ventricular septal defect (VSD) myocardium and, thus, may be an important
molecular pathway in human heart development. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the effects of NOMO1 gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) during
early mouse cardiac differentiation using P19 cells as a model system. Our
results revealed that the differentiated P19 cell population exhibited
downregulated NOMO1 levels and expressed lower levels of Nodal signaling
mediators, such as Nodal, Cripto and Smad2, than the negative control. Similarly,
cardiomyocyte-specific sarcomeric markers, such as cardiac troponin T, as well as
expression of cardiogenesis-related transcriptional factors, such as Nkx2.5,
Gata4 and Tbx5 were found to be downregulated in P19 differentiated
cardiomyocytes in NOMO1-silenced cells when compared to controls. In conclusion, 
our results indicate that NOMO1 gene knockdown inhibits the differentiation of
P19 cells into cardiomyocytes, which highlights a potential role for NOMO1 in
early cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3249-58. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3149. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Angiotensin II promotes differentiation of mouse c-kit-positive cardiac stem
cells into pacemaker-like cells.

Xue C(1), Zhang J(1), Lv Z(1), Liu H(1), Huang C(2), Yang J(2), Wang T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical
College, Nanchong, Sichuan 637000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, P.R. China.

Cardiac stem cells (CSCs) can differentiate into cardiac muscle-like cells;
however, it remains unknown whether CSCs may possess the ability to differentiate
into pacemaker cells. The aim of the present study was to determine whether
angiotensin II (Ang II) could promote the specialization of CSCs into
pacemaker-like cells. Mouse CSCs were treated with Ang II from day 3-5, after
cell sorting. The differentiation potential of the cells was then analyzed by
morphological analysis, flow cytometry, reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction, immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis. Treatment with Ang II
resulted in an increased number of cardiac muscle-like cells (32.7 ± 4.8% vs.
21.5 ± 4.8%; P<0.05), and inhibition of smooth muscle-like cells (6.2 ± 7.3% vs. 
20.5 ± 5.1%; P<0.05). Following treatment with Ang II, increased levels of the
cardiac progenitor-specific markers GATA4 and Nkx2.5 were observed in the cells. 
Furthermore, the transcript levels of pacemaker function-related genes, including
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN)2, HCN4, T-box (Tbx)2
and Tbx3, were significantly upregulated. Immunofluorescence analysis confirmed
the increased number of pacemaker-like cells. The pacemaker current (If) was
recorded in the cells derived from CSCs, treated with Ang II. In conclusion,
treatment of CSCs with Ang II during the differentiation process modified
cardiac-specific gene expression and resulted in the enhanced formation of
pacemaker-like cells.

PMCID: PMC4368082
PMID: 25572000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):759-77. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490542. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Scl binds to primed enhancers in mesoderm to regulate hematopoietic and cardiac
fate divergence.

Org T(1), Duan D(1), Ferrari R(2), Montel-Hagen A(1), Van Handel B(1), Kerényi
MA(3), Sasidharan R(1), Rubbi L(1), Fujiwara Y(3), Pellegrini M(1), Orkin SH(3), 
Kurdistani SK(2), Mikkola HK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell
Research Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Harvard Stem Cell Institute Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA hmikkola@mcdb.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):691-3.

Scl/Tal1 confers hemogenic competence and prevents ectopic cardiomyogenesis in
embryonic endothelium by unknown mechanisms. We discovered that Scl binds to
hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers that become epigenetically primed in
multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm, to regulate the divergence of hematopoietic 
and cardiac lineages. Scl does not act as a pioneer factor but rather exploits a 
pre-established epigenetic landscape. As the blood lineage emerges, Scl binding
and active epigenetic modifications are sustained in hematopoietic enhancers,
whereas cardiac enhancers are decommissioned by removal of active epigenetic
marks. Our data suggest that, rather than recruiting corepressors to enhancers,
Scl prevents ectopic cardiogenesis by occupying enhancers that cardiac factors,
such as Gata4 and Hand1, use for gene activation. Although hematopoietic Gata
factors bind with Scl to both activated and repressed genes, they are dispensable
for cardiac repression, but necessary for activating genes that enable
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell development. These results suggest that a
unique subset of enhancers in lineage-specific genes that are accessible for
regulators of opposing fates during the time of the fate decision provide a
platform where the divergence of mutually exclusive fates is orchestrated.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4369313
PMID: 25564442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;22(3):285-99. doi: 10.1177/1933719114565031. Epub 2015 Jan
5.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone and gonadal steroids regulate transcription factor
mRNA expression in primary pituitary and immortalized gonadotrope cells.

Zheng W(1), Grafer CM(2), Kim J(3), Halvorson LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Core Laboratories, St. Paul University Hospital, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Green Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Houston Fertility Institute,
Houston, TX, USA. (4)Rockville, MD, USA lhalvo@gmail.com.

Hormonal regulation of pituitary gonadotropin gene expression has been attributed
to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-mediated stimulation of immediate early 
gene expression and gonadal steroid interactions with their respective nuclear
receptors. A number of orphan nuclear receptors including steroidogenic factor 1,
liver receptor homologue 1, dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia
critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1, and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factors I/II as well as the GATA family members, GATA2 and
GATA4, have also been implicated in transcriptional regulation of the
gonadotropin genes. We hypothesized that hormonally mediated changes in these
latter transcription factors may provide an additional mechanism for mediating
hormonal effects beyond the more classically appreciated pathways. In these
studies, we demonstrate significant regulation of orphan nuclear receptor and
GATA messenger RNA levels by GnRH, dihydrotestosterone, estradiol, and
progesterone in both cultured primary pituitary cells and gonadotrope-derived
cell line, LßT2. These results advance our understanding of the complex
mechanisms by which GnRH and steroid hormones achieve precise regulation of
anterior pituitary function.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25563755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Stem Cells Int. 2014;2014:379678. doi: 10.1155/2014/379678. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Transient Downregulation of Nanog and Oct4 Induced by DETA/NO Exposure in Mouse
Embryonic Stem Cells Leads to Mesodermal/Endodermal Lineage Differentiation.

Mora-Castilla S(1), Tejedo JR(2), Tapia-Limonchi R(2), Díaz I(2), Hitos AB(2),
Cahuana GM(2), Hmadcha A(3), Martín F(2), Soria B(3), Bedoya FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER),
University Pablo de Olavide, Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) of Diabetes and 
Related Metabolic Diseases, Red-Tercel, Avenida Américo Vespucio S/N, 41092
Seville, Spain ; Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 2880 Torrey Pines Scenic Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER),
University Pablo de Olavide, Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) of Diabetes and 
Related Metabolic Diseases, Red-Tercel, Avenida Américo Vespucio S/N, 41092
Seville, Spain. (3)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative
Medicine (CABIMER), Progress and Health Foundation, Biomedical Research Network
(CIBER) of Diabetes and Related Metabolic Diseases, Red TerCel, Américo Vespucio 
S/N, 41092 Seville, Spain.

The function of pluripotency genes in differentiation is a matter of
investigation. We report here that Nanog and Oct4 are reexpressed in two mouse
embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines following exposure to the differentiating agent 
DETA/NO. Both cell lines express a battery of both endoderm and mesoderm markers 
following induction of differentiation with DETA/NO-based protocols. Confocal
analysis of cells undergoing directed differentiation shows that the majority of 
cells expressing Nanog express also endoderm genes such as Gata4 and FoxA2 (75.4%
and 96.2%, resp.). Simultaneously, mRNA of mesodermal markers Flk1 and Mef2c are 
also regulated by the treatment. Acetylated histone H3 occupancy at the promoter 
of Nanog is involved in the process of reexpression. Furthermore, Nanog binding
to the promoter of Brachyury leads to repression of this gene, thus disrupting
mesendoderm transition.

PMCID: PMC4269087
PMID: 25544848  [PubMed]


181. Res Vet Sci. 2015 Feb;98:42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2014.11.014. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

Oxytocin improves the expression of cardiac specific markers in porcine bone
marrow stem cells differentiation.

Ybarra N(1), Vincent P(2), Smith LC(2), Troncy E(3).

Author information: 
(1)GREPAQ - Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculté de médecine
vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. (2)CRRA -
Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université
de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. (3)GREPAQ - Department of Veterinary
Biomedicine, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. Electronic address: eric.troncy@umontreal.ca.

Bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs) treated with 5-azacytidine possess myogenic
differentiation potential. Oxytocin (OT) induces cardiomyogenesis in murine
embryonic and cardiac stem cells. We attempted to isolate, characterize, and
induce OT-mediated cardiomyogenic differentiation of porcine pBMSCs. Cells were
treated as: control, OT, and 5-azacytidine groups. During early passages,
transcripts of Oct4, GATA4, OT receptor, and phospholamban were expressed. RT-PCR
showed upregulation of GATA4 in OT and 5-azacytidine-induced groups.
Immunocytochemistry revealed higher expressions of cardiac troponin T and myosin 
heavy chain in OT than in 5-azacytidine-induced groups (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Western blot
analysis showed upregulation of cardiac troponin I in OT-induced pBMSCs
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). We infer pBMSCs should be induced during early passages, when
expressing transcription factors related to pluripotency and cardiomyogenesis, as
well as OT receptor. The more abundant expression of cardiac specific proteins in
OT-treated pBMSCs suggests OT could be a more potent cardiomyogenic inducer of
pBMSC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25541154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Sep;29(6):1254-62. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.12.008. Epub
2014 Dec 23.

Evaluation of a new standardized enzymatic isolation protocol for human umbilical
cord-derived stem cells.

Buyl K(1), Vanhaecke T(2), Desmae T(2), Lagneaux L(3), Rogiers V(2), Najar M(3), 
De Kock J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology, Center for
Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 
103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.
(2)Department of In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology, Center for
Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 
103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. (3)Laboratory of Clinical Cell Therapy, Bordet
Institut, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 808 Route de Lennik, B-1070 Brussels,
Belgium.

The umbilical cord (UC) represents an important source of mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSC). These human UC-derived MSC (UC-MSC) have already been isolated using a
protocol based on the migratory and plastic adhesive properties of MSC
(UC-MSC-Mig). The UC-MSC-Mig isolation method, however, is difficult to
standardize. Therefore, we developed an enzymatic isolation protocol (UC-MSC-Enz)
to overcome the above mentioned disadvantages. First, we investigated the
UC-MSC-Enz for their MSC properties. We found that UC-MSC-Enz express the MSC
markers CD73, CD90 and CD105 and are able to differentiate into osteoblasts,
adipocytes and chondroblasts fulfilling the MSC criteria of the International
Society for Cellular Therapy. Previously we found that UC-MSC-Mig are unique
among MSCs due to their significant expression of several hepatic (progenitor)
markers. Therefore, we also investigated the expression of hepatic transcription 
factors and other hepatic markers in UC-MSC-Enz at both the mRNA and protein
level. We found that the expression of hepatic transcription factors (GATA4,
GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and hepatic markers (AFP, DPP4, CX43, DKK1, DSG2, KRT18
and KRT19) in UC-MSC-Enz was not significantly different from those of
UC-MSC-Mig. Consequently, this optimized enzyme-based method represents a fast,
robust and standardized way to isolate UC-MSC for a broad range of applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25541070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Apr;36(4):802-8. doi: 10.1007/s00246-014-1091-3. Epub 2014 
Dec 19.

Germline mutations in NKX2-5, GATA4, and CRELD1 are rare in a Mexican sample of
Down syndrome patients with endocardial cushion and septal heart defects.

Alcántara-Ortigoza MA(1), De Rubens-Figueroa J, Reyna-Fabian ME, Estandía-Ortega 
B, González-del Angel A, Molina-Álvarez B, Velázquez-Aragón JA,
Villagómez-Martínez S, Pereira-López GI, Martínez-Cruz V, Álvarez-Gómez RM,
Díaz-García L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto 
Nacional de Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Insurgentes Sur 3700-C,
Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico,
malcantaraortigoza@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Oct;36(7):1551.

Congenital heart defects (CHD) are found in ~50 % of Down syndrome (DS) patients.
Genetic variants have been implicated, including CRELD1 mutations, but no
previous study has examined the candidate genes, NKX2-5 and GATA4, in DS patients
with secundum atrial defects (ASDII) and ventricular septal defects (VSD).
Furthermore, CRELD1 mutations have not yet been studied in Mexican DS patients
with atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD). Mexican DS patients (n = 148) with
standard trisomy 21 were classified as follows: group I, normal heart; group II, 
VSD, ASDII, or both; and group III, AVSD. Mexican healthy controls (n = 113) were
also included. Sequence analysis was performed on NKX2-5 and GATA4 in all three
groups, and on CRELD1 in only group III. Statistical differences in the
percentages of functional variants were analyzed by Fisher's exact test. Three
non-synonymous variants in NKX2-5 were identified in the heterozygous state: a
novel p.Pro5Ser was found in one DS patient without CHD; the p.Glu21Gln was found
in one ASDII patient; and the p.Arg25Cys (R25C) was found in three patients (one 
from each DS study group). The p.Glu21Gln and R25C were also documented in 0.88 %
of the controls. No significant difference was observed between the DS groups and
healthy controls. Germline mutations in the NKX2-5, GATA4, and CRELD1 genes do
not appear to be associated with CHD in Mexican DS patients. Our findings also
support the notion that the R25C variant of NKX2-5 is a polymorphism, as it was
not significantly different between our DS patients and controls.

PMID: 25524324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014 Dec 19;14:195. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-14-195.

Secondhand smoke exposure toxicity accelerates age-related cardiac disease in old
hamsters.

Wu JP, Hsieh CH, Ho TJ, Kuo WW, Yeh YL, Lin CC, Kuo CH, Huang CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan. cyhuang@mail.cmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Aging is associated with physiological or pathological left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) cardiac changes. Secondhand smoke (SHS) exposure is
associated with pathological LVH. The action mechanism in cardiac concentric
hypertrophy from SHS exposure is understood, but the transition contributed from 
SHS exposure is not. To determine whether exposure to SHS has an impact on
age-induced LVH we examined young and old hamsters that underwent SHS exposure in
a chamber for 30 mins.
METHODS: Morphological and histological studies were then conducted using
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson's trichrome staining. Echocardiographic
analysis was used to determine left ventricular wall thickness and function. LVH 
related protein expression levels were detected by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The results showed that both young and aged hamsters exposed to SHS
exhibited increased heart weights and left ventricular weights, left ventricular 
posterior wall thickness and intraventricular septum systolic and diastolic
pressure also increased. However, left ventricular function systolic and
diastolic pressure deteriorated. H&E and Masson's trichrome staining results
showed LV papillary muscles were ruptured, resulting in lower cardiac function at
the myocardial level. LV muscle fiber arrangement was disordered and collagen
accumulation occurred. Concentric LVH related protein molecular markers increased
only in young hamsters exposed to SHS. However, this declined with hamster age.
By contrast, eccentric LVH related proteins increased in aging hamsters exposed
the SHS. Pro-inflammatory proteins, IL-6, TNF-a, JAK1, STAT3, and SIRTI
expression increased in aging hamsters exposed to SHS.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that SHS exposure induces a pro-inflammatory response
that results in concentric transition to aging eccentric LVH.

PMCID: PMC4349676
PMID: 25524239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):207-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.113043.

Dose-dependent nuclear ß-catenin response segregates endomesoderm along the sea
star primary axis.

McCauley BS(1), Akyar E(1), Saad HR(1), Hinman VF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 5th Ave,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon 
University, 4400 5th Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA veronica@cmu.edu.

In many invertebrates, the nuclearization of ß-catenin at one pole of the embryo 
initiates endomesoderm specification. An intriguing possibility is that a
gradient of nuclear ß-catenin (nß-catenin), similar to that operating in
vertebrate neural tube patterning, functions to distinguish cell fates in
invertebrates. To test this hypothesis, we determined the function of nß-catenin 
during the early development of the sea star, which undergoes a basal
deuterostomal mode of embryogenesis. We show that low levels of nß-catenin
activity initiate bra, which is expressed in the future posterior endoderm-fated 
territory; intermediate levels are required for expression of foxa and gata4/5/6,
which are later restricted to the endoderm; and activation of ets1 and erg in the
mesoderm-fated territory requires the highest nß-catenin activity. Transcription 
factors acting downstream of high nß-catenin segregate the endoderm/mesoderm
boundary, which is further reinforced by Delta/Notch signaling. Significantly,
therefore, in sea stars, endomesoderm segregation arises through transcriptional 
responses to levels of nß-catenin activity. Here, we describe the first empirical
evidence of a dose-dependent response to a dynamic spatiotemporal nß-catenin
activity that patterns cell fates along the primary axis in an invertebrate.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4299145
PMID: 25516976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Tsitologiia. 2014;56(3):212-7.

[Comparative characteristics of the stem cells isolated from subcutaneous and
subepicardial adipose tissue].

[Article in Russian]

Krylova TA, Bystrova OA, Khudiakov AA, Malashicheva AB, Moiseeva OM, Zenin VV,
Martynova MG.

BACKGROUND: Stem cells (SCs) considerably vary in morphological,
immunophenotypic, proliferative, and differentiation characteristics depending on
their tissue source. The comparative analysis of their biological properties is
essential for the optimal choice of SCs for regenerative therapies.
METHODS: Using immunocytochemistry, flow cytometry, histochemistry and real-time 
RT-PCR, we have investigated SCs obtained from human subepicardial (SEC-AT) and
subcutaneous (SC-AT) adipose tissue and cultured under similar culture conditions
without any differentiation-promoting factors.
RESULTS: The cultures were similar in the high proportion of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive cells. In both cultures, immunophenotyping has
revealed high expression of mesenchymal stem cell surface markers CD29, CD44,
CD73, and CD105, low expression of CD31, CD34 and CD45, and wide variability in
CD117, CD146 and CD309 expression. The only distinction in CD marker profile was 
significantly lower expression of CD90 in SCs from SEC-AT. Histochemical analysis
has shown the lack of Oil Red O-positive cells in both cultures and about
ten-fold higher number of alkaline phosphatase-positive cells among SCs from
SC-AT. In the both cultures, immunocytochemistry has detected similar low
expression of slow myosin heavy chain marker MAB1628 and smooth muscle actin
marker a-hSMA. Gap junctional protein Connexin-43 expression was markedly higher 
in SCs from SC-AT, and epithelial cell marker Cytokeratin-19 expression was
detected only in these cells. By RT-PCR, GATA4 mRNA was found to be highly
expressed only in SCs from SEC-AT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that SC-AT, as compared with SEC-AT, is richer
in epithelial cell and osteogenic progenitors. In turn, SEC-AT possesses
cardiomyogenic SCs, and can be considered as an alternative to SC-AT as a source 
of SCs for cell cardiotherapy.

PMID: 25509417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Reproduction. 2015 Mar;149(3):245-57. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0369. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

GATA4 knockdown in MA-10 Leydig cells identifies multiple target genes in the
steroidogenic pathway.

Bergeron F(1), Nadeau G(1), Viger RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)ReproductionMother and Child Health, Room T3-67, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec, Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la 
Reproduction (CRBR), 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V
4G2Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyFaculty of Medicine, Laval University, 
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4. (2)ReproductionMother and Child Health, Room
T3-67, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec,
Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction (CRBR), 2705 Laurier
Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2Department of Obstetrics and
GynecologyFaculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1K 
7P4 ReproductionMother and Child Health, Room T3-67, Centre de Recherche du
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec, Centre de Recherche en Biologie
de la Reproduction (CRBR), 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada
G1V 4G2Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyFaculty of Medicine, Laval
University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4 robert.viger@crchul.ulaval.ca.

GATA4 is an essential transcription factor required for the initiation of genital
ridge formation, for normal testicular and ovarian differentiation at the time of
sex determination, and for male and female fertility in adulthood. In spite of
its crucial roles, the genes and/or gene networks that are ultimately regulated
by GATA4 in gonadal tissues remain to be fully understood. This is particularly
true for the steroidogenic lineages such as Leydig cells of the testis where many
in vitro (promoter) studies have provided good circumstantial evidence that GATA4
is a key regulator of Leydig cell gene expression and steroidogenesis, but formal
proof is still lacking. We therefore performed a microarray screening analysis of
MA-10 Leydig cells in which Gata4 expression was knocked down using an siRNA
strategy. Analysis identified several GATA4-regulated pathways including
cholesterol synthesis, cholesterol transport, and especially steroidogenesis. A
decrease in GATA4 protein was associated with decreased expression of
steroidogenic genes previously suspected to be GATA4 targets such as Cyp11a1 and 
Star. Gata4 knockdown also led to an important decrease in other novel
steroidogenic targets including Srd5a1, Gsta3, Hsd3b1, and Hsd3b6, as well as
genes known to participate in cholesterol metabolism such as Scarb1, Ldlr, Soat1,
Scap, and Cyp51. Consistent with the decreased expression of these genes, a
reduction in GATA4 protein compromised the ability of MA-10 cells to produce
steroids both basally and under hormone stimulation. These data therefore provide
strong evidence that GATA4 is an essential transcription factor that sits atop of
the Leydig cell steroidogenic program.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25504870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 May;72(10):2005-22. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1795-9. Epub 
2014 Dec 14.

EGF is required for cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells through interaction
with GATA-4 in a time- and dose-dependent manner.

Ma CX(1), Song YL, Xiao L, Xue LX, Li WJ, Laforest B, Komati H, Wang WP, Jia ZQ, 
Zhou CY, Zou Y, Nemer M, Zhang SF, Bai X, Wu H, Zang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Ke Xue Da Dao 100, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan,
China.

The regulation of cardiac differentiation is critical for maintaining normal
cardiac development and function. The precise mechanisms whereby cardiac
differentiation is regulated remain uncertain. Here, we have identified a GATA-4 
target, EGF, which is essential for cardiogenesis and regulates cardiac
differentiation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Moreover, EGF demonstrates 
functional interaction with GATA-4 in inducing the cardiac differentiation of
P19CL6 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Biochemically, GATA-4 forms a 
complex with STAT3 to bind to the EGF promoter in response to EGF stimulation and
cooperatively activate the EGF promoter. Functionally, the cooperation during EGF
activation results in the subsequent activation of cyclin D1 expression, which
partly accounts for the lack of additional induction of cardiac differentiation
by the GATA-4/STAT3 complex. Thus, we propose a model in which the regulatory
cascade of cardiac differentiation involves GATA-4, EGF, and cyclin D1.

PMID: 25504289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Dec 11;5:e1566. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.524.

Caspase-1 cleavage of transcription factor GATA4 and regulation of cardiac cell
fate.

Aries A(1), Whitcomb J(1), Shao W(2), Komati H(1), Saleh M(2), Nemer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration Laboratory, Departments of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, 550 Cumberland,
Room 246, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada. (2)Departments of Medicine and
Biochemistry, McGill University, 3648 Sir William Osler Promenade, Room 364,
Montréal, Québec H3G 0B1, Canada.

Caspase-1 or interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) converting enzyme is a pro-inflammatory
member of the caspase family. An IL-1ß-independent role for caspase-1 in
cardiomyocyte cell death and heart failure has emerged but the mechanisms
underlying these effects are incompletely understood. Here, we report that
transcription factor GATA4, a key regulator of cardiomyocyte survival and
adaptive stress response is an in vivo and in vitro substrate for caspase-1.
Caspase-1 mediated cleavage of GATA4 generates a truncated protein that retains
the ability to bind DNA but lacks transcriptional activation domains and acts as 
a dominant negative regulator of GATA4. We show that caspase-1 is rapidly
activated in cardiomyocyte nuclei treated with the cell death inducing drug
Doxorubicin. We also find that inhibition of caspase-1 alone is as effective as
complete caspase inhibition at rescuing GATA4 degradation and myocyte cell death.
Caspase-1 inhibition of GATA4 transcriptional activity is rescued by HSP70, which
binds directly to GATA4 and masks the caspase recognition motif. The data
identify a caspase-1 nuclear substrate and suggest a direct role for caspase-1 in
transcriptional regulation. This mechanism may underlie the
inflammation-independent action of caspase-1 in other organs.

PMCID: PMC4649840
PMID: 25501827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2015 Jan;117(1):69-77. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2014.11.006. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Systems approaches in integrative cardiac biology: illustrations from cardiac
heterocellular signalling studies.

Nim HT(1), Boyd SE(2), Rosenthal NA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Level 1, Building 75, Monash
University, VIC 3800, Australia; Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute,
Level 1, Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia. Electronic address:
hieu.nim@monash.edu. (2)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Level 1,
Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia; Australian Regenerative
Medicine Institute, Level 1, Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia.
(3)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Level 1, Building 75, Monash
University, VIC 3800, Australia.

Understanding the complexity of cardiac physiology requires system-level studies 
of multiple cardiac cell types. Frequently, however, the end result of published 
research lacks the detail of the collaborative and integrative experimental
design process, and the underlying conceptual framework. We review the recent
progress in systems modelling and omics analysis of the heterocellular heart
environment through complementary forward and inverse approaches, illustrating
these conceptual and experimental frameworks with case studies from our own
research program. The forward approach begins by collecting curated information
from the niche cardiac biology literature, and connecting the dots to form
mechanistic network models that generate testable system-level predictions. The
inverse approach starts from the vast pool of public omics data in recent cardiac
biological research, and applies bioinformatics analysis to produce novel
candidates for further investigation. We also discuss the possibility of
combining these two approaches into a hybrid framework, together with the
benefits and challenges. These interdisciplinary research frameworks illustrate
the interplay between computational models, omics analysis, and wet lab
experiments, which holds the key to making real progress in improving human
cardiac wellbeing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25499442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jun 15;408:165-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.12.003. Epub
2014 Dec 8.

Toying with fate: Redirecting the differentiation of adrenocortical progenitor
cells into gonadal-like tissue.

Röhrig T(1), Pihlajoki M(2), Ziegler R(1), Cochran RS(3), Schrade A(2),
Schillebeeckx M(4), Mitra RD(4), Heikinheimo M(2), Wilson DB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Hochschule Mannheim - University
of Applied Sciences, Mannheim 68163, Germany. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA; Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Helsinki 00290, Finland. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's
Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of 
Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address:
wilson_d@wustl.edu.

Cell fate decisions are integral to zonation and remodeling of the adrenal
cortex. Animal models exhibiting ectopic differentiation of gonadal-like cells in
the adrenal cortex can shed light on the molecular mechanisms regulating
steroidogenic cell fate. In one such model, prepubertal gonadectomy (GDX) of mice
triggers the formation of adrenocortical neoplasms that resemble luteinized
ovarian stroma. Transcriptomic analysis and genome-wide DNA methylation mapping
have identified genetic and epigenetic markers of GDX-induced adrenocortical
neoplasia. Members of the GATA transcription factor family have emerged as key
regulators of cell fate in this model. Expression of Gata4 is pivotal for the
accumulation of gonadal-like cells in the adrenal glands of gonadectomized mice, 
whereas expression of Gata6 limits the spontaneous and GDX-induced
differentiation of gonadal-like cells in the adrenal cortex. Additionally, Gata6 
is essential for proper development of the adrenal X-zone, a layer analogous to
the fetal zone of the human adrenal cortex. The relevance of these observations
to developmental signaling pathways in the adrenal cortex, to other animal models
of altered adrenocortical cell fate, and to human diseases is discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4417465 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25498963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Dec 11;7:902. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-902.

Characterization of the developing small intestine in the absence of either GATA4
or GATA6.

Walker EM, Thompson CA, Kohlnhofer BM, Faber ML, Battle MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. mbattle@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: Studies of adult mice lacking either GATA4 or GATA6 in the small
intestine demonstrate roles for these factors in small intestinal biology.
Deletion of Gata4 in the adult mouse intestine revealed an essential role for
GATA4 in jejunal function. Deletion of Gata6 in the adult mouse ileum alters
epithelial cell types and ileal enterocyte gene expression. The effect of
deletion of Gata4 or Gata6 alone during embryonic small intestinal development,
however, has not been examined. We recently demonstrated that loss of both
factors in double conditional knockout embryos causes severe defects in jejunal
development. Therefore, the goal of this study is to provide phenotypic analysis 
of the small intestine of single Gata4 and Gata6 conditional knockout embryos.
RESULTS: Villin-Cre was used to delete Gata4 or Gata6 in the developing
intestinal epithelium. Elimination of either GATA4 or GATA6 in the jejunum, where
these factors are co-expressed, caused changes in enterocyte and enteroendocrine 
cell gene expression. Ectopic expression of markers of the ileal-specific bile
acid metabolism pathway was induced in GATA4-deficient jejunum but not in
GATA6-deficient jejunum. A subtle increase in goblet cells was also identified in
jejunum of both mutants. In GATA6-deficient embryonic ileum, villus length was
altered, and enterocyte gene expression was perturbed including ectopic
expression of the colon marker Car1. Goblet cells were increased, and
enteroendocrine cells were decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we show that aspects of the phenotypes observed in the
small intestine of adult Gata4 and Gata6 conditional knockout mice emerge during 
development. The effect of eliminating GATA6 from the developing ileum was
greater than that of eliminating either GATA4 or GATA6 from the developing
jejunum likely reflecting functional redundancy between these factors in the
jejunum. Although GATA4 and GATA6 functions overlap, our data also suggest unique
functions for GATA4 and GATA6 within the developing intestine. GATA4 likely
operates independently of GATA6 within the jejunum to regulate jejunal versus
ileal enterocyte identity and consequently jejunal physiology. GATA6 likely
regulates enteroendocrine cell differentiation cell autonomously whereas GATA4
affects this population indirectly.

PMCID: PMC4307969
PMID: 25495347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. BMC Genet. 2014 Dec 14;15:140. doi: 10.1186/s12863-014-0140-5.

Genetics and timing of sex determination in the East African cichlid fish
Astatotilapia burtoni.

Heule C(1), Göppert C(2), Salzburger W(3), Böhne A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel,
Switzerland. co.heule@unibas.ch. (2)Zoological Institute, University of Basel,
Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland. c.goeppert@stud.unibas.ch. (3)Zoological 
Institute, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland.
walter.salzburger@unibas.ch. (4)Zoological Institute, University of Basel,
Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland. astrid.boehne@unibas.ch.

BACKGROUND: The factors determining sex are diverse in vertebrates and especially
so in teleost fishes. Only a handful of master sex-determining genes have been
identified, however great efforts have been undertaken to characterize the
subsequent genetic network of sex differentiation in various organisms. East
African cichlids offer an ideal model system to study the complexity of sexual
development, since many different sex-determining mechanisms occur in closely
related species of this fish family. Here, we investigated the sex-determining
system and gene expression profiles during male development of Astatotilapia
burtoni, a member of the rapidly radiating and exceptionally species-rich
haplochromine lineage.
RESULTS: Crossing experiments with hormonally sex-reversed fish provided evidence
for an XX-XY sex determination system in A. burtoni. Resultant all-male broods
were used to assess gene expression patterns throughout development of a set of
candidate genes, previously characterized in adult cichlids only.
CONCLUSIONS: We could identify the onset of gonad sexual differentiation at 11-12
dpf. The expression profiles identified wnt4B and wt1A as the earliest gonad
markers in A. burtoni. Furthermore we identified late testis genes (cyp19a1A,
gsdf, dmrt1 and gata4), and brain markers (ctnnb1A, ctnnb1B, dax1A, foxl2, foxl3,
nanos1A, nanos1B, rspo1, sf-1, sox9A and sox9B).

PMCID: PMC4278230
PMID: 25494637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1850-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620211. Epub 2014 
Dec 8.

Transcription factors GATA4 and HNF4A control distinct aspects of intestinal
homeostasis in conjunction with transcription factor CDX2.

San Roman AK(1), Aronson BE(2), Krasinski SD(3), Shivdasani RA(4), Verzi MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the
Graduate Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (2)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115. (4)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and
ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu. (5)From the Department of Medical Oncology
and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Genetics, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 verzi@biology.rutgers.edu.

Distinct groups of transcription factors (TFs) assemble at tissue-specific
cis-regulatory sites, implying that different TF combinations may control
different genes and cellular functions. Within such combinations, TFs that
specify or maintain a lineage and are therefore considered master regulators may 
play a key role. Gene enhancers often attract these tissue-restricted TFs, as
well as TFs that are expressed more broadly. However, the contributions of the
individual TFs to combinatorial regulatory activity have not been examined
critically in many cases in vivo. We address this question using a genetic
approach in mice to inactivate the intestine-specifying and intestine-restricted 
factor CDX2 alone or in combination with its more broadly expressed partner
factors, GATA4 and HNF4A. Compared with single mutants, each combination produced
significantly greater defects and rapid lethality through distinct anomalies.
Intestines lacking Gata4 and Cdx2 were deficient in crypt cell replication,
whereas combined loss of Hnf4a and Cdx2 specifically impaired viability and
maturation of villus enterocytes. Integrated analysis of TF binding and of
transcripts affected in Hnf4a;Cdx2 compound-mutant intestines indicated that this
TF pair controls genes required to construct the apical brush border and absorb
nutrients, including dietary lipids. This study thus defines combinatorial TF
activities, their specific requirements during tissue homeostasis, and modules of
transcriptional targets in intestinal epithelial cells in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340426
PMID: 25488664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;35(4):649-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00860-14. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

MyoR modulates cardiac conduction by repressing Gata4.

Harris JP(1), Bhakta M(1), Bezprozvannaya S(2), Wang L(1), Lubczyk C(1), Olson
EN(3), Munshi NV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology Division), UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative
Science and Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology Division), UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA McDermott Center for
Human Growth and Development, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA 
Nikhil.Munshi@UTSouthwestern.edu.

The cardiac conduction system coordinates electrical activation through a series 
of interconnected structures, including the atrioventricular node (AVN), the
central connection point that delays impulse propagation to optimize cardiac
performance. Although recent studies have uncovered important molecular details
of AVN formation, relatively little is known about the transcriptional mechanisms
that regulate AV delay, the primary function of the mature AVN. We identify here 
MyoR as a novel transcription factor expressed in Cx30.2(+) cells of the AVN. We 
show that MyoR specifically inhibits a Cx30.2 enhancer required for AVN-specific 
gene expression. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MyoR interacts directly with
Gata4 to mediate transcriptional repression. Our studies reveal that MyoR
contains two nonequivalent repression domains. While the MyoR C-terminal
repression domain inhibits transcription in a context-dependent manner, the
N-terminal repression domain can function in a heterologous context to convert
the Hand2 activator into a repressor. In addition, we show that genetic deletion 
of MyoR in mice increases Cx30.2 expression by 50% and prolongs AV delay by 13%. 
Taken together, we conclude that MyoR modulates a Gata4-dependent regulatory
circuit that establishes proper AV delay, and these findings may have wider
implications for the variability of cardiac rhythm observed in the general
population.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301724
PMID: 25487574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Dec 15;745:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.09.038. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

Erythropoietin protects myocardium against ischemia-reperfusion injury under
moderate hyperglycemia.

Jun JH(1), Jun NH(2), Shim JK(3), Shin EJ(1), Kwak YL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesia and Pain Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine,
National Health Insurance Corporation Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea. 
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Yonsei Cardiovascular
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Anesthesia and Pain Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Yonsei 
Cardiovascular Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: ylkwak@yuhs.ac.

Erythropoietin (EPO), an essential hormone for erythropoiesis, provides
protection against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Hyperglycemia
during acute myocardial infarction aggravates organ damage and attenuates the
efficacies of various protective measures. This study aimed to investigate the
protective role of EPO against myocardial I/R injury under a clinically relevant 
moderate hyperglycemic condition and its associated mechanisms. Eighty-two
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly assigned to six groups: normoglycemia-Sham,
normoglycemia-I/R-control-saline (IRC), normoglycemia-I/R-EPO (IRE),
hyperglycemia-Sham, hyperglycemia-IRC, and hyperglycemia-IRE. The rats received
1.2 g/kg dextrose or same volume of normal saline depending on the group. I/R was
induced by a 30 min period of ischemia followed by reperfusion for 4 h. For 1 h
before I/R injury, intravenous 4000 IU/kg of EPO was administered. EPO
pretreatment significantly reduced the number of apoptotic cells and the infarct 
size compared with those of the control groups. EPO increased GATA-4
phosphorylation and acetylation against I/R in hyperglycemic myocardium. It also 
enhanced ERK induced GATA-4 post-translational modifications such as increased
GATA-4 phosphorylation and acetylation, and decreased GATA-4 ubiquitination
following hypoxia-reoxygenation in H9c2 cells in hyperglycemic medium. Increased 
GATA-4 stability by EPO diminished I/R-related down-regulation of Bcl-2 and
reduction of caspase-3 activities in hyperglycemic myocardium. In conclusion, EPO
pretreatment before I/R injury conveyed significant myocardial protection under
moderate hyperglycemic condition through mechanisms involved in reduction of
caspase-3 activity and up-regulation of Bcl-2 in association with enhanced
ERK-induced GATA-4 stability.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Feb;79:79-88. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.11.004. Epub
2014 Nov 13.

Mechanisms of epigenetic and cell-type specific regulation of Hey target genes in
ES cells and cardiomyocytes.

Weber D(1), Heisig J(1), Kneitz S(2), Wolf E(3), Eilers M(4), Gessler M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biochemistry, Theodor Boveri Institute (Biocenter), University
of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany. (2)Physiological Chemistry,
Theodor Boveri Institute (Biocenter), University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland,
D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany. (3)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Theodor Boveri
Institute (Biocenter), University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg,
Germany. (4)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Theodor Boveri Institute
(Biocenter), University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany;
Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland,
D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany. (5)Developmental Biochemistry, Theodor Boveri
Institute (Biocenter), University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg,
Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Wuerzburg, Am
Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany; Comprehensive Heart Failure Center,
University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany. Electronic
address: gessler@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Hey bHLH transcription factors are critical effectors of Notch signaling. During 
mammalian heart development they are expressed in atrial and ventricular
cardiomyocytes and in the developing endocardium. Hey knockout mice suffer from
lethal cardiac defects, such as ventricular septum defects, valve defects and
cardiomyopathy. Despite this functional relevance, little is known about the
regulation of downstream targets in relevant cell types. The objective of this
study was to elucidate the regulatory mechanisms by which Hey proteins affect
gene expression in a cell type specific manner. We used an in vitro cardiomyocyte
differentiation system with inducible Hey1 or Hey2 expression to study target
gene regulation in cardiomyocytes (CM) generated from murine embryonic stem cells
(ESC). The effects of Hey1 and Hey2 are largely redundant, but cell type
specific. The number of regulated genes is comparable between ESC and CM, but the
total number of binding sites is much higher, especially in ESC, targeting mainly
genes involved in transcriptional regulation and developmental processes.
Repression by Hey proteins generally correlates with the extent of Hey-binding to
target promoters, Hdac recruitment and lower histone acetylation. Functionally,
treatment with the Hdac inhibitor TSA abolished Hey target gene regulation.
However, in CM the repressive effect of Hey-binding is lost for a subset of
genes. These also lack Hey-dependent histone deacetylation in CM and are enriched
for binding sites of cardiac specific activators like Srf, Nkx2-5, and Gata4.
Ectopic Nkx2-5 overexpression in ESC blocks Hey-mediated repression of these
genes. Thus, Hey proteins mechanistically repress target genes via Hdac
recruitment and histone deacetylation. In CM Hey-repression is counteracted by
cardiac activators, which recruit histone acetylases and prevent Hey mediated
deacetylation and subsequent repression for a subset of genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):237-44. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305547. Epub
2014 Nov 21.

Stoichiometry of Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 influences the efficiency and quality of 
induced cardiac myocyte reprogramming.

Wang L(1), Liu Z(1), Yin C(1), Asfour H(1), Chen O(1), Li Y(1), Bursac N(1), Liu 
J(1), Qian L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (L.W., Z.L., C.Y.,
O.C., J.L., L.Q.), McAllister Heart Institute (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L.,
L.Q,), and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., 
L.Q.), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC (H.A., Y.L., N.B.). (2)From the
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L.,
L.Q.), McAllister Heart Institute (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., L.Q,), and
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., L.Q.),
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC (H.A., Y.L., N.B.). li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):216-8.

RATIONALE: Generation of induced cardiac myocytes (iCMs) directly from
fibroblasts offers great opportunities for cardiac disease modeling and cardiac
regeneration. A major challenge of iCM generation is the low conversion rate of
fibroblasts to fully reprogrammed iCMs, which could in part be attributed to
unbalanced expression of reprogramming factors Gata4 (G), Mef2c (M), and Tbx5 (T)
using the current gene delivery approach.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to establish a system to express distinct ratios of G, M, T
proteins in fibroblasts and determine the effect of G, M, T stoichiometry on iCM 
reprogramming.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We took advantage of the inherent feature of the
polycistronic system and generated all possible combinations of G, M, T with
identical 2A sequences in a single transgene. We demonstrated that each splicing 
order of G, M, T gave rise to distinct G, M, T protein expression levels.
Combinations that resulted in higher protein level of Mef2c with lower levels of 
Gata4 and Tbx5 significantly enhanced reprogramming efficiency compared with
separate G, M, T transduction. Importantly, after further optimization, the MGT
vector resulted in more than 10-fold increase in the number of mature beating iCM
loci. Molecular characterization revealed that more optimal G, M, T stoichiometry
correlated with higher expression of mature cardiac myocyte markers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that stoichiometry of G, M, T protein
expression influences the efficiency and quality of iCM reprogramming. The
established optimal G, M, T expression condition will provide a valuable platform
for future iCM studies.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4299697
PMID: 25416133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Dec 15;307(12):R1471-87. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00307.2014. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Caffeine exposure alters cardiac gene expression in embryonic cardiomyocytes.

Fang X(1), Mei W(2), Barbazuk WB(2), Rivkees SA(1), Wendler CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida; and. (2)Department of Biology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida. (3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; and cwendler@ufl.edu.

Previous studies demonstrated that in utero caffeine treatment at embryonic day
(E) 8.5 alters DNA methylation patterns, gene expression, and cardiac function in
adult mice. To provide insight into the mechanisms, we examined cardiac gene and 
microRNA (miRNA) expression in cardiomyocytes shortly after exposure to
physiologically relevant doses of caffeine. In HL-1 and primary embryonic
cardiomyocytes, caffeine treatment for 48 h significantly altered the expression 
of cardiac structural genes (Myh6, Myh7, Myh7b, Tnni3), hormonal genes (Anp and
BnP), cardiac transcription factors (Gata4, Mef2c, Mef2d, Nfatc1), and microRNAs 
(miRNAs; miR208a, miR208b, miR499). In addition, expressions of these genes were 
significantly altered in embryonic hearts exposed to in utero caffeine. For in
utero experiments, pregnant CD-1 dams were treated with 20-60 mg/kg of caffeine, 
which resulted in maternal circulation levels of 37.3-65.3 µM 2 h after
treatment. RNA sequencing was performed on embryonic ventricles treated with
vehicle or 20 mg/kg of caffeine daily from E6.5-9.5. Differential expression (DE)
analysis revealed that 124 genes and 849 transcripts were significantly altered, 
and differential exon usage (DEU) analysis identified 597 exons that were changed
in response to prenatal caffeine exposure. Among the DE genes identified by RNA
sequencing were several cardiac structural genes and genes that control DNA
methylation and histone modification. Pathway analysis revealed that pathways
related to cardiovascular development and diseases were significantly affected by
caffeine. In addition, global cardiac DNA methylation was reduced in
caffeine-treated cardiomyocytes. Collectively, these data demonstrate that
caffeine exposure alters gene expression and DNA methylation in embryonic
cardiomyocytes.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4269671
PMID: 25354728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4267-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.114025. Epub 2014 Oct 24.

Induction of diverse cardiac cell types by reprogramming fibroblasts with cardiac
transcription factors.

Nam YJ(1), Lubczyk C(2), Bhakta M(2), Zang T(3), Fernandez-Perez A(2), McAnally
J(3), Bassel-Duby R(3), Olson EN(4), Munshi NV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu. (5)Department of 
Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, 
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu.

Various combinations of cardiogenic transcription factors, including Gata4 (G),
Hand2 (H), Mef2c (M) and Tbx5 (T), can reprogram fibroblasts into induced
cardiac-like myocytes (iCLMs) in vitro and in vivo. Given that optimal cardiac
function relies on distinct yet functionally interconnected atrial, ventricular
and pacemaker (PM) cardiomyocytes (CMs), it remains to be seen which subtypes are
generated by direct reprogramming and whether this process can be harnessed to
produce a specific CM of interest. Here, we employ a PM-specific Hcn4-GFP
reporter mouse and a spectrum of CM subtype-specific markers to investigate the
range of cellular phenotypes generated by reprogramming of primary fibroblasts.
Unexpectedly, we find that a combination of four transcription factors (4F)
optimized for Hcn4-GFP expression does not generate beating PM cells due to
inadequate sarcomeric protein expression and organization. However, applying
strict single-cell criteria to GHMT-reprogrammed cells, we observe induction of
diverse cellular phenotypes, including those resembling immature forms of all
three major cardiac subtypes (i.e. atrial, ventricular and pacemaker). In
addition, we demonstrate that cells induced by GHMT are directly reprogrammed and
do not arise from an Nxk2.5(+) progenitor cell intermediate. Taken together, our 
results suggest a remarkable degree of plasticity inherent to GHMT reprogramming 
and provide a starting point for optimization of CM subtype-specific
reprogramming protocols.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302916
PMID: 25344074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015 Feb;59(2):221-30. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400279. Epub 2014 
Nov 17.

Sulforaphane suppresses cardiac hypertrophy by inhibiting GATA4/GATA6 expression 
and MAPK signaling pathways.

Kee HJ(1), Kim GR, Kim IK, Jeong MH.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University
Hospital, Gwangju, South Korea.

SCOPE: Sulforaphane (SFN) is a naturally occurring isothiocynate compound found
in cruciferous vegetables. Here, we report the effect of SFN on cardiac
hypertrophy and propose an underlying mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: SFN suppresses cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by
hypertrophic stimuli in vitro and in vivo. SFN suppresses the expression of fetal
genes, including atrial natriuretic peptide, brain natriuretic peptide, and beta 
myosin heavy chain. We used an siRNA technique and atrial natriuretic peptide
promoter with mutated GATA binding sites to demonstrate that SFN mediates cardiac
hypertrophy by modulating transcription factors GATA4/6.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that SFN has the potential to prevent cardiac
hypertrophy by downregulating GATA4/6 and mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling pathways.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25332186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Oct 14;3(5):e001271. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001271.

Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic heart
development.

Leung C(1), Lu X(2), Liu M(3), Feng Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.,
X.L., Q.F.) Collaborative Program in Developmental Biology, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.). (2)Department of Physiology and 
Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.). (3)Lawson Health
Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
(M.L., Q.F.). (4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.) Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (Q.F.)
Lawson Health Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada (M.L., Q.F.).

BACKGROUND: Defects in cardiac septation are the most common form of congenital
heart disease, but the mechanisms underlying these defects are still poorly
understood. The small GTPase Rac1 is implicated in planar cell polarity of
epithelial cells in Drosophila; however, its role in mammalian cardiomyocyte
polarity is not clear. We tested the hypothesis that Rac1 signaling in the second
heart field regulates cardiomyocyte polarity, chamber septation, and right
ventricle development during embryonic heart development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice with second heart field-specific deficiency of Rac1
(Rac1(SHF)) exhibited ventricular and atrial septal defects, a thinner right
ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Fate-mapping analysis showed that
second heart field contribution to the interventricular septum and right
ventricle was deficient in Rac1(SHF) hearts. Notably, cardiomyocytes had a
spherical shape with disrupted F-actin filaments in Rac1(SHF) compared with
elongated and well-aligned cardiomyocytes in littermate controls. Expression of
Scrib, a core protein in planar cell polarity, was lost in Rac1(SHF) hearts with 
decreased expression of WAVE and Arp2/3, leading to decreased migratory ability. 
In addition, Rac1-deficient neonatal cardiomyocytes displayed defects in cell
projections, lamellipodia formation, and cell elongation. Furthermore, apoptosis 
was increased and the expression of Gata4, Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and Hand2 transcription 
factors was decreased in the Rac1(SHF) right ventricle myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of Rac1 in the second heart field impairs elongation and 
cytoskeleton organization of cardiomyocytes and results in congenital septal
defects, thin right ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Our study
suggests that Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic 
heart development.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4323834
PMID: 25315346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2015 Jan;123(1):48-54. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1389924.
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Expression analysis of stemness genes in a rat thyroid cell line FRTL5.

Shimasue A(1), Yamakawa N(1), Watanabe M(2), Hidaka Y(1), Iwatani Y(2), Takano
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (2)Division of Health Sciences, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Detection and analysis of a small subpopulation of cells such as stem cells or
cancer stem cells are recognized to be a key technique in a recent regeneration
and cancer science. However, in the thyroid, no marker that identifies stem cells
has been established yet. We previously established a novel method to analyze
cells collected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), named mRNA
quantification after FACS (FACS-mQ). By using this method, the biological
characteristics of the sorted cells can be determined by analyzing their gene
expression profile. In this study, we analyzed the expression of stemness genes
in a rat thyroid cell lines FRTL5 using FACS-mQ. 3 stemness genes, NANOG, ABCG2
and GATA4, were expressed in FRTL5. In FRTL5 cells, varied expression of
thyroglobulin (TG) among cells was observed by flow cytometry. Cell populations
with high or low TG expression were analyzed by FACS-mQ. The cell population with
low TG expression showed increased expression of the stemness genes. Furthermore,
Ki67-positive cells showed increased expression of TG, which suggested that cells
with high TG proliferated rapidly. These results indicated that FRTL5 contains a 
cell population with high stemness gene expression and less differentiated
features, resembling stem cells. These cells might regulate proliferation in
FRTL5.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25314653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Sci Rep. 2014 Oct 14;4:6614. doi: 10.1038/srep06614.

Combined biophysical and soluble factor modulation induces cardiomyocyte
differentiation from human muscle derived stem cells.

Tchao J(1), Han L(2), Lin B(2), Yang L(2), Tobita K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)1]
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA [2]
Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA [3] McGowan 
Institute of Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.

Cellular cardiomyoplasty has emerged as a novel therapy to restore contractile
function of injured failing myocardium. Human multipotent muscle derived stem
cells (MDSC) can be a potential abundant, autologous cell source for cardiac
repair. However, robust conditions for cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation are not
well established for this cell type. We have developed a new method for CM
differentiation from human MDSC that combines 3-dimensional artificial muscle
tissue (AMT) culture with temporally controlled biophysical cell aggregation and 
delivery of 4 soluble factors (microRNA-206 inhibitor, IWR-1, Lithium Chloride,
and BMP-4) (4F-AG-AMT). The 4F-AG-AMT displayed cardiac-like response to
ß-adrenergic stimulation and contractile properties. 4F-AG-AMT expressed major
cardiac (NKX2-5, GATA4, TBX5, MEF2C) transcription factors and structural
proteins. They also express cardiac gap-junction protein, connexin-43, similar to
CMs and synchronized spontaneous calcium transients. These results highlight the 
importance of temporal control of biophysical and soluble factors for CM
differentiation from MDSCs.

PMCID: PMC4196107
PMID: 25310989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Ann Med. 2014 Dec;46(8):640-52. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2014.959557. Epub 2014 Oct 
13.

Morphogenesis and molecular considerations on congenital cardiac septal defects.

Gittenberger-de Groot AC(1), Calkoen EE, Poelmann RE, Bartelings MM, Jongbloed
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , The
Netherlands.

The primary unseptated heart tube undergoes extensive remodeling including
septation at the atrial, atrioventricular, ventricular, and ventriculo-arterial
level. Alignment and fusion of the septal components is required to ensure full
septation of the heart. Deficiencies lead to septal defects at various levels.
Addition of myocardium and mesenchymal tissues from the second heart field (SHF) 
to the primary heart tube, as well as a population of neural crest cells,
provides the necessary cellular players. Surprisingly, the study of the molecular
background of these defects does not show a great diversity of responsible
transcription factors and downstream gene pathways. Epigenetic modulation and
mutations high up in several transcription factor pathways (e.g. NODAL and GATA4)
may lead to defects at all levels. Disturbance of modulating pathways, involving 
primarily the SHF-derived cell populations and the genes expressed therein,
results at the arterial pole (e.g. TBX1) in a spectrum of ventricular septal
defects located at the level of the outflow tract. At the venous pole (e.g.
TBX5), it can explain a variety of atrial septal defects. The various defects can
occur as isolated anomalies or within families. In this review developmental,
morphological, genetic, as well as epigenetic aspects of septal defects are
discussed.

PMID: 25307363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Jan;20(1):185-201. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0536-1.
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

Celastrol, an oral heat shock activator, ameliorates multiple animal disease
models of cell death.

Sharma S(1), Mishra R, Walker BL, Deshmukh S, Zampino M, Patel J, Anamalai M,
Simpson D, Singh IS, Kaushal S, Kaushal S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Maryland Medical Center, 110 S.
Paca Street, 7th Floor, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.

Protein homeostatic regulators have been shown to ameliorate single,
loss-of-function protein diseases but not to treat broader animal disease models 
that may involve cell death. Diseases often trigger protein homeostatic
instability that disrupts the delicate balance of normal cellular viability.
Furthermore, protein homeostatic regulators have been delivered invasively and
not with simple oral administration. Here, we report the potent homeostatic
abilities of celastrol to promote cell survival, decrease inflammation, and
maintain cellular homeostasis in three different disease models of apoptosis and 
inflammation involving hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes. We show that celastrol
significantly recovers the left ventricular function and myocardial remodeling
following models of acute myocardial infarction and doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyopathy by diminishing infarct size, apoptosis, and inflammation.
Celastrol prevents acute liver dysfunction and promotes hepatocyte survival after
toxic doses of thioacetamide. Finally, we show that heat shock response (HSR) is 
necessary and sufficient for the recovery abilities of celastrol. Our
observations may have dramatic clinical implications to ameliorate entire disease
processes even after cellular injury initiation by using an orally delivered HSR 
activator.

PMCID: PMC4255245
PMID: 25300203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Development. 2014 Oct;141(20):3978-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.111906.

BMP-mediated induction of GATA4/5/6 blocks somitic responsiveness to SHH.

Daoud G(1), Kempf H(1), Kumar D(1), Kozhemyakina E(1), Holowacz T(1), Kim DW(1), 
Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Bldg C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department
of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Bldg 
C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA
andrew_lassar@hms.harvard.edu.

The relative timing of SHH and BMP signals controls whether presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) cells will adopt either a chondrogenic or lateral plate mesoderm fate. Here
we document that SHH-mediated induction of Nkx3.2 maintains the competence of
somitic cells to initiate chondrogenesis in response to subsequent BMP signals by
repressing BMP-dependent induction of GATA genes. Conversely, administration of
BMP signals to PSM or forced expression of GATA family members in chick PSM
explants blocks induction of hedgehog-dependent gene expression. We demonstrate
that GATA factors can interact with Gli factors and can recruit the
transcriptional co-factor FOG1 (ZFPM1) to the regulatory region of the mouse Gli1
gene, repressing the induction of Gli1 by SHH by binding to both GATA and Gli
binding sites. Knockdown of FOG1 reverses the ability of GATA factors to repress 
Gli1 expression. Our findings uncover a novel role for GATA transcription factors
as repressors of hedgehog signaling, and document that NKX3.2 maintains the
ability of sclerotomal cells to express SHH transcriptional targets in the
presence of BMP signals by repressing the induction of Gata4/5/6.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197703
PMID: 25294942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dev Growth Differ. 2014 Oct;56(8):544-54. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12155. Epub 2014 Oct
3.

Nkx2.5 is involved in myeloid cell differentiation at anterior ventral blood
islands in the Xenopus embryo.

Sakata H(1), Maéno M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, 8050
Ikarashi-2, Nishi-ku, Niigata, 950-2181, Japan.

We have shown previously that two populations of myeloid cells emerge in the
anterior and posterior ventral blood islands (aVBI and pVBI) at the different
stages in Xenopus laevis embryo. In order to elucidate the regulatory mechanism
of myeloid cell differentiation in the aVBI, we examined the role of Nkx2.5, an
essential transcription factor for heart differentiation, in regulation of the
myeloid cell differentiation in this region. Knockdown of endogenous Nkx2.5 by
introducing MO into the dorsal marginal zone (DMZ) suppressed the expression of
MHCa as well as that of mpo and spib in the resultant embryos and in DMZ explants
made from the injected embryos. Expression of c/ebpa was less affected in the
embryos injected with Nkx2.5 MO. The effect of Nkx2.5 MO in myeloid cell
differentiation was recovered by coinjection of nkx2.5 or c/ebpa mRNA, indicating
that Nkx2.5 functions at the same or the upper level of C/EBPa for the
specification of myeloid cells. An attempt to identify transcription factors for 
myeloid cell differentiation in ventral marginal zone (VMZ) explants demonstrated
that coinjection of two transcription factors out of three factors, namely
C/EBPa, Nkx2.5 and GATA4, was sufficient to induce a certain amount of mpo
expression. We suggest that C/EBPa is an unequivocal factor for myeloid cell
differentiation in the aVBI and that Nkx2.5 and GATA4 cooperate with C/EBPa for
promotion of myeloid cell differentiation.

© 2014 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2014 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 25283688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014 Oct 1;4(10). pii: a013946. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a013946.

Insights into the genetic structure of congenital heart disease from human and
murine studies on monogenic disorders.

Prendiville T(1), Jay PY(2), Pu WT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110. (3)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

Study of monogenic congenital heart disease (CHD) has provided entry points to
gain new understanding of heart development and the molecular pathogenesis of
CHD. In this review, we discuss monogenic CHD caused by mutations of the cardiac 
transcription factor genes NKX2-5 and GATA4. Detailed investigation of these
genes in mice and humans has expanded our understanding of heart development,
shedding light on the complex genetic and environmental factors that influence
expression and penetrance of CHD gene mutations.

Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 25274754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Invest Clin. 2014 Sep;55(3):207-16.

[Mutations in the GATA4 gen in patients with non-syndromic congenital heart
disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Orjuela Quintero DC, Núñez F, Caicedo V, Pachón S, Salazar Salazar M.

Congenital heart diseases are defined as any heart or large vessel structural
abnormality resulting from abnormal embryonic development, usually described
between the 3rd and 10th week of gestation. They comprise the second cause of
death in children under a year of age in Colombia, with a prevalence of 7.5-9.5
per 1,000 births, including live and still births. We analyzed 33 heart tissue
samples collected at the Clínica Shaio (Bogotá, Colombia). Blood and tissue
samples were collected from patients with non-syndromic congenital heart disease.
Tissue was isolated near the defect. Electropherograms obtained from samples were
analyzed using bioinformatic tools: ChromasPro and ClustalW. The whole gen
covering its six exons was analyzed in forward and reverse orientation. We
identified 17 mutations, including five non-synonymous sequence changes, one
synonymous variant and one variation in the 5' UTR, three intronic changes and
seven deletions. We found no evidence of gene GATA4 somatic sequence variants in 
any of the samples analyzed.

PMID: 25272520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Hum Reprod. 2014 Nov;29(11):2497-511. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu232. Epub 2014 Sep
29.

Quantitative detection of human spermatogonia for optimization of spermatogonial 
stem cell culture.

Zheng Y(1), Thomas A(1), Schmidt CM(1), Dann CT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University, 800 E. Kirkwood Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405-7102, USA.
(2)Indiana University, 800 E. Kirkwood Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405-7102, USA
ctdann@indiana.edu.

STUDY QUESTION: Can human spermatogonia be detected in long-term primary
testicular cell cultures using validated, germ cell-specific markers of
spermatogonia?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Germ cell-specific markers of spermatogonia/spermatogonial stem
cells (SSCs) are detected in early (1-2 weeks) but not late (> 6 weeks) primary
testicular cell cultures; somatic cell markers are detected in late primary
testicular cell cultures.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The development of conditions for human SSC culture is
critically dependent on the ability to define cell types unequivocally and to
quantify spermatogonia/SSCs. Growth by somatic cells presents a major challenge
in the establishment of SSC cultures and therefore markers that define
spermatogonia/SSCs, but are not also expressed by testicular somatic cells, are
essential for accurate characterization of SSC cultures.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Testicular tissue from eight organ donors with
normal spermatogenesis was used for assay validation and establishing primary
testicular cell cultures.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immunofluorescence analysis of normal
human testicular tissue was used to validate antibodies (UTF1, SALL4, DAZL and
VIM) and then the antibodies were used to demonstrate that primary testicular
cells cultured in vitro for 1-2 weeks were composed of somatic cells and rare
germ cells. Primary testicular cell cultures were further characterized by
comparing to testicular somatic cell cultures using quantitative reverse
transcriptase PCR (UTF1, FGFR3, ZBTB16, GPR125, DAZL, GATA4 and VIM) and flow
cytometry (CD9 and SSEA4).
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: UTF1, FGFR3, DAZL and ZBTB16 qRT-PCR and
SSEA4 flow cytometry were validated for the sensitive, quantitative and specific 
detection of germ cells. In contrast, GPR125 mRNA and CD9 were found to be not
specific to germ cells because they were also expressed in testicular somatic
cell cultures. While the germ cell-specific markers were detected in early
primary testicular cell cultures (1-2 weeks), their expression steadily declined 
over time in vitro. After 6 weeks in culture only somatic cells were detected.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Different groups attempting SSC culture have
utilized different sources of human testes and minor differences in the
preparation and maintenance of the testicular cell cultures. Differences in
outcome may be explained by genetic background of the source tissue or technical 
differences.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The ability to propagate human SSCs in vitro 
is a prerequisite for proposed autologous transplantation therapy aimed at
restoring fertility to men who have been treated for childhood cancer. By
applying the assays validated here it will be possible to quantitatively compare 
human SSC culture conditions. The eventual development of conditions for
long-term propagation of human SSCs in vitro will greatly facilitate learning
about the basic biology of these cells and in turn the ability to use human SSCs 
in therapy.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: The experiments presented in this manuscript
were funded by a Project Development Team within the ICTSI NIH/NCRR Grant Number 
TR000006. The authors declare no competing interests.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4191455
PMID: 25267789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3100-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36783. Epub 2014 
Sep 26.

Identification of TBX5 mutations in a series of 94 patients with Tetralogy of
Fallot.

Baban A(1), Postma AV, Marini M, Trocchio G, Santilli A, Pelegrini M, Sirleto P, 
Lerone M, Albanese SB, Barnett P, Boogerd CJ, Dallapiccola B, Digilio MC,
Ravazzolo R, Pongiglione G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiosurgery, Bambino Gesù Children
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) (OMIM #187500) is the most frequent conotruncal
congenital heart defect (CHD) with a range of intra- and extracardiac phenotypes.
TBX5 is a transcription factor with well-defined roles in heart and forelimb
development, and mutations in TBX5 are associated with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS)
(OMIM#142900). Here we report on the screening of 94 TOF patients for mutations
in TBX5, NKX2.5 and GATA4 genes. We identified two heterozygous mutations in
TBX5. One mutation was detected in a Moroccan patient with TOF, a large ostium
secundum atrial septal defect and complete atrioventricular block, and features
of HOS including bilateral triphalangeal thumbs and fifth finger clinodactyly.
This patient carried a previously described de novo, stop codon mutation
(p.R279X) located in exon 8 causing a premature truncated protein. In a second
patient from Italy with TOF, ostium secundum atrial septal defect and progressive
arrhythmic changes on ECG, we identified a maternally inherited novel mutation in
exon 9, which caused a substitution of a serine with a leucine at amino acid
position 372 (p.S372L, c.1115C>T). The mother's clinical evaluation demonstrated 
frequent ventricular extrasystoles and an atrial septal aneurysm. Physical
examination and radiographs of the hands showed no apparent skeletal defects in
either child or mother. Molecular evaluation of the p.S372L mutation demonstrated
a gain-of-function phenotype. We also review the literature on the co-occurrence 
of TOF and HOS, highlighting its relevance. This is the first systematic
screening for TBX5 mutations in TOF patients which detected mutations in two of
94 (2.1%) patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25263169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Sep;38(9):2396-402. doi: 10.1111/acer.12518.

Alcohol consumption during gestation causes histone3 lysine9 hyperacetylation and
an alternation of expression of heart development-related genes in mice.

Pan B(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Sun H, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Disease in Childhood (Chongqing Medical
University), Ministry of Education, Chongqing, China; Key Laboratory of
Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing, China; Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
China; Heart Centre, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol abuse during gestation may cause congenital heart diseases
(CHDs). The underlying mechanisms of alcohol-induced cardiac deformities are
still not clear. Recent studies suggest that histone modification may play a
crucial role in this pathological process. Moreover, our previous studies
reported that ethanol could induce histone3 lysine9 (H3K9) hyperacetylation and
overexpression of heart development-related genes in vitro. The aim of this study
was to investigate the effect of alcohol consumption during gestation on the
imbalance of H3K9 acetylation and the alternation of the expression of heart
development-related genes during cardiogenesis.
METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed to a single dose of alcohol (10 µl/g/d, 56%
alcohol) by gavage every day in the morning from embryo day 7.5 (E7.5) to E15.5. 
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was applied for observing the structure of
the embryonic hearts. Western blotting and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction were used for detecting the level of H3K9 acetylation and gene
expression. Histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activities were detected by colorimetric assay and fluorometric assay.
RESULTS: H&E staining of cardiac tissue showed abnormalities of embryonic hearts 
at E17.5. The level of H3K9 acetylation reached peak at E17.5 and decreased
sharply to a low level at birth and maintained at low level afterward. Alcohol
exposure increased H3K9 acetylation at E11.5, E14.5, E17.5, and E18.5,
respectively (p < 0.05), and enhanced the expression of Gata4 in the embryonic
hearts at E14.5 and E17.5, Mef2c at E14.5, and Nkx2.5 at E14.5 and E17.5, (p <
0.05) but not for Tbx5 (p > 0.05). On embryonic day 17.5, HAT activities of
embryonic hearts increased significantly, however alcohol exposure did not alter 
HDAC activities.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a time course of H3K9 acetylation change during 
heart development and demonstrate that alcohol exposure in utero may induce an
increase of HAT activities, which results in H3K9 hyperacetylation and an
increase of the expression of heart development-related genes. These findings
reveal a novel epigenetic mechanism that connects the alcohol consumption during 
the pregnancy and the development of CHD in the fetus.

Copyright © 2014 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 25257289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 24;5:4907. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5907.

Dynamic GATA4 enhancers shape the chromatin landscape central to heart
development and disease.

He A(1), Gu F(2), Hu Y(2), Ma Q(2), Ye LY(2), Akiyama JA(3), Visel A(4),
Pennacchio LA(5), Pu WT(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (3)Genomics
Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA. (4)1] Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, California 94720, USA [2] United States
Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek,
California 94598, USA [3] School of Natural Sciences, University of California,
5200 North Lake Rd, Merced, California 95343, USA. (5)1] Genomics Division,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, California
94720, USA [2] United States Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, 2800
Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, California 94598, USA. (6)1] Department of
Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University,
1350 Massachusetts Avenue, Suite 727W, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

How stage-specific enhancer dynamics modulate gene expression patterns essential 
for organ development, homeostasis and disease is not well understood. Here, we
addressed this question by mapping chromatin occupancy of GATA4--a master cardiac
transcription factor--in heart development and disease. We find that GATA4 binds 
and participates in establishing active chromatin regions by stimulating H3K27ac 
deposition, which facilitates GATA4-driven gene expression. GATA4 chromatin
occupancy changes markedly between fetal and adult heart, with a limited binding 
sites overlap. Cardiac stress restored GATA4 occupancy to a subset of fetal
sites, but many stress-associated GATA4 binding sites localized to loci not
occupied by GATA4 during normal heart development. Collectively, our data show
that dynamic, context-specific transcription factors occupancy underlies
stage-specific events in development, homeostasis and disease.

PMCID: PMC4236193
PMID: 25249388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mech Dev. 2014 Nov;134:31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2014.09.001. Epub 2014 Sep 21.

Carboxy terminus of GATA4 transcription factor is required for its cardiogenic
activity and interaction with CDK4.

Gallagher JM(1), Yamak A(2), Kirilenko P(1), Black S(1), Bochtler M(3), Lefebvre 
C(2), Nemer M(2), Latinkic BV(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and Differentiation, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. (3)International Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Warsaw, Poland; Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Warsaw, Poland. (4)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom. Electronic address: LatinkicB@cardiff.ac.uk.

GATA4-6 transcription factors regulate numerous aspects of development and
homeostasis in multiple tissues of mesodermal and endodermal origin. In the
heart, the best studied of these factors, GATA4, has multiple distinct roles in
cardiac specification, differentiation, morphogenesis, hypertrophy and survival. 
To improve understanding of how GATA4 achieves its numerous roles in the heart,
here we have focused on the carboxy-terminal domain and the residues required for
interaction with cofactors FOG2 and Tbx5. We present evidence that the carboxy
terminal region composed of amino acids 362-400 is essential for mediating
cardiogenesis in Xenopus pluripotent explants and embryos. In contrast, the same 
region is not required for endoderm-inducing activity of GATA4. Further evidence 
is presented that the carboxy terminal cardiogenic region of GATA4 does not
operate as a generic transcriptional activator. Potential mechanism of action of 
the carboxy terminal end of GATA4 is provided by the results showing physical and
functional interaction with CDK4, including the enhancement of cardiogenic
activity of GATA4 by CDK4. These results establish CDK4 as a GATA4 partner in
cardiogenesis. The interactions of GATA4 with its other well described cofactors 
Tbx5 and FOG2 are known to be involved in heart morphogenesis, but their
requirement for cardiac differentiation is unknown. We report that the mutations 
that disrupt interactions of GATA4 with Tbx5 and FOG2, G295S and V217G,
respectively, do not impair cardiogenic activity of GATA4. These findings add
support to the view that distinct roles of GATA4 in the heart are mediated by
different determinants of the protein. Finally, we show that the rat GATA4 likely
induces cardiogenesis cell autonomously or directly as it does not require
activity of endodermal transcription factor Sox17, a GATA4 target gene that
induces cardiogenesis non-cell autonomously.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4259525
PMID: 25241353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;31(3):596-600.

[Differentiation of rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells into
cardiomyocyte-like cells induced by cyclic stretching strain].

[Article in Chinese]

Kuang W, Tang M, He X, Wu W, Liu X, Li L.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are multipotent stem cells
that differentiate into a variety of cell types and widely used in tissue
regeneration engineering. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether the
cyclic biaxial stretching strain could promote the rat BMSCs (rBMSCs) to
differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro. The second or third
generation of rBMSCs were randomly divided into the cyclic stretching stain
group, the control group and the blank group. Those rBMSCs in the cyclic
stretching strain group were seeded on a silicone membrane with complete medium
were exposed to biaxial stretching strain of 10% of membrane at a frequency of 1 
Hz lasting for 6 h, 12 h and 24 h. Those in the control group were seeded on
silicone membrane with complete medium. Those in the blank group were seeded in
the 6-wells plates with complete medium. The mRNA expression of GATA4 and
myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2C (MEF-2C) were detected by the real-time
fluorescent quantification PCR and the protein expression of connexin 43 (Cx43)
was detected by using the Western blot method. The results showed that the mRNA
expression level of the GATA4 and MEF-2C, and the protein expression level of
Cx43 were significantly higher in the cyclic stretching strain groups, compared
with those in the relative control groups (P < 0.05). It suggests that cyclic
biaxial stretching strain could play a part in the induction of rBMSCs to
differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro, but the differentiation
mechanism is still unclear.

PMID: 25219242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:9-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.09.003. Epub
2014 Sep 10.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2--a potential autocrine/paracrine factor in mediating
the stretch activated B-type and atrial natriuretic peptide expression in cardiac
myocytes.

Tokola H(1), Rysä J(2), Pikkarainen S(3), Hautala N(4), Leskinen H(5), Kerkelä
R(5), Ilves M(6), Aro J(5), Vuolteenaho O(6), Ritvos O(7), Ruskoaho H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014, Finland; Department of
Pathology, Institute of Diagnostics, University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu
FI-90014, Finland; Department of Pathology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. BOX
50, Oulu FI-90029 OYS, Finland. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014,
Finland; School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio FIN-70211, Finland. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014,
Finland; Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, P.O. BOX 340, Helsinki FI-00029 HUS, Finland.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014, Finland; Department of
Ophthalmology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. BOX 21, Oulu FI-90029 OYS, Finland.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014, Finland. (6)Department of
Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, P.O. BOX 5000, Oulu
FI-90014, Finland. (7)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Haartman
Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (8)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, P.O.
BOX 5000, Oulu FI-90014, Finland; Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, P.O. BOX 56, Viikinkaari 5E,
Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. Electronic address: heikki.ruskoaho@helsinki.fi.

Hemodynamic overload exposes the heart to variety of neural, humoral and
mechanical stresses. Even without the neurohumoral control of the entire organism
cardiac myocytes have the ability to sense mechanical stretch and convert it into
adaptive intracellular signals. This process is controlled by several growth
factors. Here we show that mechanical stretch in vitro and hemodynamic overload
in vivo activated the expression of bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), while
expression of BMP-4 was temporarily attenuated by stretch. BMP-2 and BMP-4 alone 
stimulated B-type and atrial natriuretic peptide (BNP and ANP) expression and
protein synthesis, and activated transcription factor GATA-4 resembling the
effects of mechanical stretch of cultured cardiac myocytes. Further, BMP
antagonist Noggin was able to inhibit stretch and hypertrophic agonist induced
BNP and ANP expression. Together these data provide evidence for BMP-2 as a new
autocrine/paracrine factor that regulates cardiomyocyte mechanotransduction and
adaptation to increased mechanical stretch.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cardiol Young. 2015 Aug;25(6):1093-8. doi: 10.1017/S1047951114001656. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Clinical and molecular characterisation of Holt-Oram syndrome focusing on cardiac
manifestations.

Jhang WK(1), Lee BH(1), Kim GH(2), Lee JO(2), Yoo HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics,Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital,University
of Ulsan College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea. (2)2Medical Genetic Center,Asan Medical
Center Children's Hospital,University of Ulsan College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea.

BACKGROUND: Holt-Oram syndrome is characterised by CHD and limb anomalies.
Mutations in TBX5 gene, encoding the T-box transcription factor, are responsible 
for the development of Holt-Oram syndrome, but such mutations are variably
detected in 30-75% of patients.
METHODS: Clinically diagnosed eight Holt-Oram syndrome patients from six families
were evaluated the clinical characteristics, focusing on the cardiac
manifestations, in particular, and molecular aetiologies. In addition to the
investigation of the mutation of TBX5, SALL4, NKX2.5, and GATA4 genes, which are 
known to regulate cardiac development by physically and functionally interacting 
with TBX5, were also analyzed. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification
analysis was performed to detect exonic deletion and duplication mutations in
these genes.
RESULTS: All included patients showed cardiac septal defects and upper-limb
anomalies. Of the eight patients, seven underwent cardiac surgery, and four
suffered from conduction abnormalities such as severe sinus bradycardia and
complete atrioventricular block. Although our patients showed typical clinical
findings of Holt-Oram syndrome, only three distinct TBX5 mutations were detected 
in three families: one nonsense, one splicing, and one missense mutation. No new 
mutations were identified by testing SALL4, NKX2.5, and GATA4 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: All Holt-Oram syndrome patients in this study showed cardiac septal 
anomalies. Half of them showed TBX5 gene mutations. To understand the genetic
causes for inherited CHD such as Holt-Oram syndrome is helpful to take care of
the patients and their families. Further efforts with large-scale genomic
research are required to identify genes responsible for cardiac manifestations or
genotype-phenotype relation in Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 25216260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):884-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304458. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Increased frequency of de novo copy number variants in congenital heart disease
by integrative analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism array and exome
sequence data.

Glessner JT(1), Bick AG(1), Ito K(1), Homsy JG(1), Rodriguez-Murillo L(1), Fromer
M(1), Mazaika E(1), Vardarajan B(1), Italia M(1), Leipzig J(1), DePalma SR(1),
Golhar R(1), Sanders SJ(1), Yamrom B(1), Ronemus M(1), Iossifov I(1), Willsey
AJ(1), State MW(1), Kaltman JR(1), White PS(1), Shen Y(1), Warburton D(1),
Brueckner M(1), Seidman C(1), Goldmuntz E(1), Gelb BD(1), Lifton R(1), Seidman
J(1), Hakonarson H(2), Chung WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for
Biomedical Informatics (M.I., J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.),
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department
of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M.,
S.R.D., C.S., J.S.); Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA (J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and
Development Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences (L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale
Biology (M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems
Biology (B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine)
(D.W.), and Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.,
R.L.), Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). (2)From the Center for
Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for Biomedical Informatics (M.I.,
J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.), Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department of Genetics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M., S.R.D., C.S., J.S.);
Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
(J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences
(L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology
(M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems Biology
(B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine) (D.W.), and
Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S., R.L.),
Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). hakonarson@email.chop.edu
Wkc15@Cumc.Columbia.Edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):821-3.

RATIONALE: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is among the most common birth defects.
Most cases are of unknown pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of de novo copy number variants (CNVs)
in the pathogenesis of sporadic CHD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 538 CHD trios using genome-wide dense single
nucleotide polymorphism arrays and whole exome sequencing. Results were
experimentally validated using digital droplet polymerase chain reaction. We
compared validated CNVs in CHD cases with CNVs in 1301 healthy control trios. The
2 complementary high-resolution technologies identified 63 validated de novo CNVs
in 51 CHD cases. A significant increase in CNV burden was observed when comparing
CHD trios with healthy trios, using either single nucleotide polymorphism array
(P=7×10(-5); odds ratio, 4.6) or whole exome sequencing data (P=6×10(-4); odds
ratio, 3.5) and remained after removing 16% of de novo CNV loci previously
reported as pathogenic (P=0.02; odds ratio, 2.7). We observed recurrent de novo
CNVs on 15q11.2 encompassing CYFIP1, NIPA1, and NIPA2 and single de novo CNVs
encompassing DUSP1, JUN, JUP, MED15, MED9, PTPRE SREBF1, TOP2A, and ZEB2, genes
that interact with established CHD proteins NKX2-5 and GATA4. Integrating de novo
variants in whole exome sequencing and CNV data suggests that ETS1 is the
pathogenic gene altered by 11q24.2-q25 deletions in Jacobsen syndrome and that
CTBP2 is the pathogenic gene in 10q subtelomeric deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a significantly increased frequency of rare de novo
CNVs in CHD patients compared with healthy controls and suggest several novel
genetic loci for CHD.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4209190
PMID: 25205790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Pediatr Int. 2015 Apr;57(2):234-8. doi: 10.1111/ped.12489. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Copy number variation of GATA4 and NKX2-5 in Chinese fetuses with congenital
heart disease.

Liu Z(1), Wang J, Liu S, Deng Y, Liu H, Li N, Li S, Chen X, Lin Y, Wang H, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Birth Defect Monitoring, West China Second Hospital,
Chengdu, China; Laboratory of Molecular Epidemiology for Birth Defects, West
China Second Hospital, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most common birth
defects in newborns. The etiology of CHD has remained largely unknown, but it is 
assumed to result from the combined effects of genetic and environmental factors.
Recent investigations have detected potentially pathogenic copy number variations
(CNV) in a proportion of patients with CHD. The present case-control study
evaluated whether CNV in the GATA4 and NKX2-5 genes contribute to the
pathogenesis of CHD in Chinese fetuses (n = 117), by comparing them with non-CHD 
control subjects (n = 100).
METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification with the P311A probe
mixture was used to detect CNV.
RESULTS: The normalized signals were within the normal range for all exons in all
CHD patients and non-CHD control subjects. Of the 117 CHD patients, three had a
deletion of 22q11, and two had a duplication of 22q11.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence of a role for NKX2-5 and GATA4 CNV in fetal
CHD; therefore, these CNV may not be common in fetal CHD in China.

© 2014 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 25203927  [PubMed - in process]


221. Oncol Lett. 2014 Oct;8(4):1751-1756. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

DNA methylation analysis of SFRP2, GATA4/5, NDRG4 and VIM for the detection of
colorectal cancer in fecal DNA.

Lu H(1), Huang S(2), Zhang X(2), Wang D(3), Zhang X(2), Yuan X(2), Zhang Q(2),
Huang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ningbo Medical Center, Li Huili Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315040, P.R. China 
; Medical School of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, P.R. China.
(2)Ningbo Medical Center, Li Huili Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315040, P.R. China.
(3)Medical School of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, P.R. China.

Aberrantly methylated genes are increasingly being established as biomarkers for 
the detection of colorectal cancer (CRC). In the present study, the methylation
levels of the secreted frizzled-related protein gene 2 (SFRP2), GATA binding
protein 4/5 (GATA4/5), N-Myc downstream-regulated gene 4 (NDRG4) and vimentin
(VIM) promoters were evaluated for their use as markers in the noninvasive
detection of CRC. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to
analyze promoter CpG methylation of SFRP2, GATA4/5, NDRG4 and VIM in the fecal
DNA of 56 patients with CRC and 40 individuals exhibiting normal colonoscopy
results. Promoter methylation levels of SFRP2, GATA4/5, NDRG4 and VIM in CRC
patients were 57.1% (32/56), 42.9% (24/56), 83.9% (47/56), 28.6% (16/56) and
41.1% (23/56), respectively. Furthermore, the specificity of the genes were 90.0%
(4/40), 95.0% (2/40), 82.5% (7/40), 97.5% (4/40) and 85.0% (6/40), respectively. 
The overall sensitivity of detection for fecal DNA with at least one methylated
gene was 96.4% (54/56) in CRC patients. By contrast, only 14 of the 40 normal
individuals exhibited methylated DNA in the aforementioned promoter regions.
Methylation of the SFRP2, GATA4/5, NDRG4 and VIM promoters in fecal DNA is
associated with the presence of colorectal tumors. Therefore, the detection of
aberrantly methylated DNA in fecal samples may present a promising, noninvasive
screening method for CRC.

PMCID: PMC4156205
PMID: 25202404  [PubMed]


222. Dev Biol. 2014 Nov 1;395(1):50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.08.030. Epub 2014
Sep 6.

FOG-2 mediated recruitment of the NuRD complex regulates cardiomyocyte
proliferation during heart development.

Garnatz AS(1), Gao Z(2), Broman M(3), Martens S(3), Earley JU(3), Svensson EC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Development, Regeneration, and Stem Cell Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (3)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA. (4)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA; Committee on Development, Regeneration, and Stem Cell Biology, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address:
eric.svensson@novartis.com.

FOG-2 is a multi-zinc finger protein that binds the transcriptional activator
GATA4 and modulates GATA4-mediated regulation of target genes during heart
development. Our previous work has demonstrated that the Nucleosome Remodeling
and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex physically interacts with FOG-2 and is necessary
for FOG-2 mediated repression of GATA4 activity in vitro. However, the relevance 
of this interaction for FOG-2 function in vivo has remained unclear. In this
report, we demonstrate the importance of FOG-2/NuRD interaction through the
generation and characterization of mice homozygous for a mutation in FOG-2 that
disrupts NuRD binding (FOG-2(R3K5A)). These mice exhibit a perinatal lethality
and have multiple cardiac malformations, including ventricular and atrial septal 
defects and a thin ventricular myocardium. To investigate the etiology of the
thin myocardium, we measured the rate of cardiomyocyte proliferation in wild-type
and FOG-2(R3K5A) developing hearts. We found cardiomyocyte proliferation was
reduced by 31±8% in FOG-2(R3K5A) mice. Gene expression analysis indicated that
the cell cycle inhibitor Cdkn1a (p21(cip1)) is up-regulated 2.0±0.2-fold in
FOG-2(R3K5A) hearts. In addition, we demonstrate that FOG-2 can directly repress 
the activity of the Cdkn1a gene promoter, suggesting a model by which FOG-2/NuRD 
promotes ventricular wall thickening by repression of this cell cycle inhibitor. 
Consistent with this notion, the genetic ablation of Cdkn1a in FOG-2(R3K5A) mice 
leads to an improvement in left ventricular function and a partial rescue of left
ventricular wall thickness. Taken together, our results define a novel mechanism 
in which FOG-2/NuRD interaction is required for cardiomyocyte proliferation by
directly down-regulating the cell cycle inhibitor Cdkn1a during heart
development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4190033
PMID: 25196150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;52(6):460-3.

[Analysis of genomic copy number variations in two unrelated neonates with 8p
deletion and duplication associated with congenital heart disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Mei M(1), Yang L(1), Zhan G(1), Wang H(1), Ma D(1), Zhou W(1), Huang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China. (2)Children's
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China. Email: gyhuang@shmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To screen for genomic copy number variations (CNVs) in two unrelated
neonates with multiple congenital abnormalities using Affymetrix SNP chip and try
to find the critical region associated with congenital heart disease.
METHOD: Two neonates were tested for genomic copy number variations by using
Cytogenetic SNP chip.Rare CNVs with potential clinical significance were selected
of which deletion segments' size was larger than 50 kb and duplication segments' 
size was larger than 150 kb based on the analysis of ChAs software, without false
positive CNVs and segments of normal population. The identified CNVs were
compared with those of the cases in DECIPHER and ISCA databases.
RESULT: Eleven rare CNVs with size from 546.6-27 892 kb were identified in the 2 
neonates. The deletion region and size of case 1 were 8p23.3-p23.1 (387 912-11
506 771 bp) and 11.1 Mb respectively, the duplication region and size of case 1
were 8p23.1-p11.1 (11 508 387-43 321 279 bp) and 31.8 Mb respectively. The
deletion region and size of case 2 were 8p23.3-p23.1 (46 385-7 809 878 bp) and
7.8 Mb respectively, the duplication region and size of case 2 were 8p23.1-p11.21
(12 260 914-40 917 092 bp) and 28.7 Mb respectively. The comparison with Decipher
and ISCA databases supported previous viewpoint that 8p23.1 had been associated
with congenital heart disease and the region between 7 809 878-11 506 771 bp may 
play a role in the severe cardiac defects associated with 8p23.1 deletions. Case 
1 had serious cardiac abnormalities whose GATA4 was located in the duplication
segment and the copy number increased while SOX7 was located in the deletion
segment and the copy number decreased.
CONCLUSION: The region between 7 809 878-11 506 771 bp in 8p23.1 is associated
with heart defects and copy number variants of SOX7 and GATA4 may result in
congenital heart disease.

PMID: 25190168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Anim Sci J. 2014 Dec;85(12):981-5. doi: 10.1111/asj.12267. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Localization of GATA2 in the nuclear and cytoplasmic regions of ovine
conceptuses.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Bai R, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Theriogenology and Animal Breeding, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

GATA transcription factors are emerging as critical regulators in trophoblast
development and its gene regulation. The purpose of this study was to examine the
expression and cellular localization of GATA2 in ovine conceptuses during the
peri-implantation period. In Western blot analyses, GATA2 proteins were found in 
days 15, 17 and 21 ovine conceptuses (day 0=day of estrus). Using
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analyses, we found that GATA2 was
localized in days 15, 17 and 21 ovine conceptuses, and more importantly, GATA2
protein was detected in both nuclear and cytoplasmic regions of the
trophectoderm. To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate
that GATA2 is localized in two cellular compartments of the trophectoderm in
ovine and many other mammalian species, and suggests that the difference in GATA2
location plays a role in the regulation of down-stream genes during the early
pregnancy period.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 25163535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;396(1-2):10-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.08.007.
Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Molecular adaptations of testosterone-producing Leydig cells during systemic in
vivo blockade of the androgen receptor.

Bjelic MM(1), Stojkov NJ(1), Baburski AZ(1), Sokanovic SJ(1), Mihajlovic AI(1),
Janjic MM(1), Kostic TS(1), Andric SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrinology and Signaling Group, Department of Biology and
Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Reproductive Endocrinology and Signaling Group, Department of Biology and
Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
Electronic address: silvana.andric@dbe.uns.ac.rs.

This study systematically evaluates the effects of androgen receptor (AR)
blockade on molecular events in Leydig cells. Results showed that intramuscular
administration of testosterone-enanthate, at clinically relevant dose, decreased 
testosterone in interstitial fluid and Leydig cells from adult rats. AR-blocker
(Androcur) prevented this effect and testosterone-reduced Leydig cells
steroidogenic capacity/activity. Testosterone-reduced expression of some
steroidogenic enzymes/proteins (Tspo,StAR,Hsd3b1/2) and transcription factors
(Nur77,Gata4,Dax1) was completely abrogated, while decreased expression of
Star,Cyp11a1,Cyp17a1,Hsd17b4,Creb1a was partially prevented. In the same cells,
increased expression of Hsd3b5/HSD3B and Ar/AR was abolished. Androcur-treatment 
abolished testosterone-reduced cAMP, coupled with a changed expressional milieu
of cAMP signaling elements. Results from in vitro experiments suggest that some
of these effects are testosterone-AR dependent, while others could be due to
disturbed LH and/or other signals. Presented data provide new molecular insight
into Leydig cells function and are important in terms of human reproductive
health and the wide-spread use of Androcur as well as use/abuse of
testosterone-enanthate.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25153259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Res. 2014 Oct;24(10):1201-13. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.113. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Baf250a orchestrates an epigenetic pathway to repress the Nkx2.5-directed
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the sinoatrial node.

Wu M(1), Peng S(1), Yang J(2), Tu Z(2), Cai X(3), Cai CL(3), Wang Z(4), Zhao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (3)1] Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place,
New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Michigan, 2800 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The sinoatrial node (SAN) is essential for rhythmic beating of the heart;
however, our understanding of what controls proper functioning of the SAN remains
primitive. To explore molecular control of SAN function, we specifically deleted 
Baf250a, a key regulatory component of the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complex SWI/SNF, in the SAN. Deletion of Baf250a in the SAN led to sinus
bradycardia. Time series analysis of dysregulated genes after deletion of Baf250a
reveals a transcriptional hierarchy maintaining pacemaker cell identity, i.e.,
Baf250a activates the expression of Tbx3, and Baf250a, Tbx3 and histone
deacetylase 3 coordinately repress the expression of Nkx2.5. Disruption of this
repressive pathway switches on expression of Nkx2.5, which stimulates expression 
of Gata4 and Tbx5. These three cardiac transcription factors further turn on a
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the SAN, which eventually leads to sick
sinus disease (SSD). Our study suggests that disruption of key genetic pathways
regulating cardiac lineage segregation may cause SSD and cardiac arrhythmias in
general.

PMCID: PMC4185344
PMID: 25145359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 15;4:6073. doi: 10.1038/srep06073.

Genetic alterations of chromosome 8 genes in oral cancer.

Yong ZW(1), Zaini ZM(1), Kallarakkal TG(1), Karen-Ng LP(2), Rahman ZA(1), Ismail 
SM(1), Sharifah NA(3), Mustafa WM(4), Abraham MT(5), Tay KK(6), Zain RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Oro-Maxillofacial Surgical and Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Dentistry, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia [2] Oral Cancer Research 
&Coordinating Centre (OCRCC), Faculty of Dentistry, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (2)Oral Cancer Research &Coordinating Centre (OCRCC), Faculty
of Dentistry, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of
Pathology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur.
(4)Department of Oral Surgery, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, 50588 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. (5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital Tengku Ampuan
Rahimah, Klang, Malaysia. (6)Oral Surgery Clinic, Hospital Umum Sarawak, Kuching,
Malaysia.

The clinical relevance of DNA copy number alterations in chromosome 8 were
investigated in oral cancers. The copy numbers of 30 selected genes in 33 OSCC
patients were detected using the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) technique. Amplifications of the EIF3E gene were found in 27.3% of the
patients, MYC in 18.2%, RECQL4 in 15.2% and MYBL1 in 12.1% of patients. The most 
frequent gene losses found were the GATA4 gene (24.2%), FGFR1 gene (24.2%), MSRA 
(21.2) and CSGALNACT1 (12.1%). The co-amplification of EIF3E and RECQL4 was found
in 9% of patients and showed significant association with alcohol drinkers. There
was a significant association between the amplification of EIF3E gene with
non-betel quid chewers and the negative lymph node status. EIF3E amplifications
did not show prognostic significance on survival. Our results suggest that EIF3E 
may have a role in the carcinogenesis of OSCC in non-betel quid chewers.

PMCID: PMC4133705
PMID: 25123227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Sep;46(9):766-73. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmu057. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Alpha-lipoic acid enhances DMSO-induced cardiomyogenic differentiation of P19
cells.

Shen X(1), Yang Q(1), Jin P(2), Li X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150081, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China
jinpeng06@tom.com lixueqi06@163.com.

Alpha-lipoic acid (a-LA) is a potent antioxidant that acts as an essential
cofactor in mitochondrial dehydrogenase reactions. a-LA has been shown to possess
anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective properties, and is used to improve symptoms 
of diabetic neuropathy. However, the role of a-LA in stem cell differentiation
and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown. In the present study, we 
showed that a-LA significantly promoted dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-induced
cardiomyogenic differentiation of mouse embryonic carcinoma P19 cells. a-LA dose 
dependently increased beating embryonic body (EB) percentages of
DMSO-differentiated P19 cells. The expressions of cardiac specific genes TNNT2,
Nkx2.5, GATA4, MEF2C, and MLC2V and cardiac isoform of troponin T
(cTnT)-positively stained cell population were significantly up-regulated by the 
addition of a-LA. We also demonstrated that the differentiation time after EB
formation was critical for a-LA to take effect. Interestingly, without DMSO
treatment, a-LA did not stimulate the cardiomyogenic differentiation of P19
cells. Further investigation indicated that collagen synthesis-enhancing
activity, instead of the antioxidative property, plays a significant role in the 
cardiomyogenic differentiation-promoting function of a-LA. These findings
highlight the potential use of a-LA for regenerative therapies in heart diseases.

© The Author 2014. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25112287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;30(8):829-32, 840.

[Involvement of ERK5 and JNK in the BMP9-induced differentiation of C3H10T1/2
cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Geng X(1), Liu S(1), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key
Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development with Disorders, Children's
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. (2)Department 
of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400014, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5
(ERK5) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in the differentiation of C3H10T1/2
cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells induced by bone morphogenetic protein 9
(BMP9).
METHODS: BMP9 gene was imported into C3H10T1/2 cells by recombinant adenovirus.
Western blotting was used to detect the actived levels of ERK5 and JNK after
cultivated with BMP9 and different concentrations of ERK5 specific inhibitor
BIX02189 or JNK specific inhibitor SP600125; real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR)
was performed to analyze the expressions of myocardium specific genes GATA
binding protein 4 (GATA4), myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) after one week
induced by BMP9; Western blotting was conducted to measure the expressions of
myocardium specific proteins connexin 43 (CX43), cardiac troponin T (cTnT) after 
three weeks induced by BMP9, and immunofluorescence to observe the positions of
CX43 and cTnT in the cells.
RESULTS: In the case of transfection efficiency up to 50%, BMP9 exceedingly
activated ERK5 and JNK, and significantly increased their phosphorylation level
(P<0.05). After BIX02189 inhibited the activity of ERK5, the expression levels of
myocardial differentiation markers MEF2C, GATA4, CX43, cTnT of C3H10T1/2 cells
were significantly suppressed (P<0.05); JNK specific inhibitor SP600125 also
inhibited the expression levels of MEF2C, GATA4, CX43, cTnT, but the inhibition
on MEF2C and GATA4 was not as notable as that of BIX02189 (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The excessive activation of ERK5 and JNK plays an important role in
the differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells induced by
BMP9.

PMID: 25108436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Oct;75:141-51. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.07.007. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

Pressure overload induces IL-18 and IL-18R expression, but markedly suppresses
IL-18BP expression in a rabbit model. IL-18 potentiates TNF-a-induced
cardiomyocyte death.

Yoshida T(1), Friehs I(2), Mummidi S(3), del Nido PJ(2), Addulnour-Nakhoul S(4), 
Delafontaine P(1), Valente AJ(2), Chandrasekar B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Heart and Vascular Institute, Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)South Texas Veterans Health Care System and Department of Medicine, University
of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (4)Department of
Medicine-Gastroenterology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA 
70112, USA; Research Service, Southeast Louisiana Veterans Health Care System,
New Orleans, LA 70161, USA. (5)Heart and Vascular Institute, Tulane University
School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Research Service, Southeast
Louisiana Veterans Health Care System, New Orleans, LA 70161, USA. Electronic
address: bchandra@tulane.edu.

Recurrent or sustained inflammation plays a causal role in the development and
progression of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and its transition to failure. 
Interleukin (IL)-18 is a potent pro-hypertrophic inflammatory cytokine. We report
that induction of pressure overload in the rabbit, by constriction of the
descending thoracic aorta induces compensatory hypertrophy at 4weeks (mass/volume
ratio: 1.7±0.11) and ventricular dilatation indicative of heart failure at 6weeks
(mass/volume ratio: 0.7±0.04). In concordance with this, fractional shortening
was preserved at 4weeks, but markedly attenuated at 6weeks. We cloned rabbit
IL-18, IL-18Ra, IL-18Rß, and IL-18 binding protein (IL-18BP) cDNA, and show that 
pressure overload, while enhancing IL-18 and IL-18R expression in hypertrophied
and failing hearts, markedly attenuated the level of expression of the endogenous
IL-18 antagonist IL-18BP. Cyclical mechanical stretch (10% cyclic equibiaxial
stretch, 1Hz) induced hypertrophy of primary rabbit cardiomyocytes in vitro and
enhanced ANP, IL-18, and IL-18Ra expression. Further, treatment with rhIL-18
induced its own expression and that of IL-18Ra via AP-1 activation, and induced
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in part via PI3K/Akt/GATA4 signaling. In contrast,
IL-18 potentiated TNF-a-induced cardiomyocyte death, and by itself induced
cardiac endothelial cell death. These results demonstrate that pressure overload 
is associated with enhanced IL-18 and its receptor expression in hypertrophied
and failingrabbit hearts. Since IL-18BP expression is markedly inhibited, our
results indicate a positive amplification in IL-18 proinflammatory signaling
during pressure overload, and suggest IL-18 as a potential therapeutic target in 
pathological hypertrophy and cardiac failure.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4157969
PMID: 25108227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 7;9(8):e104135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104135. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of histone H3K9 acetylation by anacardic acid can correct the
over-expression of Gata4 in the hearts of fetal mice exposed to alcohol during
pregnancy.

Peng C(1), Zhu J(2), Sun HC(3), Huang XP(4), Zhao WA(3), Zheng M(3), Liu LJ(5),
Tian J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
China; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders,
Chongqing, China; Chongqing International Science and Technology Cooperation
Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China. (2)Key Laboratory
of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing, China; Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
China. (3)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China. (4)Department of Biomedical Science, Charlie E. Schmidt College
of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida, United States of
America. (5)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China; Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular malformations can be caused by abnormalities in Gata4 
expression during fetal development. In a previous study, we demonstrated that
ethanol exposure could lead to histone hyperacetylation and Gata4 over-expression
in fetal mouse hearts. However, the potential mechanisms of histone
hyperacetylation and Gata4 over-expression induced by ethanol remain unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pregnant mice were gavaged with ethanol or saline. Fetal
mouse hearts were collected for analysis. The results of ethanol fed groups
showed that global HAT activity was unusually high in the hearts of fetal mice
while global HDAC activity remained unchanged. Binding of P300, CBP, PCAF, SRC1, 
but not GCN5, were increased on the Gata4 promoter relative to the saline treated
group. Increased acetylation of H3K9 and increased mRNA expression of Gata4,
a-MHC, cTnT were observed in these hearts. Treatment with the pan-histone
acetylase inhibitor, anacardic acid, reduced the binding of P300, PCAF to the
Gata4 promoter and reversed H3K9 hyperacetylation in the presence of ethanol.
Interestingly, anacardic acid attenuated over-expression of Gata4, a-MHC and cTnT
in fetal mouse hearts exposed to ethanol.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that P300 and PCAF may be critical regulatory
factors that mediate Gata4 over-expression induced by ethanol exposure.
Alternatively, P300, PCAF and Gata4 may coordinate over-expression of cardiac
downstream genes in mouse hearts exposed to ethanol. Anacardic acid may thus
protect against ethanol-induced Gata4, a-MHC, cTnT over-expression by inhibiting 
the binding of P300 and PCAF to the promoter region of these genes.

PMCID: PMC4125174
PMID: 25101666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2732-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36703. Epub 2014 
Aug 5.

A mutation in the Kozak sequence of GATA4 hampers translation in a family with
atrial septal defects.

Mohan RA(1), van Engelen K, Stefanovic S, Barnett P, Ilgun A, Baars MJ, Bouma BJ,
Mulder BJ, Christoffels VM, Postma AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is the most common congenital heart defect clinically 
characterized by an opening in the atrial septum. Mutations in GATA4, TBX5, and
NKX2-5 underlie this phenotype. Here, we report on the identification of a novel 
-6 G>C mutation in the highly conserved Kozak sequence in the 5'UTR of GATA4 in a
small family presenting with two different forms of ASD. This is the first time a
mutation in the Kozak sequence has been linked to heart disease. Functional
assays demonstrate reduced GATA4 translation, though the GATA4 transcript levels 
remain normal. This leads to a reduction of GATA4 protein level, consequently
diminishing the ability of GATA4 to transactivate target genes, as demonstrated
by using the GATA4-driven Nppa (ANF) promoter. In conclusion, we identified a
mutation in the GATA4 Kozak sequence that likely contributes to the pathogenesis 
of ASD. In general, it points to the importance of accurate protein level
regulation during heart development and emphasizes the need to analyze the entire
transcribed region when screening for mutations.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25099673  [PubMed - in process]


233. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2015 May;103(5):1828-39. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.35304. Epub
2014 Sep 24.

Adipose-derived stem cell adhesion on laminin-coated microcarriers improves
commitment toward the cardiomyogenic lineage.

Karam JP(1), Bonafè F, Sindji L, Muscari C, Montero-Menei CN.

Author information: 
(1)LUNAM Université, UMR S-1066 F-49933, Angers, France; NSERM U1066, MINT "Micro
et nanomédecines biomimétiques,", F-49933, Angers, France; INRC-National
Institute for Cardiovascular Research, 40126, Bologna, Italy; Department of
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 40126, Bologna, Italy.

For tissue-engineering studies of the infarcted heart it is essential to identify
a source of cells that may provide cardiomyocyte progenitors, which is easy to
amplify, accessible in adults, and allowing autologous grafts. Preclinical
studies have shown that human adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) can
differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells and improve heart function in
myocardial infarction. We have developed pharmacologically active microcarriers
(PAMs) which are biodegradable and biocompatible polymeric microspheres conveying
cells on their biomimetic surface, therefore providing an adequate
three-dimensional (3D) microenvironment. Moreover, they can release a growth
factor in a prolonged manner. In order to implement ADSCs and PAMs for cardiac
tissue engineering we first defined the biomimetic surface by studying the
influence of matrix molecules laminin (LM) and fibronectin (FN), in combination
with growth factors present in the cardiogenic niche, to further enhance the in
vitro cardiac differentiation of ADSCs. We demonstrated that LM increased the
expression of cardiac markers (Nkx2.5, GATA4, MEF2C) by ADSCs after 2 weeks in
vitro. Interestingly, our results suggest that the 3D support provided by PAMs
with a LM biomimetic surface (LM-PAMs) further enhanced the expression of cardiac
markers and induced the expression of a more mature contractile protein, cardiac 
troponin I, compared with the 2D differentiating conditions after only 1 week in 
culture. The enrichment of the growth-factor cocktail with TGF-ß1 potentiated the
cardiomyogenic differentiation. These results suggest that PAMs offering a LM
biomimetic surface may be efficiently used for applications combining adult stem 
cells in tissue-engineering strategies of the ischemic heart.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25098676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:769515. doi: 10.1155/2014/769515.
Epub 2014 Jun 29.

Apocynum Tablet Protects against Cardiac Hypertrophy via Inhibiting AKT and
ERK1/2 Phosphorylation after Pressure Overload.

Qi J(1), Liu Q(1), Gong K(2), Yu J(3), Wang L(1), Guo L(1), Zhou M(4), Wu J(5),
Zhang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Laboratory, Guangdong Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine,
2nd Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 101 Dade
Road, Yuexiu District, Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, The 
Second Clinical Medical School, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225001, China.
(3)Animal Laboratory, Guangdong Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine, 2nd
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou
510120, China. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillary Surgery, Stomatology Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510140, China. (5)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Northeast Ohio Medical University, 
Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Background. Cardiac hypertrophy occurs in many cardiovascular diseases. Apocynum 
tablet (AT), a traditional Chinese medicine, has been widely used in China to
treat patients with hypertension. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms of
AT on the hypertension-induced cardiac hypertrophy remain elusive. The current
study evaluated the effect and mechanisms of AT on cardiac hypertrophy. Methods. 
We created a mouse model of cardiac hypertrophy by inducing pressure overload
with surgery of transverse aortic constriction (TAC) and then explored the effect
of AT on the development of cardiac hypertrophy using 46 mice in 4 study groups
(combinations of AT and TAC). In addition, we evaluated the signaling pathway of 
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, AKT, and protein expression of GATA4 in the
cardioprotective effects of AT using Western blot. Results. AT inhibited the
phosphorylation of Thr202/Tyr204 sites of ERK1/2, Ser473 site of AKT, and protein
expression of GATA4 and significantly inhibited cardiac hypertrophy and cardiac
fibrosis at 2 weeks after TAC surgery (P < 0.05). Conclusions. We experimentally 
demonstrated that AT inhibits cardiac hypertrophy via suppressing phosphorylation
of ERK1/2 and AKT.

PMCID: PMC4100359
PMID: 25093027  [PubMed]


236. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Aug 4;5(4):93. doi: 10.1186/scrt482.

Physiological conditioning by electric field stimulation promotes cardiomyogenic 
gene expression in human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells.

Llucià-Valldeperas A, Sanchez B, Soler-Botija C, Gálvez-Montón C, Roura S,
Prat-Vidal C, Perea-Gil I, Rosell-Ferrer J, Bragos R, Bayes-Genis A.

The optimal cell lineage for cardiac-regeneration approaches remains mysterious. 
Additionally, electrical stimulation promotes cardiomyogenic differentiation of
stimulated cells. Therefore, we hypothesized that electrical conditioning of
cardiomyocyte progenitor cells (CMPCs) might enrich their cardiovascular
potential. CMPCs were isolated from human adult atrial appendages, characterized,
and electrically stimulated for 7 and 14 days. Electrical stimulation modulated
CMPCs gene and protein expression, increasing all cardiac markers. GATA-binding
protein 4 (GATA4) early transcription factor was significantly overexpressed (P =
0.008), but also its coactivator myocyte enhancer factor 2A (MEF2A) was
upregulated (P = 0.073) under electrical stimulation. Moreover, important
structural proteins and calcium handling-related genes were enhanced. The
cardioregeneration capability of CMPCs is improved by electrical field
stimulation. Consequently, short-term electrical stimulation should be a valid
biophysical approach to modify cardiac progenitor cells toward a cardiogenic
phenotype, and can be incorporated into transdifferentiation protocols.
Electrostimulated CMPCs may be best-equipped cells for myocardial integration
after implantation.

PMCID: PMC4282148
PMID: 25092238  [PubMed - in process]


237. Dev Dyn. 2014 Nov;243(11):1416-28. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24175. Epub 2014 Aug 25.

Expression pattern of mRNA A and mRNA B of alpha sarcoglycan gene during mouse
embryonic development and regulation of their expression by myogenic and
cardiogenic transcription factors.

Roque-Ramírez B(1), Chimal-Monroy J, Canto P, Coral-Vázquez RM.

Author information: 
(1)División de Investigación Biomédica, Subdirección de Enseñanza e
Investigación, Centro Médico Nacional 20 de Noviembre, Instituto de Seguridad y
Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del Estado, México, D.F. México.

BACKGROUND: Type 2D limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGM2D) is a progressive
disorder caused by mutations in the alpha sarcoglycan (a-SG) gene. In mice, the
a-SG gene contains two promoters that regulate the expression of two different
mRNAs (A and B). However, their gene expression pattern during embryonic
development has not been explored and their regulation by myogenic and
cardiogenic transcription factors has been only partially studied.
RESULTS: During embryonic development, mRNA A and B of a-SG gene were initially
detected in hypaxial muscles, heart, stomach, tongue, and mesenchymal cells,
which surround the dorsal region of the somites. Moreover, mRNA B was exclusively
expressed in the floor plate and notochord and in the interdigits of limbs. In
vitro, MyoD and myogenin positively regulated the transcription of mRNA B during 
skeletal myogenesis, whereas mRNA A was activated only for MyoD in differentiated
skeletal muscle. In addition, Gata-4 together with Mef2c may regulate the
expression of mRNA B in heart development, whereas Nkx2.5 and myocardin may
activate expression of mRNA A in the differentiated cardiomyocyte.
CONCLUSIONS: The differential expression of a-SG mRNAs during mouse embryonic
development may be a consequence of the differential regulation of both promoters
by myogenic and cardiogenic factors.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25091331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 5;64(5):436-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.04.056.

Effect of human donor cell source on differentiation and function of cardiac
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Sanchez-Freire V(1), Lee AS(2), Hu S(2), Abilez OJ(3), Liang P(4), Lan F(4),
Huber BC(5), Ong SG(4), Hong WX(2), Huang M(4), Wu JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Department of Radiology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Institute of Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California;
Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (3)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (4)Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Department of Radiology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (5)Department of Medicine,
Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California;
Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California; Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California; Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
Electronic address: joewu@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 5;64(5):449-50.

BACKGROUND: Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a potentially
unlimited source for generation of cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs). However, current
protocols for iPSC-CM derivation face several challenges, including variability
in somatic cell sources and inconsistencies in cardiac differentiation
efficiency.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to assess the effect of epigenetic memory on
differentiation and function of iPSC-CMs generated from somatic cell sources of
cardiac versus noncardiac origins.
METHODS: Cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) and skin fibroblasts from the same
donors were reprogrammed into iPSCs and differentiated into iPSC-CMs via embryoid
body and monolayer-based differentiation protocols.
RESULTS: Differentiation efficiency was found to be higher in CPC-derived
iPSC-CMs (CPC-iPSC-CMs) than in fibroblast-derived iPSC-CMs (Fib-iPSC-CMs). Gene 
expression analysis during cardiac differentiation demonstrated up-regulation of 
cardiac transcription factors in CPC-iPSC-CMs, including NKX2-5, MESP1, ISL1,
HAND2, MYOCD, MEF2C, and GATA4. Epigenetic assessment revealed higher methylation
in the promoter region of NKX2-5 in Fib-iPSC-CMs compared with CPC-iPSC-CMs.
Epigenetic differences were found to dissipate with increased cell passaging, and
a battery of in vitro assays revealed no significant differences in their
morphological and electrophysiological properties at early passage. Finally, cell
delivery into a small animal myocardial infarction model indicated that
CPC-iPSC-CMs and Fib-iPSC-CMs possess comparable therapeutic capabilities in
improving functional recovery in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to compare differentiation of iPSC-CMs from 
human CPCs versus human fibroblasts from the same donors. The authors demonstrate
that although epigenetic memory improves differentiation efficiency of cardiac
versus noncardiac somatic cell sources in vitro, it does not contribute to
improved functional outcome in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134946
PMID: 25082575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Virchows Arch. 2014 Nov;465(5):567-77. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1635-1. Epub 2014 
Jul 30.

Expression pattern of clinically relevant markers in paediatric germ cell- and
sex-cord stromal tumours is similar to adult testicular tumours.

Mosbech CH(1), Svingen T, Nielsen JE, Toft BG, Rechnitzer C, Petersen BL,
Rajpert-De Meyts E, Hoei-Hansen CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Growth and Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Paediatric germ cell tumours (GCTs) are rare and account for less than 3 % of
childhood cancers. Like adult GCTs, they probably originate from primordial germ 
cells, but the pattern of histopathological types is different, and they occur
predominantly in extragonadal sites along the body midline. Because they are
rare, histology of paediatric GCTs is poorly documented, and it remains unclear
to what extent they differ from adult GCTs. We have analysed 35 paediatric germ
cell tumours and 5 gonadal sex-cord stromal tumours from prepubertal patients
aged 0-15 years, to gain further knowledge, elaborate on clinical-pathological
associations and better understand their developmental divergence. The tumours
were screened for expression of stemness-related factors (OCT4, AP-2<U+03B3>, SOX2),
classical yolk sac tumours (YSTs; AFP, SALL4), GCTs (HCG, PLAP, PDPN/D2-40), as
well as markers for sex-cord stromal tumour (PDPN, GATA4). All YSTs expressed AFP
and SALL4, with GATA4 present in 13/14. The majority of teratomas expressed SOX2 
and PDPN, whereas SALL4 was found in 8/13 immature teratomas. Adult seminoma
markers AP-2<U+03B3>, OCT4, SALL4 and PDPN were all expressed in dysgerminoma. We
further report a previously unrecognised pathogenetic relationship between AFP
and SALL4 in YST in that different populations of YST cells express either SALL4 
or AFP, which suggests variable differentiation status. We also show that AP-2<U+03B3>
is expressed in the granulosa layer of ovarian follicles and weakly expressed in 
immature but not in mature granulosa cell tumours. Our findings indicate that the
expression pattern of these antigens is similar between paediatric and adult
GCTs, even though they develop along different developmental trajectories.

PMID: 25074678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3123-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.109405. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

The nuclear hormone receptor family member NR5A2 controls aspects of multipotent 
progenitor cell formation and acinar differentiation during pancreatic
organogenesis.

Hale MA(1), Swift GH(1), Hoang CQ(1), Deering TG(1), Masui T(1), Lee YK(2), Xue
J(1), MacDonald RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA raymond.macdonald@utsouthwestern.edu.

The orphan nuclear receptor NR5A2 is necessary for the stem-like properties of
the epiblast of the pre-gastrulation embryo and for cellular and physiological
homeostasis of endoderm-derived organs postnatally. Using conditional gene
inactivation, we show that Nr5a2 also plays crucial regulatory roles during
organogenesis. During the formation of the pancreas, Nr5a2 is necessary for the
expansion of the nascent pancreatic epithelium, for the subsequent formation of
the multipotent progenitor cell (MPC) population that gives rise to pre-acinar
cells and bipotent cells with ductal and islet endocrine potential, and for the
formation and differentiation of acinar cells. At birth, the NR5A2-deficient
pancreas has defects in all three epithelial tissues: a partial loss of endocrine
cells, a disrupted ductal tree and a >90% deficit of acini. The acinar defects
are due to a combination of fewer MPCs, deficient allocation of those MPCs to
pre-acinar fate, disruption of acinar morphogenesis and incomplete acinar cell
differentiation. NR5A2 controls these developmental processes directly as well as
through regulatory interactions with other pancreatic transcriptional regulators,
including PTF1A, MYC, GATA4, FOXA2, RBPJL and MIST1 (BHLHA15). In particular,
Nr5a2 and Ptf1a establish mutually reinforcing regulatory interactions and
collaborate to control developmentally regulated pancreatic genes by binding to
shared transcriptional regulatory regions. At the final stage of acinar cell
development, the absence of NR5A2 affects the expression of Ptf1a and its acinar 
specific partner Rbpjl, so that the few acinar cells that form do not complete
differentiation. Nr5a2 controls several temporally distinct stages of pancreatic 
development that involve regulatory mechanisms relevant to pancreatic oncogenesis
and the maintenance of the exocrine phenotype.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197540
PMID: 25063451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Reprod Dev. 2014 Apr 24;60(2):83-91. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6: molecular characterization, expression
patterns and possible functions during goose (Anser cygnoides) follicle
development.

Yuan X(1), Xia L, Dong X, Hu S, Zhang Y, Ding F, Liu H, Li L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, Sichuan 625014, P.R. China.

The transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, members of the GATA family, play an 
important role in ovarian cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. In
this study, the full-length coding sequences of goose GATA-4 and GATA-6 were
cloned and characterized. GATA-4 and GATA-6 consist of 1236 and 1104 nucleotides 
encoding proteins with 411 and 367 amino acids, respectively. The deduced amino
acid sequences of both proteins include two adjacent zinc finger domains with the
distinctive form (CVNC-X17-CNAC)-X29-(CANC-X17-CNAC) and share 84.76% identity
within this domain. In silico prediction together with matching of the high
affinity RRXS(T)Y motif revealed that the GATA-4 protein might be phosphorylated 
predominantly at S(233), but no phosphorylation site was found in the GATA-6
protein. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed that GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs 
were co-expressed in goose follicles, moderately expressed in granulosa cells and
weakly expressed in theca cells. The expression level of GATA-4 mRNA in healthy
follicles was significantly higher than in atretic follicles or postovulatory
follicles (P<0.01), and the expression level of GATA-6 mRNA in healthy follicles 
was significantly lower than in atretic follicles or postovulatory follicles
(P<0.01). The expression level of GATA-4 mRNA in granulosa cells was
downregulated during follicle development; the peak of expression occurred in the
8-10 mm follicles, and the lowest expression was in the F1 follicles. GATA-6 was 
upregulated and reached its peak expression in the F1 follicles. These results
indicate that the molecular structural differences in goose GATA-4 and GATA-6 may
be related to their different roles during follicle development.

PMCID: PMC3999398
PMID: 24531706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Gene. 2013 Oct 26. pii: S0378-1119(13)01423-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.028.
[Epub ahead of print]

A novel mutation of GATA4 (K319E) is responsible for familial atrial septal
defect and pulmonary valve stenosis.

Xiang R(1), Fan LL(2), Huang H(2), Cao BB(2), Li XP(3), Peng DQ(4), Xia K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China; Department of Cardiology, the
Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, the Second
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, 410011, China. Electronic address: pengdq@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China. Electronic address:
xiakun@sklmg.edu.cn.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans, and the
etiology of most CHD remains to be elusive. Atrial septal defect (ASD) makes up
30-40% of all adult CHDs and is thought to be genetically heterogeneous. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutations in transcription factors e.g. NKX2.5,
GATA4, and TBX5 contribute to congenital ASD. In this study, we investigate a
family of three generations with seven patients with ASD and pulmonary valve
stenosis (PS). A novel GATA4 mutation, c.955A>G (p.K319E), was identified and
co-segregated with the affected patients in this family. This mutation was
predicted to be deleterious by three different bioinformatics programs (The
polyphen2, SIFT and MutationTaster). Our finding expands the spectrum of GATA4
mutations and provides additional support that GATA4 plays important roles in
cardiac development.

© 2013.

PMID: 24513334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


303. Life Sci. 2013 Oct 24. pii: S0024-3205(13)00615-2. doi:
10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.013. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of autophagy in doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity.

Dirks-Naylor AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wingate University, School of Pharmacy, Wingate, NC 28174.

Doxorubicin (Dox) is an effective chemotherapeutic agent, however, its use is
limited by cardiotoxicity. The mechanisms causing cardiotoxicity have not been
clearly elucidated, but known to involve, at least in part, oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis. More recently, it has been suggested
that dysregulation of autophagy may also play an important role in Dox-induced
cardiotoxicity. Autophagy has dual functions. Under physiological conditions,
autophagy is essential for optimal cellular function and survival by ridding the 
cell of damaged or unwanted proteins and organelles. Under pathological
conditions, autophagy may be stimulated in order to protect the cell from stress 
stimuli or, alternatively, to contribute to cell death. Thus, appropriate
regulation of autophagy can be a matter of life or death. The role of autophagy
in Dox-induced cardiotoxicity has recently been explored, however, conflicting
reports on the effects of Dox on autophagy and its role in cardiotoxicity exist. 
Most, but not all, of the studies conclude that Dox upregulates cardiac autophagy
and contributes to the pathogenesis of Dox-induced toxicity. Dox may induce
autophagy by suppressing the expression of GATA4 and/or S6K1, which may directly 
or indirectly regulate expression of essential autophagy genes such as Atg12,
Atg5, Beclin1 and Bcl-2. Interestingly, the Dox-induced autophagic response may
be species specific as Dox treatment has been shown to stimulate autophagy in rat
models, but suppress autophagy in mouse models. Additional studies will elucidate
this possibility.

© 2013.

PMID: 24513201  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


304. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 May;390(1-2):263-70. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-1977-7. Epub 
2014 Feb 7.

Gelsolin (GSN) induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and BNP expression via p38
signaling and GATA-4 transcriptional factor activation.

Hu WS(1), Ho TJ, Pai P, Chung LC, Kuo CH, Chang SH, Tsai FJ, Tsai CH, Jie YC,
Liou YM, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)PhD Program for Aging, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is an adaptive response of the heart to various types
of stress. During the period of stress accumulation, the transition from
physiological hypertrophy to pathological hypertrophy results in the promotion of
heart failure. Gelsolin (GSN) is a member of the actin-binding proteins, which
regulate dynamic actin filament organization by severing and capping. Moreover,
GSN also regulates cell morphology, differentiation, movement, and apoptosis. In 
this study, we used H9c2 and H9c2-GSN stable clones in an attempt to understand
the mechanisms of GSN overexpression in cardiomyocytes. These data showed that
the overexpression of GSN in H9c2-induced cardiac hypertrophy and increased the
pathological hypertrophy markers atrial natriuretic peptide brain natriuretic
peptide. Furthermore, we found that E-cadherin expression decreased with the
overexpression of GSN in H9c2, but ß-catenin expression increased. These data
presume that the cytoskeleton is loose. Further, previous studies show that the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway can induce cardiac hypertrophy. Our data
showed that p-p38 expression increased with the overexpression of GSN in H9c2,
and the transcription factor p-GATA4 expression also increased, suggesting that
the overexpression of GSN in H9c2-induced cardiac hypertrophy seemed to be
regulated by the p38/GATA4 pathway. Moreover, we used both the p38 inhibitor
(SB203580) and GSN siRNA to confirm our conjecture. We found that both of these
factors significantly suppressed gelsolin-induced cardiac hypertrophy through
p38/GATA4 signaling pathway. Therefore, we predict that the gene silencing of GSN
and/or the downstream blocking of GSN along the p38 pathway could be applied to
ameliorate pathological cardiac hypertrophy in the future.

PMID: 24505034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Eur J Heart Fail. 2014 Apr;16(4):367-76.

Ageing is a risk factor in imatinib mesylate cardiotoxicity.

Maharsy W, Aries A, Mansour O, Komati H, Nemer M.

AIMS: Chemotherapy-induced heart failure is increasingly recognized as a major
clinical challenge. Cardiotoxicity of imatinib mesylate, a highly selective and
effective anticancer drug belonging to the new class of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, is being reported in patients, some progressing to congestive heart
failure. This represents an unanticipated challenge that could limit effective
drug use. Understanding the mechanisms and risk factors of imatinib mesylate
cardiotoxicity is crucial for prevention of cardiovascular complications in
cancer patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used genetically engineered mice and primary rat neonatal
cardiomyocytes to analyse the action of imatinib on the heart. We found that
treatment with imatinib (200 mg/kg/day for 5 weeks) leads to
mitochondrial-dependent myocyte loss and cardiac dysfunction, as confirmed by
electron microscopy, RNA analysis, and echocardiography. Imatinib cardiotoxicity 
was more severe in older mice, in part due to an age-dependent increase in
oxidative stress. Mechanistically, depletion of the transcription factor GATA4
resulting in decreased levels of its prosurvival targets Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL was an 
underlying cause of imatinib toxicity. Consistent with this, GATA4
haploinsufficient mice were more susceptible to imatinib, and myocyte-specific
up-regulation of GATA4 or Bcl-2 protected against drug-induced cardiotoxicity.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that imatinib action on the heart targets
cardiomyocytes and involves mitochondrial impairment and cell death that can be
further aggravated by oxidative stress. This in turn offers a possible
explanation for the current conflicting data regarding imatinib cardiotoxicity in
cancer patients and suggests that cardiac monitoring of older patients receiving 
imatinib therapy may be especially warranted.

© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Heart Failure

PMCID: PMC4238824
PMID: 24504921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):320-3.

A novel mutation of GATA4 (K319E) is responsible for familial atrial septal
defect and pulmonary valve stenosis.

Xiang R, Fan LL, Huang H, Cao BB, Li XP, Peng DQ, Xia K.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans, and the
etiology of most CHD remains to be elusive. Atrial septal defect (ASD) makes up
3040% of all adult CHDs and is thought to be genetically heterogeneous. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutations in transcription factors e.g. NKX2.5,
GATA4, and TBX5 contribute to congenital ASD. In this study, we investigate a
family of three generations with seven patients with ASD and pulmonary valve
stenosis (PS). A novel GATA4 mutation, c.955ANG (p.K319E), was identified and
co-segregated with the affected patients in this family. This mutation was
predicted to be deleterious by three different bioinformatics programs (The
polyphen2, SIFT and MutationTaster). Our finding expands the spectrum of GATA4
mutations and provides additional support that GATA4 plays important roles in
cardiac development.

PMID: 24498650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e86985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086985. eCollection
2014.

Maternal microchimerism: increased in the insulin positive compartment of type 1 
diabetes pancreas but not in infiltrating immune cells or replicating islet
cells.

Ye J(1), Vives-Pi M(2), Gillespie KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Metabolism Unit, School of Clinical Sciences, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. (2)Immunology Department, Institut de Recerca
Germans Trias i Pujol, Carretera Canyet s/n, Badalona, Spain.

Comment in
    Chimerism. 2014;5(2):21-3.

BACKGROUND: Maternal microchimeric cells (MMc) transfer across the placenta
during pregnancy. Increased levels of MMc have been observed in several
autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes but their role is unknown. It has
been suggested that MMc are 1) effector cells of the immune response, 2) targets 
of the autoimmune response or 3) play a role in tissue repair. The aim of this
study was to define the cellular phenotype of MMc in control (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>14) and type 1 
diabetes pancreas (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>8).
METHODS: Using sex chromosome-based fluorescence in-situ hybridization, MMc were 
identified in male pancreas and their phenotype determined by concomitant
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: In normal pancreas, MMc positive for endocrine, exocrine, duct and
acinar markers were identified suggesting that these cells are derived from
maternal progenitors. Increased frequencies of MMc were observed in type 1
diabetes pancreas (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03) with particular enrichment in the insulin positive
fraction (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01). MMc did not contribute to infiltrating immune cells or Ki67+
islet cell populations in type 1 diabetes.
CONCLUSION: These studies provide support for the hypothesis that MMc in human
pancreas are derived from pancreatic precursors. Increased frequencies of MMc
beta cells may contribute to the initiation of autoimmunity or to tissue repair
but do not infiltrate islets in type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3909047
PMID: 24498006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Stem Cells. 2014 May;32(5):1083-91. doi: 10.1002/stem.1655.

Adult stem cells in the small intestine are intrinsically programmed with their
location-specific function.

Middendorp S(1), Schneeberger K, Wiegerinck CL, Mokry M, Akkerman RD, van
Wijngaarden S, Clevers H, Nieuwenhuis EE.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Differentiation and specialization of epithelial cells in the small intestine are
regulated in two ways. First, there is differentiation along the crypt-villus
axis of the intestinal stem cells into absorptive enterocytes, Paneth, goblet,
tuft, enteroendocrine, or M cells, which is mainly regulated by WNT. Second,
there is specialization along the cephalocaudal axis with different absorptive
and digestive functions in duodenum, jejunum, and ileum that is controlled by
several transcription factors such as GATA4. However, so far it is unknown
whether location-specific functional properties are intrinsically programmed
within stem cells or if continuous signaling from mesenchymal cells is necessary 
to maintain the location-specific identity of the small intestine. Using the pure
epithelial organoid technique, we show that region-specific gene expression
profiles are conserved throughout long-term cultures of both mouse and human
intestinal stem cells and correlated with differential Gata4 expression.
Furthermore, the human organoid culture system demonstrates that Gata4-regulated 
gene expression is only allowed in absence of WNT signaling. These data show that
location-specific function is intrinsically programmed in the adult stem cells of
the small intestine and that their differentiation fate is independent of
location-specific extracellular signals. In light of the potential future
clinical application of small intestine-derived organoids, our data imply that it
is important to generate GATA4-positive and GATA4-negative cultures to regenerate
all essential functions of the small intestine.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24496776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Apr 16;4(4):579-93. doi: 10.1534/g3.114.010447.

Genome-wide analysis of functional and evolutionary features of tele-enhancers.

Huang D(1), Ovcharenko I.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

We investigated sequence features of enhancers separated from their target gene
by at least one intermediate gene/exon (named tele-enhancers in this study) and
enhancers residing inside their target gene locus. In this study, we used whole
genome enhancer maps and gene expression profiles to establish a large panel of
tele-enhancers. By contrasting tele-enhancers to proximal enhancers targeting
heart genes, we observed that heart tele-enhancers use unique regulatory
mechanisms based on the cardiac transcription factors SRF, TEAD, and NKX-2.5,
whereas proximal heart enhancers rely on GATA4 instead. A functional analysis
showed that tele-enhancers preferentially regulate house-keeping genes and genes 
with a metabolic role during heart development. In addition, tele-enhancers are
significantly more conserved than their proximal counterparts. Similar trends
have been observed for non-heart tissues and cell types, suggesting that our
findings represent general characteristics of tele-enhancers.

PMCID: PMC4059231
PMID: 24496725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Arch Med Sci. 2013 Dec 30;9(6):976-83. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2013.39788. Epub 2013
Dec 26.

Mutation spectrum of GATA4 associated with congenital atrial septal defects.

Yang YQ(1), Wang J(2), Liu XY(3), Chen XZ(4), Zhang W(4), Wang XZ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Medical College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital atrial septal defect (ASD) is the second commonest form 
of cardiac developmental anomaly, responsible for substantial morbidity and
mortality in affected individuals. Previous studies have implicated genetic
defects in the pathogenesis of ASD. However, ASD is largely a genetically
heterogeneous disease and the genetic determinants for ASD in the majority of
patients remain to be identified.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The entire coding region of GATA4, a gene encoding a
zinc-finger transcription factor essential for normal cardiac morphogenesis, was 
sequenced in 220 unrelated patients with ASD. The available relatives of the
patients harboring the identified mutations and 200 unrelated ethnicity-matched
control individuals were genotyped.
RESULTS: Four heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations, p.P36S, p.H190R, p.S262A,
and p.V399G, were identified in four unrelated patients with ASD, respectively.
These mutations were neither detected in 200 control individuals nor described in
the human SNP database. Alignment of multiple GATA4 protein sequences across
species indicated that the affected amino acids were highly conserved
evolutionarily. Genetic analysis of the available relatives of the mutation
carriers showed that in each family the mutation co-segregated with ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings expand the spectrum of mutations in GATA4 linked to ASD
and provide new insight into the molecular etiology associated with ASD,
suggesting the potential implications for the genetic diagnosis and gene-specific
therapy for this prevalent cardiovascular abnormality in humans.

PMCID: PMC3902718
PMID: 24482639  [PubMed]


311. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4687-95. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1614-9. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Genetic imbalances detected by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
in a cohort of patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma-the first step towards 
clinical personalized medicine.

Ribeiro IP(1), Marques F, Caramelo F, Ferrão J, Prazeres H, Julião MJ, Rifi W,
Savola S, de Melo JB, Baptista IP, Carreira IM.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, 3000-354, Coimbra, Portugal.

Oral tumors are a growing health problem worldwide; thus, it is mandatory to
establish genetic markers in order to improve diagnosis and early detection of
tumors, control relapses and, ultimately, delineate individualized therapies.
This study was the first to evaluate and discuss the clinical applicability of a 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probe panel directed to
head and neck cancer. Thirty primary oral squamous cell tumors were analyzed
using the P428 MLPA probe panel. We detected genetic imbalances in 26 patients
and observed a consistent pattern of distribution of genetic alterations in terms
of losses and gains for some chromosomes, particularly for chromosomes 3, 8, and 
11. Regarding the latter, some specific genes were highlighted due to frequent
losses of genetic material--RARB, FHIT, CSMD1, GATA4, and MTUS1--and others due
to gains--MCCC1, MYC, WISP1, PTK2, CCND1, FGF4, FADD, and CTTN. We also verified 
that the gains of MYC and WISP1 genes seem to suggest higher propensity of tumors
localized in the floor of the mouth. This study proved the value of this MLPA
probe panel for a first-tier analysis of oral tumors. The probemix was developed 
to include target regions that have been already shown to be of
diagnostic/prognostic relevance for oral tumors. Furthermore, this study
emphasized several of those specific genetic targets, suggesting its importance
to oral tumor development, to predict patients' outcomes, and also to guide the
development of novel molecular therapies.

PMID: 24477574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;142(2):217-26. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1183-4. Epub
2014 Jan 30.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to hepatocyte-like cells on a new
developed xeno-free extracellular matrix.

Farzaneh Z(1), Pakzad M, Vosough M, Pournasr B, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at the Cell Science
Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, PO 
Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) provide a new source for hepatocyte production
in translational medicine and cell replacement therapy. The reported hESC-derived
hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs) were commonly generated on Matrigel, a mouse cell
line-derived extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we performed the hepatic lineage
differentiation of hESCs following a stepwise application of growth factors on a 
newly developed serum- and xeno-free, simple and cost-benefit ECM, designated
"RoGel," which generated from a modified conditioned medium of human fibroblasts.
In comparison with Matrigel, the differentiated HLCs on both ECMs expressed
similar levels of hepatocyte-specific genes, secreted a-fetoprotein, and
metabolized ammonia, showed glycogen storage activity as well as low-density
lipoprotein and indocyanine green uptake. The transplantation of hESC-HLCs into
the carbon tetrachloride-injured liver demonstrated incorporation of the cells
into the host mouse liver and the expression of albumin. The results suggest that
the xeno-free and cost-benefit matrix may be applicable in bioartificial livers
and also may facilitating a clinical application of human pluripotent stem
cell-derived hepatocytes in the future.

PMID: 24477550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1415-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312993111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Cyclin D2 is a GATA4 cofactor in cardiogenesis.

Yamak A(1), Latinkic BV, Dali R, Temsah R, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and Differentiation, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, K1N 6N5.

The G1 cyclins play a pivotal role in regulation of cell differentiation and
proliferation. The mechanisms underlying their cell-specific roles are
incompletely understood. Here, we show that a G1 cyclin, cyclin D2 (CycD2),
enhances the activity of transcription factor GATA4, a key regulator of
cardiomyocyte growth and differentiation. GATA4 recruits CycD2 to its target
promoters, and their interaction results in synergistic activation of
GATA-dependent transcription. This effect is specific to CycD2 because CycD1 is
unable to potentiate activity of GATA4 and is CDK-independent. GATA4 physically
interacts with CycD2 through a discreet N-terminal activation domain that is
essential for the cardiogenic activity of GATA4. Human mutations in this domain
that are linked to congenital heart disease interfere with CycD2-GATA4 synergy.
Cardiogenesis assays in Xenopus embryos indicate that CycD2 enhances the
cardiogenic function of GATA4. Together, our data uncover a role for CycD2 as a
cardiogenic coactivator of GATA4 and suggest a paradigm for cell-specific effects
of cyclin Ds.

PMCID: PMC3910654
PMID: 24474767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 Jan 28;15:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-15-3.

Spdef deletion rescues the crypt cell proliferation defect in conditional Gata6
null mouse small intestine.

Aronson BE, Stapleton KA, Vissers LA, Stokhuijzen E, Bruijnzeel H, Krasinski
SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115, USA. stephen.krasinski@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: GATA transcription factors are essential for self-renewal of the
small intestinal epithelium. Gata4 is expressed in the proximal 85% of small
intestine while Gata6 is expressed throughout the length of small intestine.
Deletion of intestinal Gata4 and Gata6 results in an altered
proliferation/differentiation phenotype, and an up-regulation of SAM pointed
domain containing ETS transcription factor (Spdef), a transcription factor
recently shown to act as a tumor suppressor. The goal of this study is to
determine to what extent SPDEF mediates the downstream functions of GATA4/GATA6
in the small intestine. The hypothesis to be tested is that intestinal
GATA4/GATA6 functions through SPDEF by repressing Spdef gene expression. To test 
this hypothesis, we defined the functions most likely regulated by the
overlapping GATA6/SPDEF target gene set in mouse intestine, delineated the
relationship between GATA6 chromatin occupancy and Spdef gene regulation in
Caco-2 cells, and determined the extent to which prevention of Spdef
up-regulation by Spdef knockout rescues the GATA6 phenotype in conditional Gata6 
knockout mouse ileum.
RESULTS: Using publicly available profiling data, we found that 83% of
GATA6-regulated genes are also regulated by SPDEF, and that proliferation/cancer 
is the function most likely to be modulated by this overlapping gene set. In
human Caco-2 cells, GATA6 knockdown results in an up-regulation of Spdef gene
expression, modeling our mouse Gata6 knockout data. GATA6 occupies a genetic
locus located 40 kb upstream of the Spdef transcription start site, consistent
with direct regulation of Spdef gene expression by GATA6. Prevention of Spdef
up-regulation in conditional Gata6 knockout mouse ileum by the additional
deletion of Spdef rescued the crypt cell proliferation defect, but had little
effect on altered lineage differentiation or absorptive enterocytes gene
expression.
CONCLUSION: SPDEF is a key, immediate downstream effecter of the crypt cell
proliferation function of GATA4/GATA6 in the small intestine.

PMCID: PMC3917371
PMID: 24472151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Jan 24;5(1):14. doi: 10.1186/scrt403.

Extracellular matrix remodeling following myocardial infarction influences the
therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cells.

Sullivan KE, Quinn KP, Tang KM, Georgakoudi I, Black LD 3rd.

INTRODUCTION: Although stem cell therapy is a promising treatment for myocardial 
infarction, the minimal functional improvements observed clinically limit its
widespread application. A need exists to maximize the therapeutic potential of
these stem cells by first understanding what factors within the infarct
microenvironment affect their ability to regenerate the necrotic tissue. In this 
study, we assessed both differentiation capacity and paracrine signaling as a
function of extracellular matrix remodeling after myocardial infarction.
METHODS: Mechanical and compositional changes to the decellularized infarcted
myocardium were characterized to understand how the extracellular environment,
specifically, was altered as a function of time after coronary artery ligation in
Sprague-Dawley rats. These alterations were first modeled in a polyacrylamide gel
system to understand how the variables of composition and stiffness drive
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation towards a cardiac lineage. Finally, the
paracrine secretome was characterized as a function of matrix remodeling through 
gene and protein expression and conditioned media studies.
RESULTS: The decellularized infarct tissue revealed significant alterations in
both the mechanical and compositional properties of the ECM with remodeling
following infarction. This altered microenvironment dynamically regulates the
potential for early cardiac differentiation. Whereas Nkx2.5 expression is limited
in the presence of chronic remodeled matrix of increased stiffness, GATA4
expression is enhanced. In addition, the remodeled matrix promotes the expression
of several proangiogenic, prosurvival, antifibrotic, and immunomodulatory growth 
factors. In particular, an increase in HGF and SDF1 expression and secretion by
mesenchymal stem cells can rescue oxidatively stressed cardiomyocytes in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that decellularization of diseased tissue
allows for the exclusive analysis of the remodeled matrix and its ability to
influence significantly the cellular phenotype. Characterization of cell fate as 
a function of myocardial remodeling following infarction is critical in
developing the ideal strategy for cell implantation to maximize tissue
regeneration and to ultimately reduce the prevalence and severity of heart
failure.

PMCID: PMC4055039
PMID: 24460869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Mar;306(6):G474-90. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00119.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Role of GATA factors in development, differentiation, and homeostasis of the
small intestinal epithelium.

Aronson BE(1), Stapleton KA, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;

The small intestinal epithelium develops from embryonic endoderm into a highly
specialized layer of cells perfectly suited for the digestion and absorption of
nutrients. The development, differentiation, and regeneration of the small
intestinal epithelium require complex gene regulatory networks involving multiple
context-specific transcription factors. The evolutionarily conserved GATA family 
of transcription factors, well known for its role in hematopoiesis, is essential 
for the development of endoderm during embryogenesis and the renewal of the
differentiated epithelium in the mature gut. We review the role of GATA factors
in the evolution and development of endoderm and summarize our current
understanding of the function of GATA factors in the mature small intestine. We
offer perspective on the application of epigenetics approaches to define the
mechanisms underlying context-specific GATA gene regulation during intestinal
development.

PMCID: PMC3949026
PMID: 24436352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e85545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085545. eCollection 
2014.

FOXL2, GATA4, and SMAD3 co-operatively modulate gene expression, cell viability
and apoptosis in ovarian granulosa cell tumor cells.

Anttonen M(1), Pihlajoki M(2), Andersson N(2), Georges A(3), L'hôte D(3),
Vattulainen S(2), Färkkilä A(1), Unkila-Kallio L(4), Veitia RA(3), Heikinheimo
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland ; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. (3)Programme de Pathologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut Jacques
Monod, UMR 7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. (4)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland ; Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Aberrant ovarian granulosa cell proliferation and apoptosis may lead to granulosa
cell tumors (GCT), the pathogenesis of which involves transcription factors
GATA4, FOXL2, and SMAD3. FOXL2 gene harbors a point mutation (C134W) in a vast
majority of GCTs. GATA4 is abundantly expressed in GCTs and its expression
correlates with poor prognosis. The TGF-ß mediator SMAD3 promotes GCT cell
survival through NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and interacts with FOXL2. Here, we find that
the expression patterns of these factors overlap in the normal human ovary and 90
GCTs, and positively correlate with each other and with their mutual target gene 
CCND2, which is a key factor for granulosa cell proliferation. We have explored
the molecular interactions of FOXL2, GATA4, and SMAD3 and their roles in the
regulation of CCND2 using co-immunoprecipitation, promoter transactivation, and
cell viability assays in human GCT cells. We found that not only SMAD3, but also 
GATA4 physically interact with both wild type and C134W-mutated FOXL2. GATA4 and 
SMAD3 synergistically induce a 8-fold increase in CCND2 promoter transactivation,
which is 50% reduced by both FOXL2 types. We confirmed that wild type FOXL2
significantly decreases cell viability. Interestingly, GATA4 and SMAD3 caused a
marked reduction of GCT cell apoptosis induced by wild type FOXL2. Thus, the
effects of GATA4 and SMAD3 on both cell viability and apoptosis are distinct from
those of wild type FOXL2; a perturbation of this balance due to the oncogenic
FOXL2 mutation is likely to contribute to GCT pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3887065
PMID: 24416423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1004072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004072. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

GATA6 is a crucial regulator of Shh in the limb bud.

Kozhemyakina E(1), Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

In the limb bud, patterning along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis is controlled
by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a signaling molecule secreted by the "Zone of Polarizing
Activity", an organizer tissue located in the posterior margin of the limb bud.
We have found that the transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6, which are key
regulators of cell identity, are expressed in an anterior to posterior gradient
in the early limb bud, raising the possibility that GATA transcription factors
may play an additional role in patterning this tissue. While both GATA4 and GATA6
are expressed in an A-P gradient in the forelimb buds, the hindlimb buds
principally express GATA6 in an A-P gradient. Thus, to specifically examine the
role of GATA6 in limb patterning we generated Prx1-Cre; GATA6(fl/fl) mice, which 
conditionally delete GATA6 from their developing limb buds. We found that these
animals display ectopic expression of both Shh and its transcriptional targets
specifically in the anterior mesenchyme of the hindlimb buds. Loss of GATA6 in
the developing limbs results in the formation of preaxial polydactyly in the
hindlimbs. Conversely, forced expression of GATA6 throughout the limb bud
represses expression of Shh and results in hypomorphic limbs. We have found that 
GATA6 can bind to chromatin (isolated from limb buds) encoding either Shh or Gli1
regulatory elements that drive expression of these genes in this tissue, and
demonstrated that GATA6 works synergistically with FOG co-factors to repress
expression of luciferase reporters driven by these sequences. Most significantly,
we have found that conditional loss of Shh in limb buds lacking GATA6 prevents
development of hindlimb polydactyly in these compound mutant embryos, indicating 
that GATA6 expression in the anterior region of the limb bud blocks hindlimb
polydactyly by repressing ectopic expression of Shh.

PMCID: PMC3886911
PMID: 24415953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2358-70. doi: 10.1002/hep.27005. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

GATA4 loss in the septum transversum mesenchyme promotes liver fibrosis in mice.

Delgado I(1), Carrasco M, Cano E, Carmona R, García-Carbonero R, Marín-Gómez LM, 
Soria B, Martín F, Cano DA, Muñoz-Chápuli R, Rojas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER),
Sevilla, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y
Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 controls specification and
differentiation of multiple cell types during embryonic development. In mouse
embryonic liver, Gata4 is expressed in the endodermal hepatic bud and in the
adjacent mesenchyme of the septum transversum. Previous studies have shown that
Gata4 inactivation impairs liver formation. However, whether these defects are
caused by loss of Gata4 in the hepatic endoderm or in the septum transversum
mesenchyme remains to be determined. In this study, we have investigated the role
of mesenchymal GATA4 activity in liver formation. We have conditionally
inactivated Gata4 in the septum transversum mesenchyme and its derivatives by
using Cre/loxP technology. We have generated a mouse transgenic Cre line, in
which expression of Cre recombinase is controlled by a previously identified
distal Gata4 enhancer. Conditional inactivation of Gata4 in hepatic mesenchymal
cells led to embryonic lethality around mouse embryonic stage 13.5, likely as a
consequence of fetal anemia. Gata4 knockout fetal livers exhibited reduced size, 
advanced fibrosis, accumulation of extracellular matrix components and hepatic
stellate cell (HSC) activation. Haploinsufficiency of Gata4 accelerated CCl4
-induced liver fibrosis in adult mice. Moreover, Gata4 expression was
dramatically reduced in advanced hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis in
humans.CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that mesenchymal GATA4 activity
regulates HSC activation and inhibits the liver fibrogenic process.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24415412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Life Sci. 2013 Dec 5;93(24):913-6.

The role of autophagy in doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity.

Dirks-Naylor AJ.

Doxorubicin (Dox) is an effective chemotherapeutic agent, however, its use is
limited by cardiotoxicity. The mechanisms causing cardiotoxicity have not been
clearly elucidated, but known to involve, at least in part, oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis. More recently, it has been suggested
that dysregulation of autophagy may also play an important role in Dox-induced
cardiotoxicity. Autophagy has dual functions. Under physiological conditions,
autophagy is essential for optimal cellular function and survival by ridding the 
cell of damaged or unwanted proteins and organelles. Under pathological
conditions, autophagy may be stimulated in order to protect the cell from stress 
stimuli or, alternatively, to contribute to cell death. Thus, appropriate
regulation of autophagy can be a matter of life or death. The role of autophagy
in Dox-induced cardiotoxicity has recently been explored, however, conflicting
reports on the effects of Dox on autophagy and its role in cardiotoxicity exist. 
Most, but not all, of the studies conclude that Dox upregulates cardiac autophagy
and contributes to the pathogenesis of Dox-induced toxicity. Dox may induce
autophagy by suppressing the expression of GATA4 and/or S6K1, which may directly 
or indirectly regulate expression of essential autophagy genes such as Atg12,
Atg5, Beclin1 and Bcl-2. Interestingly, the Dox-induced autophagic response may
be species specific as Dox treatment has been shown to stimulate autophagy in rat
models, but suppress autophagy in mouse models. Additional studies will elucidate
this possibility.

PMID: 24404586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e84591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084591.
eCollection 2013.

Parsing the roles of the transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the adult
cardiac hypertrophic response.

van Berlo JH(1), Aronow BJ(1), Molkentin JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America ; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of
America.

The transcriptional code that programs cardiac hypertrophy involves the zinc
finger-containing DNA binding factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, both of which are
required to mount a hypertrophic response of the adult heart. Here we performed
conditional gene deletion of Gata4 or Gata6 in the mouse heart in conjunction
with reciprocal gene replacement using a transgene encoding either GATA-4 or
GATA-6 in the heart as a means of parsing dosage effects of GATA-4 and GATA-6
versus unique functional roles. We determined that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play a
redundant and dosage-sensitive role in programming the hypertrophic growth
response of the heart following pressure overload stimulation. However,
non-redundant functions were identified in allowing the heart to compensate and
resist heart failure after pressure overload stimulation, as neither Gata4 nor
Gata6 deletion was fully rescued by expression of the reciprocal transgene. For
example, only Gata4 heart-specific deletion blocked the neoangiogenic response to
pressure overload stimulation. Gene expression profiling from hearts of these
gene-deleted mice showed both overlapping and unique transcriptional codes, which
is presented. These results indicate that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play a
dosage-dependent and redundant role in programming cardiac hypertrophy, but that 
each has a more complex role in maintaining cardiac homeostasis and resistance to
heart failure following injury that cannot be compensated by the other.

PMCID: PMC3877334
PMID: 24391969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Oral Oncol. 2014 Mar;50(3):155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.12.006. Epub 
2013 Dec 31.

Stem cell profiling in head and neck cancer reveals an Oct-4 expressing
subpopulation with properties of chemoresistance.

Reers S(1), Pfannerstill AC(1), Maushagen R(1), Pries R(1), Wollenberg B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, 
Germany. (2)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Schleswig-Holstein,
Lübeck, Germany. Electronic address: Barbara.Wollenberg@uk-sh.de.

OBJECTIVES: In the past decade cancer, including head and neck squamous cell
cancer (HNSCC), is increasingly being regarded as a stem cell associated disease 
which arises from cells with the property of stemness. According to the cancer
stem cell (CSC) theory, only a specific subpopulation of cancer cells has the
ability to initiate and perpetuate cancer growth, especially under treatment. In 
this article we describe a subpopulation of cells within HNSCC that expresses the
stemness factor Oct-4, which leads to apoptotic resistance after exposure to
chemotherapeutic agents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Permanent cell lines and HNSCC tissue were analyzed for
expression of stem cell markers using flow cytometric, immunohistochemical
approaches and an antibody based protein array. Chemotherapeutic agent-induced
growth inhibition, also known as "enrichment", was determined by the colorimetric
cell proliferation assay (MTT-based) and putative stem cell markers were
investigated by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Various potential CSC markers were identified in heterogenic expression 
profiles in permanent cell lines and solid tumors. Our data suggest the Oct-4A
isoform as a marker of stemness in HNSCC and the enrichment of cancer stem-like
cells by various chemotherapeutic agents was associated with a significantly
higher expression of Oct-4.
CONCLUSION: This data suggests that many potential CSC markers are expressed on
different expression levels in HNSCC. Among these markers Oct-4(A) plays a
pivotal role in the detection of cancer cells with enhanced chemoresistance and
provide evidence for the existence of cancer stem-like cells in HNSCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24387977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Turk J Haematol. 2013 Jun;30(2):115-21. doi: 10.4274/Tjh.2012.0161. Epub 2013 Jun
5.

Cardiogenic and myogenic gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells after
5-azacytidine treatment.

Supokawej A(1), Kheolamai P(2), Nartprayut K(1), U-Pratya Y(3), Manochantr S(2), 
Chayosumrit M(4), Issaragrisil S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol University, Faculty of Medical Technology, Department of Clinical
Microscopy, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Thammasat University, Faculty of Medicine,
Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pre-clinical Science, Pathumthani,
Thailand. (3)Mahidol University, Faculty of Medicine, Division of Hematology,
Department of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. (4)Mahidol
University, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Siriraj Center of Excellence
for Stem Cell Research, Bangkok, Thailand. (5)Mahidol University, Faculty of
Medicine, Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital,
Bangkok, Thailand ; Mahidol University, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital,
Siriraj Center of Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Bangkok, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: 5-Azacytidine is a hypomethylating agent that is used for the
treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome. This histone modifier is widely employed
and plays a nonspecific role in influencing the differentiation capability of
stem cells. The ability of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells to differentiate
into cardiomyocyte- and myocyte-like cells after exposure to 3 different doses of
5-azacytidine has been evaluated and compared. The aim of the study was to
optimize the effective dose of 5-azacytidine for promoting the cardiomyocyte and 
myocyte differentiation capabilities of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human bone marrow aspirations were collected from healthy 
donors. MSCs were used for the study of mesodermal differentiation. MSCs were
cultured to promote osteoblast differentiation and adipocyte differentiation. The
evaluation of osteogenic or adipogenic properties was then performed through
immunocytochemical staining. BMMSCs were trypsinized into single-cell suspensions
and then prepared for flow cytometric analysis. The MSCs were treated with 5, 10,
or 15 µM 5-azacytidine for 24 h and then cultured for 3 weeks. Total RNA was
extracted from untreated and 5-azacytidine-treated cells. Troponin T and GATA4
antibodies were used as cardiogenic markers, whereas myogenin and MyoD antibodies
were used as myocyte markers.
RESULTS: The morphology and growth rate of MSCs that were treated with any of the
3 doses of 5-azacytidine were similar to the morphology and growth rate of
control MSCs. An immunofluorescence analysis examining the expression of the
cardiac-specific markers GATA4 and troponin T and the skeletal muscle-specific
markers MyoD and myogenin revealed that cells treated with 15 µM 5-azacytidine
were strongly positive for these markers. Real-time RT-PCR results were examined;
these amplifications indicated that there were higher expression levels of
cardiac- and skeletal muscle-specific mRNAs in MSCs treated with 15 µm
5-azacytidine than in MSCs that had either been treated with lower doses of
5-azacytidine or left untreated.
CONCLUSION: MSCs treated with 5-azacytidine demonstrated the capacity to
differentiate into both cardiomyocytes and skeletal myocytes, and 15 µM
5-azacytidine could be the optimal dose of this drug. Other promoting factors
should be examined to investigate the possibility of promoting the
differentiation of MSCs into specific cell types.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3878477
PMID: 24385773  [PubMed]


324. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):204-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.033. Epub 2013
Dec 28.

Epicardial GATA factors regulate early coronary vascular plexus formation.

Kolander KD(1), Holtz ML(1), Cossette SM(1), Duncan SA(2), Misra RP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States. (2)Department of Cell Biology,
Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Medical
College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United
States. Electronic address: rmisra@mcw.edu.

During early development, GATA factors have been shown to be important for key
events of coronary vasculogenesis, including formation of the epicardium.
Myocardial GATA factors are required for coronary vascular (CV) formation;
however, the role of epicardial localized GATAs in this process has not been
addressed. The current study was conducted to investigate the molecular
mechanisms by which the epicardium controls coronary vasculogenesis, focusing on 
the role of epicardial GATAs in establishing the endothelial plexus during early 
coronary vasculogenesis. To address the role of epicardial GATAs, we ablated
GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors specifically from the mouse epicardium and 
found that the number of endothelial cells in the sub-epicardium was drastically 
reduced, and concomitant coronary vascular plexus formation was significantly
compromised. Here we present evidence for a novel role for epicardial GATA
factors in controlling plexus formation by recruiting endothelial cells to the
sub-epicardium.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3962664
PMID: 24380800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Feb;16(1):65-76. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0057. Epub 2013 Dec 
31.

Efficient generation of hepatic cells from multipotent adult mouse germ-line stem
cells using an OP9 co-culture system.

Streckfuss-Bömeke K(1), Jende J, Cheng IF, Hasenfuss G, Guan K.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, Georg-August-University of
Göttingen , 37075, Göttingen, Germany .

On the basis of their self-renewal capacity and their ability to differentiate
into derivatives of all three germ layers, germ line-derived multipotent adult
stem cells (maGSCs) from mouse testis might serve as one of preferable sources
for pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine. In our study, we aimed for
an efficient hepatic differentiation protocol that is applicable for both maGSCs 
and embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We attempted to accomplish this goal by using a 
new established co-culture system with OP9 stroma cells for direct
differentiation of maGSCs and ESCs into hepatic cells. We found that the hepatic 
differentiation of maGSCs was induced by the OP9 co-culture system in comparison 
to the gelatin culture. Furthermore, we showed that the combination of OP9
co-culture with activin A resulted in the increased expression of endodermal and 
early hepatic markers Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2, Hnf4, Afp, and Ttr compared to
differentiated cells on gelatin or on OP9 alone. Moreover, the hepatic
progenitors were capable of differentiating further into mature hepatic cells,
demonstrated by the expression of liver-specific markers Aat, Alb, Tdo2, Krt18,
Krt8, Krt19, Cps1, Sek, Cyp7a1, Otc, and Pah. A high percentage of maGSC-derived 
hepatic progenitors (51% AFP- and 61% DLK1-positive) and mature hepatic-like
cells (26% ALB-positive) were achieved using this OP9 co-culture system. These
generated hepatic cells successfully demonstrated in vitro functions associated
with mature hepatocytes, including albumin and urea secretion, glycogen storage, 
and uptake of low-density lipoprotein. The established co-culture system for
maGSCs into functional hepatic cells might serve as a suitable model to delineate
the differentiation process for the generation of high numbers of mature
hepatocytes in humans without genetic manipulations and make germ line-derived
stem cells a potential autologous and alternative cell source for hepatic
transplants in metabolic liver disorders.

PMCID: PMC3920844
PMID: 24380658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(5):909-20. doi: 10.3727/096368913X676907. Epub 2013 Dec 
30.

Bone Morphogenetic Protein 9 and 13 Induce C3H10T1/2 Cell Differentiation to
Cardiomyocyte-Like Cells In Vitro.

Chen L(1), Wei H, Tan J, Chen H, Liu Z, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

The present study aimed to evaluate the effect of bone morphogenetic protein 9
(BMP9) and BMP13 on cardiac differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells in vitro and to
characterize the differentiated cells on their ultrastructure and transmembrane
electrophysiological features. C3H10T1/2 cells were transfected with the vectors 
for BMP9 or BMP13 and differentiated into cardiomyocytes in vitro for up to 28
days. The expression of cardiac-specific genes Gata4 and Mef2c and proteins
troponin T (cTnT) and connexin 43 (Cx43) was significantly increased in the cells
transfected with BMP9 or BMP13 after differentiation over the controls as
evaluated using quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunofluorescence
staining. Transmission electron microscopy and Masson trichrome staining showed
that the specific myocardial leap dish and myofilament-like structure were
present in the cells overexpressing BMP9 or BMP13, not in the control cells.
Whole-cell patch-clamping study demonstrated the presence of delayed rectifier
potassium current, inward rectifier potassium current, and T-type calcium current
in the cells overexpressing BMP9 or BMP13. Sodium current was detected in a small
number of cells overexpressing BMP9, not in the BMP13-transfected cells or the
control cells. The expression of Mef2c gene and Cx43 and cTnT proteins was also
significantly higher in the cells overexpressing BMP9 than those overexpressing
BMP13. Our data indicate that BMP9 and BMP13 (BMP9 might be more effective)
promoted the differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells
with cellular ultrastructures and ion channel currents similar to mature
cardiomyocytes in vitro.

PMID: 24380493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Theriogenology. 2014 Mar 1;81(4):545-55. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Effect of vitamin C on growth of caprine spermatogonial stem cells in vitro.

Wang J(1), Cao H(1), Xue X(1), Fan C(1), Fang F(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhang 
X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University,
Hefei, Anhui, China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui
Agricultural University, Hefei, Anhui, China; Anhui Provincial Laboratory of
Local Livestock and Poultry Genetic Resource Conservation and Bio-Breeding,
Hefei, Anhui, China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui
Agricultural University, Hefei, Anhui, China; Anhui Provincial Laboratory of
Local Livestock and Poultry Genetic Resource Conservation and Bio-Breeding,
Hefei, Anhui, China; Engineering Research Center of Reproduction and breeding in 
Sheep of Anhui Province, Hefei, Anhui, China. Electronic address: wjhxxh@163.com.

The genetic manipulation of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) can be used for the 
production of transgenic animals in a wide range of species. However, this
technology is limited by the absence of an ideal culture system in which SSCs can
be maintained and proliferated, especially in domestic animals like the goat. The
aim of this study therefore was to investigate whether the addition of vitamin C 
(Vc) in cell culture influences the growth of caprine SSCs. Various
concentrations of Vc (0, 5, 10, 25, 40, and 50 µg/mL(-1)) were added to SSC
culture media, and their effect on morphology and alkaline phosphatase activity
was studied. The number of caprine SSC colonies and area covered by them were
measured at 10 days of culture. The expression of various germ cell and somatic
cell markers such as VASA, integrins, Oct-4, GATA-4, a-SMA, vimentin, and Thy-1
was studied to identify the proliferated cells using immunostaining analyses.
Further, the intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) level was measured at
the 3rd, 6th, and 9th day after culture, and expression of Bax, Bcl-2, and P53,
factors involved in the regulation of apoptosis, were analyzed on the 7th day
after culture using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The results showed that the
SSCs formed compact colonies and had unclear borders in the different
Vc-supplemented groups at 10 days, and there were no major morphologic
differences between the groups. The number and area of colonies were both the
highest in the 40 µg/mL(-1) Vc group. Differential expression of markers for germ
cells, undifferentiated spermatogonia, and testis somatic cells was observed.
Cultured germ cell clumps were found to have alkaline phosphatase activity
regardless of the Vc dose. The number of Thy-1- and Oct-4-positive cells was the 
most in the 40 µg/mL(-1) Vc group. Moreover, the level of ROS was dependent on
the Vc dose and culture time. The Vc dose 40 µg/mL(-1) was found to be optimum
with regard to decreasing ROS generation, and increasing the expression of the
antiapoptotic gene Bcl-2 and decreasing the expression of the proapoptotic genes 
Bax and P53. In conclusion, the addition of 40 µg/mL(-1) Vc can maintain a
certain physiological level of ROS, trigger the expression of the antiapoptosis
gene Bcl-2, suppress the proapoptotic gene P53 and Bax pathway, and further
promote the proliferation of caprine SSCs in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e84180. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084180.
eCollection 2013.

Aberrant methylation of gene associated CpG sites occurs in borderline
personality disorder.

Teschler S(1), Bartkuhn M(1), Künzel N(1), Schmidt C(1), Kiehl S(1), Dammann
G(2), Dammann R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Psychiatric Hospital, Spital Thurgau AG, Münsterlingen, Switzerland ;
Department of Psychiatry, Basel University Medical School, Basel, Switzerland.

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a complex psychiatric disease with an
increased impact in the last years. While the diagnosis and therapy are well
established, little is known on the pathogenesis of borderline personality
disorder. Previously, a significant increase in DNA methylation of relevant
neuropsychiatric genes in BPD patients has been reported. In our study we
performed genome wide methylation analysis and revealed specific CpG sites that
exhibited increased methylation in 24 female BPD patients compared to 11 female
healthy controls. Bead chip technology and quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing 
showed a significantly increased methylation at CpG sites of APBA2 (1.1 fold) and
APBA3 (1.1 fold), KCNQ1 (1.5 fold), MCF2 (1.1 fold) and NINJ2 (1.2 fold) in BPD
patients. For the CpG sites of GATA4 and HLCS an increase in DNA methylation was 
observed, but was only significant in the bead chip assay. Moreover genome wide
methylation levels of blood samples of BPD patients and control samples are
similar. In summary, our results show a significant 1.26 fold average increase in
methylation at the analyzed gene associated CpG sites in the blood of BPD
patients compared to controls samples (p<0.001). This data may provide new
insights into epigenetic mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of BPD.

PMCID: PMC3868545
PMID: 24367640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e83723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083723.
eCollection 2013.

Function of GATA factors in the adult mouse liver.

Zheng R(1), Rebolledo-Jaramillo B(2), Zong Y(3), Wang L(4), Russo P(5), Hancock
W(4), Stanger BZ(6), Hardison RC(7), Blobel GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America ; Division of Hematology, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Abramson Family
Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Division
of Transplant Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and
Biesecker Center for Pediatric Liver Disease, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (5)Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Abramson
Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (7)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

GATA transcription factors and their Friend of Gata (FOG) cofactors control the
development of diverse tissues. GATA4 and GATA6 are essential for the expansion
of the embryonic liver bud, but their expression patterns and functions in the
adult liver are unclear. We characterized the expression of GATA and FOG factors 
in whole mouse liver and purified hepatocytes. GATA4, GATA6, and FOG1 are the
most prominently expressed family members in whole liver and hepatocytes. GATA4
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq)
identified 4409 occupied sites, associated with genes enriched in ontologies
related to liver function, including lipid and glucose metabolism. However,
hepatocyte-specific excision of Gata4 had little impact on gross liver
architecture and function, even under conditions of regenerative stress, and,
despite the large number of GATA4 occupied genes, resulted in relatively few
changes in gene expression. To address possible redundancy between GATA4 and
GATA6, both factors were conditionally excised. Surprisingly, combined Gata4,6
loss did not exacerbate the phenotype resulting from Gata4 loss alone. This
points to the presence of an unusually robust transcriptional network in adult
hepatocytes that ensures the maintenance of liver function.

PMCID: PMC3867416
PMID: 24367609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Mar;33(3):654-60. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1600. Epub 2013 Dec 
23.

A novel GATA4 loss-of-function mutation responsible for familial dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Zhao L(1), Xu JH(2), Xu WJ(2), Yu H(2), Wang Q(3), Zheng HZ(3), Jiang WF(3),
Jiang JF(2), Yang YQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R. China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is the most common form of primary myocardial
disorder and is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Increasing
evidence suggests that genetic risk factors play an important role in the
pathogenesis of idiopathic DCM. However, DCM is a genetically heterogeneous
disease, and the genetic defects responsible for DCM in an overwhelming majority 
of cases remain to be identified. In the present study, the entire coding region 
and the splice junction sites of the GATA4 gene, which encodes a cardiac
transcription factor essential for cardiogenesis, were sequenced in 150 unrelated
patients with idiopathic DCM. The available relatives of the index patient
harboring an identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy
individuals used as controls were genotyped. The functional characteristics of
the mutant GATA4 were delineated in contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a
luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA4
mutation, p.V291L, was identified in a family with DCM inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, which co-segregated with DCM in the family with complete
penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in 400 control chromosomes, and the 
altered amino acid was completely conserved evolutionarily among species.
Functional analysis revealed that the GATA4 mutant was associated with
significantly diminished transcriptional activity. The findings expand the
mutational spectrum of GATA4 linked to DCM and provide novel insight into the
molecular etiology involved in DCM, suggesting the potential implications in the 
early prophylaxis and allele-specific treatment for this common type of
cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 24366163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Mar;12(2):338-53. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.009. Epub 2013
Dec 3.

miR-200c and GATA binding protein 4 regulate human embryonic stem cell renewal
and differentiation.

Huang HN(1), Chen SY(2), Hwang SM(3), Yu CC(2), Su MW(4), Mai W(4), Wang HW(5),
Cheng WC(6), Schuyler SC(7), Ma N(8), Lu FL(9), Lu J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Bioresource Collection and Research Center, Food Industry Research and
Development Institute, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (4)National RNAi Platform/National Core
Facility Program for Biotechnology, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Molecular
Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)VGH-YM Genomic Research Center,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical
Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Cancer Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department
of Education and Research, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)VGH-YM
Genomic Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division 
of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of Biomedical Science, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan County, Taiwan. (8)Institute of Systems 
Biology and Bioinformatics, National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University Medical College, Taipei, Taiwan. (10)Genomics Research Center,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; National RNAi Platform/National
Core Facility Program for Biotechnology, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Genomics and System Biology Program, College of Life Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: jeanlu@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are functionally unique for their self-renewal
ability and pluripotency, but the molecular mechanisms giving rise to these
properties are not fully understood. hESCs can differentiate into embryoid bodies
(EBs) containing ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. In the miR-200 family,
miR-200c was especially enriched in undifferentiated hESCs and significantly
downregulated in EBs. The knockdown of the miR-200c in hESCs downregulated Nanog 
expression, upregulated GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4) expression, and induced
hESC apoptosis. The knockdown of GATA4 rescued hESC apoptosis induced by
downregulation of miR-200c. miR-200c directly targeted the 3'-untranslated region
of GATA4. Interestingly, the downregulation of GATA4 significantly inhibited EB
formation in hESCs. Overexpression of miR-200c inhibited EB formation and
repressed the expression of ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm markers, which could
partially be rescued by ectopic expression of GATA4. Fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) and activin A/nodal can sustain hESC renewal in the absence of feeder
layer. Inhibition of transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß[Symbol: see
text])/activin A/nodal signaling by SB431542 treatment downregulated the
expression of miR-200c. Overexpression of miR-200c partially rescued the
expression of Nanog/phospho-Smad2 that was downregulated by SB431542 treatment.
Our observations have uncovered novel functions of miR-200c and GATA4 in
regulating hESC renewal and differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24365599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Regul Pept. 2014 Jan 10;188:52-9. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2013.12.005. Epub 2013
Dec 21.

Unexpected effects of voluntary exercise training on natriuretic peptide and
receptor mRNA expression in the ob/ob mouse heart.

Broderick TL(1), Wang D(2), Jankowski M(2), Gutkowska J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Diabetes and Exercise Metabolism, Midwestern University,
Glendale, AZ, USA. Electronic address: tbrode@midwestern.edu. (2)Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Biochemistry, Centre Hospitalier de L'Université de
Montréal-Hôtel-Dieu Research Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Regular exercise is generally recommended for the treatment of obesity and type 2
diabetes. Exercise reduces body weight, improves glycemic control and
cardiovascular (CV) function. This study was designed to determine the impact of 
voluntary wheel running on the cardiac oxytocin (OT)-natriuretic peptide (NP)
system and plasma CV risk factors in the ob/ob mouse, a model of insulin
resistance coupled with severe obesity. Five-week-old male ob/ob mice and
non-obese heterozygote control littermates were assigned to either a sedentary or
running group. Voluntary running was performed using a wheel system for a period 
of 8 weeks. Compared to non-obese mice, daily running activity expressed in
kilometers, was significantly lower in ob/ob mice. In these mice, voluntary
running improved body weight, but exacerbated CV markers, including plasma
glucose and triglyceride levels. OT receptor gene expression was decreased in
hearts of ob/ob mice compared to non-obese mice, and no improvement in the
expression of this receptor was observed after voluntary running. Hearts from
ob/ob mice also expressed lower BNP mRNA, whereas no differences in A- and C-type
NP were observed between non-obese and ob/ob mice. After voluntary running, a
downregulation in the expression of all three NPs coupled with increased
apoptosis was observed in ob/ob hearts. Our results show that voluntary exercise 
running activity was decreased in the ob/ob mouse. Surprisingly, this was
associated with a worsening of common CV plasma markers, reduced expression of
peptides linked to the cardioprotective OT-NP system, and increased expression of
cardiac apoptotic markers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24365091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. BMB Rep. 2014 Aug;47(8):463-8.

GATA4 negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation by downregulation of Runx2.

Song I(1), Kim K(2), Kim JH(3), Lee YK(4), Jung HJ(4), Byun HO(4), Yoon G(4), Kim
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Ajou
University, Suwon 443-721, Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Chonnam National
University Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Korea. (3)Department of Pharmacology;
Center for Creative Biomedical Scientists at Chonnam National University, Chonnam
National University Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Korea. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine; Department of Biomedical
Sciences, The Graduate School, Ajou University, Suwon 443-721, Korea.

Osteoblasts are specialized mesenchymal cells that are responsible for bone
formation. In this study, we examine the role of GATA4 in osteoblast
differentiation. GATA4 was abundantly expressed in preosteoblast cells and
gradually down-regulated during osteoblast differentiation. Overexpression of
GATA4 in osteoblastic cells inhibited alkaline phosphatase activity and nodule
formation in osteogenic conditioned cell culture system. In addition,
overexpression of GATA4 attenuated expression of osteogenic marker genes,
including Runx2, alkaline phosphatase, bone sialoprotein, and osteocalcin, all of
which are important for osteoblast differentiation and function. Overexpression
of GATA4 attenuated Runx2 promoter activity, whereas silencing of GATA4 increased
Runx2 induction. We found that GATA4 interacted with Dlx5 and subsequently
decreased Dlx5 binding activity to Runx2 promoter region. Our data suggest that
GATA4 acts as a negative regulator in osteoblast differentiation by
downregulation of Runx2.

PMCID: PMC4206719
PMID: 24355298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Tissue Eng Part A. 2014 Apr;20(7-8):1285-94. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2013.0149. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

Fucoidan promotes early step of cardiac differentiation from human embryonic stem
cells and long-term maintenance of beating areas.

Hamidi S(1), Letourneur D, Aid-Launais R, Di Stefano A, Vainchenker W, Norol F,
Le Visage C.

Author information: 
(1)1 INSERM, UMR 1009, Institut Gustave Roussy , Villejuif, France .

Somatic stem cells require specific niches and three-dimensional scaffolds
provide ways to mimic this microenvironment. Here, we studied a scaffold based on
Fucoidan, a sulfated polysaccharide known to influence morphogen gradients during
embryonic development, to support human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
differentiation toward the cardiac lineage. A macroporous (pore 200 µm) Fucoidan 
scaffold was selected to support hESCs attachment and proliferation. Using a
protocol based on the cardiogenic morphogen bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) and
transforming growth factor (TGFß) followed by tumor necrosis factor (TNFa), an
effector of cardiopoietic priming, we examined the cardiac differentiation in the
scaffold compared to culture dishes and embryoid bodies (EBs). At day 8, Fucoidan
scaffolds supported a significantly higher expression of the 3 genes encoding for
transcription factors marking the early step of embryonic cardiac differentiation
NKX2.5 (p<0.05), MEF2C (p<0.01), and GATA4 (p<0.01), confirmed by flow cytometry 
analysis for MEF2C and NKX2.5. The ability of Fucoidan scaffolds to locally
concentrate and slowly release TGFß and TNFa was confirmed by Luminex technology.
We also found that Fucoidan scaffolds supported the late stage of embryonic
cardiac differentiation marked by a significantly higher atrial natriuretic
factor (ANF) expression (p<0.001), although only rare beating areas were
observed. We postulated that absence of mechanical stress in the soft hydrogel
impaired sarcomere formation, as confirmed by molecular analysis of the cardiac
muscle myosin MYH6 and immunohistological staining of sarcomeric a-actinin.
Nevertheless, Fucoidan scaffolds contributed to the development of thin filaments
connecting beating areas through promotion of smooth muscle cells, thus enabling 
maintenance of beating areas for up to 6 months. In conclusion, Fucoidan
scaffolds appear as a very promising biomaterial to control cardiac
differentiation from hESCs that could be further combined with mechanical stress 
to promote sarcomere formation at terminal stages of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3993066
PMID: 24354596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biol Reprod. 2014 Feb 6;90(2):25. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113290. Print 2014 
Feb.

GATA4 autoregulates its own expression in mouse gonadal cells via its distal 1b
promoter.

Mazaud-Guittot S(1), Prud'homme B, Bouchard MF, Bergeron F, Daems C, Tevosian SG,
Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Mother and Child Health, Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec
and Centre de recherche en biologie de la reproduction (CRBR), Quebec City,
Quebec, Canada.

Transcription factor GATA4 is required for the development and function of the
mammalian gonads. We first reported that the GATA4 gene in both human and rodents
is expressed as two major alternative transcripts that differ solely in their
first untranslated exon (exon 1a vs. exon 1b). We had also showed by quantitative
PCR that in mouse tissues, both Gata4 exon 1a- and 1b-containing transcripts are 
present in all sites that are normally positive for GATA4 protein. In adult
tissues, exon 1a-containing transcripts generally predominate. A notable
exception, however, is the testis where the Gata4 exon 1a and 1b transcripts
exhibit a similar level of expression. We now confirm by in situ hybridization
analysis that each transcript is also strongly expressed during gonad
differentiation in both sexes in the rat. To gain further insights into how Gata4
gene expression is controlled, we characterized the mouse Gata4 promoter sequence
located upstream of exon 1b. In vitro studies revealed that the Gata4 1b promoter
is less active than the 1a promoter in several gonadal cell lines tested. Whereas
we have previously shown that endogenous Gata4 transcription driven by the 1a
promoter is dependent on a proximally located Ebox motif, we now show using
complementary in vitro and in vivo approaches that Gata4 promoter 1b-directed
expression is regulated by GATA4 itself. Thus, Gata4 transcription in the gonads 
and other tissues is ensured by distinct promoters that are regulated
differentially and independently.

PMID: 24352556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Hum Genomics. 2013 Dec 12;7:25. doi: 10.1186/1479-7364-7-25.

A study of the role of GATA4 polymorphism in cardiovascular metabolic disorders.

Muiya NP, Wakil SM, Tahir AI, Hagos S, Najai M, Gueco D, Al-Tassan N, Andres E,
Mazher N, Meyer BF, Dzimiri N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. dzimiri@kfshrc.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: The study was designed to evaluate the association of GATA4 gene
polymorphism with coronary artery disease (CAD) and its metabolic risk factors,
including dyslipidaemic disorders, obesity, type 2 diabetes and hypertension,
following a preliminary study linking early onset of CAD in heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolaemia to chromosome 8, which harbours the GATA4 gene.
RESULTS: We first sequenced the whole GATA4 gene in 250 individuals to identify
variants of interest and then investigated the association of 12
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the disease traits using Taqman
chemistry in 4,278 angiographed Saudi individuals. Of the studied SNPs, rs804280 
(1.14 (1.03 to 1.27); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) was associated with CAD (2,274 cases vs 2,004
controls), hypercholesterolaemia (1,590 vs 2,487) (1.61 (1.03-2.52); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037)
and elevated low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (hLDLC) (575 vs 3,404) (1.87
(1.10-3.15); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020). Additionally, rs3729855_T (1.52 (1.09-2.11; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013)) 
and rs17153743 (AG<U+2009>+<U+2009>GG) (2.30 (1.30-4.26); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005) were implicated in
hypertension (3,312 vs 966), following adjustments for confounders. Furthermore, 
haplotypes CCCGTGCC (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.71; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.041) and GACCCGTG (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.84; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.050)
constructed from the SNPs were associated with CAD and ACCCACGC (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.58;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010) with myocardial infarction, while hypercholesterolaemia (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.86;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.050) and hLDLC (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.94; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.026) shared the AACCCATGT, and AACCCATGTC 
was associated with hLDLC (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.83; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028). A 10-mer GACCCGCGCC (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.59;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006) was associated with obesity (1,631 vs 2,362), and the GACACACCC
(<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.05; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044) was implicated in type 2 diabetes mellitus 2,378 vs
1,900).
CONCLUSION: Our study implicates GATA4 in CAD and its metabolic risk traits. The 
finding also points to the possible involvement of yet undefined entities related
to GATA4 transcription activity or gene regulatory pathways in events leading to 
these cardiovascular disorders.

PMCID: PMC3899629
PMID: 24330461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Anim Sci J. 2014 Apr;85(4):388-94. doi: 10.1111/asj.12156. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Expression and in situ localization of GATA4, 5 and 6 mRNAs in ovine conceptuses 
and uterine endometria during the peri-implantation period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In vertebrates, six GATA transcription factors, GATA1 through GATA6, have been
identified and GATA1-3 is known to be involved in hematopoietic developments,
while GATA4-6 play roles in cardiac and endoderm developments. Recently, we and
others have found that GATA2 and GATA3 found in the trophectoderm plays a role in
gene expression specific to this cell type, but GATA4-6 have not been well
characterized in early embryonic developments. Using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and in situ hybridization, we examined the expression of
GATA4, 5 and 6 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in ovine conceptuses and uteri during the
peri-implantation period. In ovine conceptuses, GATA4, 5 and 6 transcripts were
present on days 15, 17 and 21 (day 0<U+2009>=<U+2009>day of mating), and high GATA5 and 6 mRNAs
were found on day 21, most of which were localized in the trophectoderm and
endoderm. Moreover, minute and substantial GATA4 and 5 mRNAs were found in days
15 and 21 uterine endometria, respectively. Increase in GATA4-6 transcripts in
day 21 uteri indicates that in addition to GATA1-3, GATA4-6 may also play a
potentially novel role in the development of ovine trophectoderm, endoderm and/or
uterine endometria following conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24329758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2014 Jun;14(2):162-9. doi: 10.1007/s12012-013-9240-0.

Curcumin-mediated cardiac defects in mouse is associated with a reduced histone
H3 acetylation and reduced expression of cardiac transcription factors.

Sun H(1), Zhu J, Lu T, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key
Laboratory of Pediatrics, Committee of Science and Technology in Chongqing, Heart
Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400014,
People's Republic of China, cathy8224@163.com.

Histone acetylation plays an important role in heart development. However, the
mechanism(s) remains unclear. This study was designed to evaluate the effect of
curcumin-caused histone hypo-acetylation on the development of mouse embryonic
heart and the expression of cardiac transcription factors in vivo. The results
showed that curcumin treatment significantly decreased histone acetylase activity
and histone acetylation level in mouse embryonic heart. In curcumin-treated mice,
the hearts on E11.5 were smaller with thinner ventricular wall and a delayed
development of trabeculae and ventricular septum compared with the controls. The 
ventricular septum was complete on E14.5; however, the ventricular wall and
septum were thinner with fewer trabeculae than those in the controls. On E17.5,
the cardiac structure appeared normal, but the ventricular wall and septum were
thinner. The expression of GATA4, Nkx2.5 and Mef2c in the heart on E11.5 and
E14.5 was decreased significantly as compared to the controls. There was no
significant difference in Mef2c expression on E17.5 between curcumin-treated
group and the controls, while GATA4 and Nkx2.5 expression remained significantly 
reduced. These results indicate that inhibition of histone acetylation by
curcumin can reduce the expression of the cardiac transcription factors resulting
in an abnormal heart development in mice.

PMID: 24323078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 22;1(3):235-47. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.07.005.
eCollection 2013.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts toward a cardiomyocyte-like state.

Fu JD(1), Stone NR, Liu L, Spencer CI, Qian L, Hayashi Y, Delgado-Olguin P, Ding 
S, Bruneau BG, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; 
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA.

Direct reprogramming of adult somatic cells into alternative cell types has been 
shown for several lineages. We previously showed that GATA4, MEF2C, and TBX5
(GMT) directly reprogrammed nonmyocyte mouse heart cells into induced
cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) in vitro and in vivo. However, GMT alone appears 
insufficient in human fibroblasts, at least in vitro. Here, we show that GMT plus
ESRRG and MESP1 induced global cardiac gene-expression and phenotypic shifts in
human fibroblasts derived from embryonic stem cells, fetal heart, and neonatal
skin. Adding Myocardin and ZFPM2 enhanced reprogramming, including sarcomere
formation, calcium transients, and action potentials, although the efficiency
remained low. Human iCM reprogramming was epigenetically stable. Furthermore, we 
found that transforming growth factor ß signaling was important for, and improved
the efficiency of, human iCM reprogramming. These findings demonstrate that human
fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed toward the cardiac lineage, and lay the 
foundation for future refinements in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3849259
PMID: 24319660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 4;33(49):5637-48. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.517. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

An integrative analysis reveals functional targets of GATA6 transcriptional
regulation in gastric cancer.

Sulahian R(1), Casey F(2), Shen J(2), Qian ZR(3), Shin H(4), Ogino S(3), Weir
BA(5), Vazquez F(5), Liu XS(4), Hahn WC(6), Bass AJ(6), Chan V(2), Shivdasani
RA(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, CA, USA. (3)1]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (6)1] Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2] Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [3] Department of Medicine,
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Lineage-restricted transcription factors (TFs) are frequently mutated or
overexpressed in cancer and contribute toward malignant behaviors; however, the
molecular bases of their oncogenic properties are largely unknown. As TF
activities are difficult to inhibit directly with small molecules, the genes and 
pathways they regulate might represent more tractable targets for drug therapy.
We studied GATA6, a TF gene that is frequently amplified or overexpressed in
gastric, esophageal and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. GATA6-overexpressing gastric 
cancer cell lines cluster in gene expression space, separate from
non-overexpressing lines. This expression clustering signifies a shared
pathogenic group of genes that GATA6 may regulate through direct cis-element
binding. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) to
identify GATA6-bound genes and considered TF occupancy in relation to genes that 
respond to GATA6 depletion in cell lines and track with GATA6 mRNA (synexpression
groups) in primary gastric cancers. Among other cellular functions,
GATA6-occupied genes control apoptosis and govern the M-phase of the cell cycle. 
Depletion of GATA6 reduced the levels of the latter transcripts and arrested
cells in G2 and M phases of the cell cycle. Synexpression in human tumor samples 
identified likely direct transcriptional targets substantially better than
consideration only of transcripts that respond to GATA6 loss in cultured cells.
Candidate target genes responded to the loss of GATA6 or its homolog GATA4 and
even more to the depletion of both proteins. Many GATA6-dependent genes lacked
nearby binding sites but several strongly dependent, synexpressed and GATA6-bound
genes encode TFs such as MYC, HES1, RARB and CDX2. Thus, many downstream effects 
occur indirectly through other TFs and GATA6 activity in gastric cancer is
partially redundant with GATA4. This integrative analysis of locus occupancy,
gene dependency and synexpression provides a functional signature of
GATA6-overexpressing gastric cancers, revealing both limits and new therapeutic
directions for a challenging and frequently fatal disease.

PMCID: PMC4050037
PMID: 24317510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 May 15;75(10):790-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.020.
Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Genetic variation in the atrial natriuretic peptide transcription factor GATA4
modulates amygdala responsiveness in alcohol dependence.

Jorde A(1), Bach P(2), Witt SH(3), Becker K(2), Reinhard I(4), Vollstädt-Klein
S(2), Kirsch M(2), Hermann D(2), Charlet K(5), Beck A(5), Wimmer L(6), Frank
J(3), Treutlein J(3), Spanagel R(7), Mann K(2), Walter H(8), Heinz A(5),
Rietschel M(3), Kiefer F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Addictive Behavior and Addiction Medicine (AJ, PB, KB, SV-K, MK,
DH, KM, FK). Electronic address: anne.jorde@zi-mannheim.de. (2)Department of
Addictive Behavior and Addiction Medicine (AJ, PB, KB, SV-K, MK, DH, KM, FK).
(3)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry (SHW, JF, JT, MR).
(4)Department of Biostatistics (IR). (5)Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy (KC, AB, AH), Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Psychiatry (LW), University Clinic Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Institute of Psychopharmacology (RS); Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University. (8)Division of Mind and Brain
Research (HW).

BACKGROUND: Two genome-wide association studies recently showed alcohol
dependence to be associated with a single-nucleotide polymorphism (rs13273672)
located on a gene (GATA4) that encodes a transcription factor of atrial
natriuretic peptide (ANP). A growing body of evidence suggests that ANP might be 
involved in the symptomology of alcohol dependence. This study examined whether
reactivity to alcohol cues in the ANP target region amygdala, a key area
implicated in addictive behavior, differs depending on the GATA4 genotype of a
patient. We also investigated potential associations between these differences in
amygdala activation and relapse behavior.
METHODS: Eighty-one abstinent, alcohol-dependent patients completed a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging cue-reactivity task in a 3-Tesla scanner and provided 
blood samples for DNA extraction.
RESULTS: The results showed significantly lower alcohol-cue-induced activations
in G-allele carriers as compared with AA-homozygotes in the bilateral amygdala. A
survival analysis revealed that a stronger alcohol-specific amygdala response
predicted a lowered risk for relapse to heavy drinking in the AA-homozygotes,
whereas this effect could not be observed in G-allele carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: These results illuminate potential underlying mechanisms of the
involvement of the GATA4 gene in the etiology of alcohol dependence via its
influence on ANP and amygdala processing.

© 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry Published by Society of Biological
Psychiatry All rights reserved.

PMID: 24314346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. PLoS Biol. 2013 Dec;11(12):e1001725. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001725. Epub 2013
Dec 3.

NK4 antagonizes Tbx1/10 to promote cardiac versus pharyngeal muscle fate in the
ascidian second heart field.

Wang W(1), Razy-Krajka F, Siu E, Ketcham A, Christiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York, United States 
of America.

The heart and head muscles share common developmental origins and genetic
underpinnings in vertebrates, including humans. Parts of the heart and
cranio-facial musculature derive from common mesodermal progenitors that express 
NKX2-5, ISL1, and TBX1. This ontogenetic kinship is dramatically reflected in the
DiGeorge/Cardio-Velo-Facial syndrome (DGS/CVFS), where mutations of TBX1 cause
malformations in the pharyngeal apparatus and cardiac outflow tract. Cardiac
progenitors of the first heart field (FHF) do not require TBX1 and segregate
precociously from common progenitors of the second heart field (SHF) and
pharyngeal muscles. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that govern
heart versus pharyngeal muscle specification within this lineage remain elusive. 
Here, we harness the simplicity of the ascidian larva to show that, following
asymmetric cell division of common progenitors, NK4/NKX2-5 promotes
GATAa/GATA4/5/6 expression and cardiac specification in the second heart
precursors by antagonizing Tbx1/10-mediated inhibition of GATAa and activation of
Collier/Olf/EBF (COE), the determinant of atrial siphon muscle (ASM)
specification. Our results uncover essential regulatory connections between the
conserved cardio-pharyngeal factor Tbx1/10 and muscle determinant COE, as well as
a mutual antagonism between NK4 and Tbx1/10 activities upstream of GATAa and COE.
The latter cross-antagonism underlies a fundamental heart versus pharyngeal
muscle fate choice that occurs in a conserved lineage of cardio-pharyngeal
progenitors. We propose that this basic ontogenetic motif underlies cardiac and
pharyngeal muscle development and evolution in chordates.

PMCID: PMC3849182
PMID: 24311985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2013 Dec;97(12):781-5. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23203. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Patient with disorganization syndrome: surgical procedures, pathology, and
potential causes.

Vallejo OG(1), Benítez Sánchez Mdel C, Cánovas CS, Ontiveros JD, Ruiz Jiménez JI,
Bermejo-Sánchez E, Martínez-Frías ML.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
Región de Murcia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The human disorganization syndrome (HDS) is an extremely rare
malformation syndrome that presents with a severe pattern of defects affecting
different structures.
METHODS: We describe a newborn girl presenting with HDS. Her clinical features
included a large appendage arising from the right buttock as the only alteration,
with size and shape of a lower member-like structure, and a pedicle of the extra 
limb structure. The surgical observations, the pathological results, evolution up
to 6 months of age, and their potential causes are described, as well as a review
of the literature.
RESULTS: The MRI procedure also detected a multicystic mass located at the
presacral region of the pelvis and perineum, without any dysraphism or other
medullary anomalies. The X-ray showed that the member-like structure had an iliac
wing, femur, tibia, fibula, and aberrant metatarsals. The review of the
literature shows disparate defects of the published cases with HDS, which include
some features pathogenically not related with this syndrome.
CONCLUSION: We highlight the need to maintain restricted the clinical diagnosis
for HDS to those concordant with a great disorganization of morphogenetic
inductions affecting the three germ layers, which occur during the first four
weeks of development. This is crucial to: (a) perform a correct diagnosis, which 
is essential to establish the prognosis and surgery procedures, (b) identify
which is/are the cause/s, and (c) the adequate genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24307594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;91(12):1135-42. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-2012-0419.
Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Altered calcium regulation in isolated cardiomyocytes from Egr-1 knock-out mice.

Pacini L(1), Suffredini S, Ponti D, Coppini R, Frati G, Ragona G, Cerbai E,
Calogero A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medico-surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, "Sapienza"
University of Rome, Corso della Repubblica 79, Latina, Italy.

Early growth response-1 one gene (Egr-1), one of the immediate early response
genes, plays an important role in the adaptive response of the myocardium to
hypertrophic stimuli. We aimed to investigate the effects of Egr-1 deletion on
cardiac function. Egr-1 knock-out (Egr-1(-/-)) homozygous mice were employed to
evaluate the electrophysiological and molecular properties of left ventricular
cardiomyocytes (VCM) by using patch-clamp technique, intracellular calcium
measurements, real-time PCR, and Western blot. Action potential was prolonged and
diastolic potential was positive-shifted in VCMs isolated from Egr-1(-/-) mice,
in comparison with those from their wild-type (WT) littermates. The calcium
content of the sarcoplasmic reticulum was reduced and the decay time for
steady-state calcium transient slowed down. Serca2, Ryr, L-type Ca(2+)-channel,
and PLB mRNA expression were reduced in Egr-1(-/-) mice compared with the
controls. Moreover, Serca2 protein was reduced, while the amount of Ncx1 protein 
was increased in Egr-1(-/-) hearts compared with those of the WT littermates.
Furthermore, genes involved in heart development (GATA-4, TGF-ß) and in Egr-1
regulation (Nab1, Nab2) were down regulated in Egr-1(-/-) mice. These results
suggest that Egr-1 plays a pivotal role in regulating excitation-contraction
coupling in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 24289086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jan 23;90(1):13. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.110197. Print 2014
Jan.

Nondividing, postpubertal rat sertoli cells resumed proliferation after
transplantation.

Mital P(1), Kaur G, Bowlin B, Paniagua NJ, Korbutt GS, Dufour JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas.

Conventionally, it was believed that Sertoli cells (SC) stopped proliferating at 
puberty and became terminally differentiated quiescent cells. However, recent
studies have challenged that dogma. In this study, we transplanted nondividing SC
isolated from 23- to 27-day-old postpubertal rats transduced with a recombinant
adenoviral vector (containing furin-modified human proinsulin cDNA) into diabetic
severe combined immunodeficiency mice. Immunostaining the grafts for cell
proliferation markers, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and MKI67,
revealed that transplanted SC within the grafts were proliferating. Possible
causes for resumption of proliferation of SC could be viral transduction, cell
isolation and culture, higher abdominal temperature at the transplant site,
and/or transplantation. To test for these possible causes, double-
immunofluorescence staining was performed for GATA4 (SC marker) and MKI67. None
of the SC were positive for MKI67 in tissue collected during SC isolation and
culture or at higher temperature. However, nontransduced SC stained positive for 
MKI67 after transplantation into rats, suggesting viral transduction was not a
key factor for induction of SC proliferation. Interestingly, resumption in
proliferative ability of nondividing SC was temporary, as SC stopped
proliferating within 14 days of transplantation and did not proliferate
thereafter. Quantification of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine-labeled SC demonstrated
that 7%-9% of the total transplanted SC were proliferating in the grafts. These
data indicate for the first time that nondividing SC resumed proliferation after 
transplantation and further validate previous findings that SC are not terminally
differentiated. Hence, transplantation of SC could provide a useful model with
which to study the regulation of SC proliferation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4076399
PMID: 24285718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jan;28(1):28-39. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1265. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

GATA factors promote ER integrity and ß-cell survival and contribute to type 1
diabetes risk.

Sartori DJ(1), Wilbur CJ, Long SY, Rankin MM, Li C, Bradfield JP, Hakonarson H,
Grant SF, Pu WT, Kushner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes (D.J.S., C.J.W., S.Y.L., M.M.R., C.L.),
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics (H.H., S.F.A.G.),
Perelman School of Medicine, and Center for Applied Genomics (J.P.B., H.H.,
S.F.A.G.), Abramson Research Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104; Department of Cardiology (W.T.P.), Children's
Hospital, Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115; Section of
Pediatric Diabetes and Endocrinology (J.A.K.), Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030; and Diabetes and Endocrinology Service (J.A.K.), Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030.

Pancreatic ß-cell survival remains poorly understood despite decades of research.
GATA transcription factors broadly regulate embryogenesis and influence survival 
of several cell types, but their role in adult ß-cells remains undefined. To
investigate the role of GATA factors in adult ß-cells, we derived
ß-cell-inducible Gata4- and Gata6-knockout mice, along with whole-body inducible 
Gata4 knockouts. ß-Cell Gata4 deletion modestly increased the proportion of dying
ß-cells in situ with ultrastructural abnormalities suggesting endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Notably, glucose homeostasis was not grossly altered in
Gata4- and Gata6-knockout mice, suggesting that GATA factors do not have
essential roles in ß-cells. Several ER stress signals were up-regulated in Gata4 
and Gata6 knockouts, most notably CHOP, a known regulator of ER stress-induced
apoptosis. However, ER stress signals were not elevated to levels observed after 
acute thapsigargin administration, suggesting that GATA deficiency only caused
mild ER stress. Simultaneous deletion of Gata4 and CHOP partially restored ß-cell
survival. In contrast, whole-body inducible Gata4 knockouts displayed no evidence
of ER stress in other GATA4-enriched tissues, such as heart. Indeed, distinct
GATA transcriptional targets were differentially expressed in islets compared
with heart. Such ß-cell-specific findings prompted study of a large meta-analysis
dataset to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms harbored within the human 
GATA4 locus, revealing several variants significantly associated with type 1
diabetes mellitus. We conclude that GATA factors have important but nonessential 
roles to promote ER integrity and ß-cell survival in a tissue-specific manner and
that GATA factors likely contribute to type 1 diabetes mellitus pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3874454
PMID: 24284823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e80461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080461.
eCollection 2013.

Helicase-like transcription factor (Hltf) regulates G2/M transition,
Wt1/Gata4/Hif-1a cardiac transcription networks, and collagen biogenesis.

Helmer RA(1), Martínez-Zaguilán R, Dertien JS, Fulford C, Foreman O, Peiris V,
Chilton BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas, United States of America.

HLTF/Hltf regulates transcription, remodels chromatin, and coordinates DNA damage
repair. Hltf is expressed in mouse brain and heart during embryonic and postnatal
development. Silencing Hltf is semilethal. Seventy-four percent of congenic
C57BL/6J Hltf knockout mice died, 75% within 12-24 hours of birth. Previous
studies in neonatal (6-8 hour postpartum) brain revealed silencing Hltf disrupted
cell cycle progression, and attenuated DNA damage repair. An RNA-Seq snapshot of 
neonatal heart transcriptome showed 1,536 of 20,000 total transcripts were
altered (p < 0.05) - 10 up- and 1,526 downregulated. Pathway enrichment analysis 
with MetaCore showed Hltf's regulation of the G2/M transition (p=9.726E(-15)) of
the cell cycle in heart is nearly identical to its role in brain. In addition,
Brca1 and 12 members of the Brca1 associated genome surveillance complex are also
downregulated. Activation of caspase 3 coincides with transcriptional repression 
of Bcl-2. Hltf loss caused downregulation of Wt1/Gata4/Hif-1a signaling cascades 
as well as Myh7b/miR499 transcription. Hltf-specific binding to promoters and/or 
regulatory regions of these genes was authenticated by ChIP-PCR. Hif-1a targets
for prolyl (P4ha1, P4ha2) and lysyl (Plod2) collagen hydroxylation, PPIase
enzymes (Ppid, Ppif, Ppil3) for collagen trimerization, and lysyl oxidase (Loxl2)
for collagen-elastin crosslinking were downregulated. However, transcription of
genes for collagens, fibronectin, Mmps and their inhibitors (Timps) was
unaffected. The collective downregulation of genes whose protein products control
collagen biogenesis caused disorganization of the interstitial and perivascular
myocardial collagen fibrillar network as viewed with picrosirius red-staining,
and authenticated with spectral imaging. Wavy collagen bundles in control hearts 
contrasted with collagen fibers that were thin, short and disorganized in Hltf
null hearts. Collagen bundles in Hltf null hearts were tangled and fragmented.
Thus, silencing Hltf during heart organogenesis compromised DNA double-strand
break repair, and caused aberrant collagen biogenesis altering the structural
network that transmits cardiomyocyte force into muscle contraction.

PMCID: PMC3835564
PMID: 24278285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Clin Chim Acta. 2014 Jan 20;428:82-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.11.010. Epub 2013
Nov 16.

ABCG5/ABCG8 in cholesterol excretion and atherosclerosis.

Yu XH(1), Qian K(2), Jiang N(2), Zheng XL(3), Cayabyab FS(4), Tang CK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Research Center, University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan
421001, China. (2)The Second Affiliated Hospital, University of South China,
Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, The University of
Calgary, Health Sciences Center, 3330 Hospital Dr NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada. (4)Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada. (5)Life Science Research Center, University of South China,
Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China; Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Key
Laboratory for Atherosclerology of Hunan Province, University of South China,
Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China. Electronic address: tangchaoke@qq.com.

Cholesterol is essential for the growth and function of all mammalian cells, but 
abnormally increased blood cholesterol is a major risk factor for atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters G5 (ABCG5) and G8
(ABCG8) form an obligate heterodimer that limits intestinal absorption and
facilitates biliary secretion of cholesterol and phytosterols. Consistent with
their function, ABCG5 and ABCG8 are located on the apical membrane of enterocytes
and hepatocytes. Liver X receptor is the major positive regulator of ABCG5 and
ABCG8 expression. Mutations in either of the two genes cause sitosterolemia, a
condition in which cholesterol and plant sterols accumulate in the circulation
leading to premature cardiovascular disease. Overexpression of ABCG5 and ABCG8 in
mice retards diet-induced atherosclerosis because of reduced circulating and
hepatic cholesterol. In the current review, we summarize recent developments and 
propose a future framework that provides new perspectives on the regulation of
cholesterol metabolism and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24252657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e77784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077784.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptome-guided functional analyses reveal novel biological properties and
regulatory hierarchy of human embryonic stem cell-derived ventricular
cardiomyocytes crucial for maturation.

Poon E(1), Yan B, Zhang S, Rushing S, Keung W, Ren L, Lieu DK, Geng L, Kong CW,
Wang J, Wong HS, Boheler KR, Li RA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Consortium, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Human (h) embryonic stem cells (ESC) represent an unlimited source of
cardiomyocytes (CMs); however, these differentiated cells are immature. Thus far,
gene profiling studies have been performed with non-purified or non-chamber
specific CMs. Here we took a combinatorial approach of using systems biology to
guide functional discoveries of novel biological properties of purified
hESC-derived ventricular (V) CMs. We profiled the transcriptomes of hESCs, hESC-,
fetal (hF) and adult (hA) VCMs, and showed that hESC-VCMs displayed a unique
transcriptomic signature. Not only did a detailed comparison between hESC-VCMs
and hF-VCMs confirm known expression changes in metabolic and contractile genes, 
it further revealed novel differences in genes associated with reactive oxygen
species (ROS) metabolism, migration and cell cycle, as well as potassium and
calcium ion transport. Following these guides, we functionally confirmed that
hESC-VCMs expressed IKATP with immature properties, and were accordingly
vulnerable to hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced apoptosis. For mechanistic insights, 
our coexpression and promoter analyses uncovered a novel transcriptional
hierarchy involving select transcription factors (GATA4, HAND1, NKX2.5, PPARGC1A 
and TCF8), and genes involved in contraction, calcium homeostasis and metabolism.
These data highlight novel expression and functional differences between
hESC-VCMs and their fetal counterparts, and offer insights into the underlying
cell developmental state. These findings may lead to mechanism-based methods for 
in vitro driven maturation.

PMCID: PMC3804624
PMID: 24204964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Vascul Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;60(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2013.10.004. Epub 2013 
Nov 5.

Simvastatin-enhanced expression of promyogenic nuclear factors and
cardiomyogenesis of murine embryonic stem cells.

Yang C(1), Madonna R(2), Li Y(2), Zhang Q(3), Shen WF(3), McNamara K(2), Yang
YJ(4), Geng YJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; The Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ruijin Hospital, Jiao-Tong University Medical School, 
Shanghai, China; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX, USA. (2)The Center for
Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX,
USA. (3)The Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Jiao-Tong
University Medical School, Shanghai, China. (4)FuWai Cardiovascular Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (5)The Center for
Cardiovascular Biology and Atherosclerosis Research, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX USA; Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX,
USA. Electronic address: yong-jian.geng@uth.tmc.edu.

A combination of statin and stem cell therapies has been shown to benefit in
experimental models of myocardial infarction. This study tests whether treatment 
with simvastatin has a direct impact on the cardiomyogenic development of murine 
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in embryoid bodies. In a concentration-dependent
manner, simvastatin treatment enhanced expression of several promyogenic nuclear 
transcription factors, including GATA4, Nkx2.5, DTEF-1 and myocardin A. The
statin-treated cells also displayed higher levels of cardiac proteins, including 
myosin, a-actinin, Ryanodine receptor-2, and atrial natriuretic peptide, and they
developed synchronized contraction. The statin's promyogenic effect was partially
diminished by the addition of the two isoprenoids FPP and GGPP, which are
intermediates of cholesterol synthesis. Thus, simvastatin treatment enhances ESC 
myogenesis during early development perhaps via a mechanism inhibiting the
mevalonate-FPP/GGPP pathway.

© 2013.

PMID: 24200505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Genes Dev. 2013 Nov 1;27(21):2332-44. doi: 10.1101/gad.225144.113.

Coordinate Nodal and BMP inhibition directs Baf60c-dependent cardiomyocyte
commitment.

Cai W(1), Albini S, Wei K, Willems E, Guzzo RM, Tsuda M, Giordani L, Spiering S, 
Kurian L, Yeo GW, Puri PL, Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA;

A critical but molecularly uncharacterized step in heart formation and
regeneration is the process that commits progenitor cells to differentiate into
cardiomyocytes. Here, we show that the endoderm-derived dual Nodal/bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist Cerberus-1 (Cer1) in embryonic stem cell
cultures orchestrates two signaling pathways that direct the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex to cardiomyogenic loci in multipotent (KDR/Flk1+) progenitors,
activating lineage-specific transcription. Transient inhibition of Nodal by Cer1 
induces Brahma-associated factor 60c (Baf60c), one of three Baf60 variants (a, b,
and c) that are mutually exclusively assembled into SWI/SNF. Blocking Nodal and
BMP also induces lineage-specific transcription factors Gata4 and Tbx5, which
interact with Baf60c. siRNA to Cer1, Baf60c, or the catalytic SWI/SNF subunit
Brg1 prevented the developmental opening of chromatin surrounding the Nkx2.5
early cardiac enhancer and cardiomyocyte differentiation. Overexpression of
Baf60c fully rescued these deficits, positioning Baf60c and SWI/SNF function
downstream from Cer1. Thus, antagonism of Nodal and BMP coordinates induction of 
the myogenic Baf60c variant and interacting transcription factors to program the 
developmental opening of cardiomyocyte-specific loci in chromatin. This is the
first demonstration that cues from the progenitor cell environment direct the
subunit variant composition of SWI/SNF to remodel the transcriptional landscape
for lineage-specific differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3828519
PMID: 24186978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Nov 1;6:46. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-46.

DNA methylation status of NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 in patients with tetralogy of
fallot.

Sheng W, Qian Y, Wang H, Ma X, Zhang P, Diao L, An Q, Chen L, Ma D(1), Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Children Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.
duanma@yahoo.cn.

BACKGROUND: NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 are essential for heart development, however,
little is known regarding their epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of
tetralogy of fallot (TOF).
METHODS: Methylation levels were measured in three regions of NKX2-5 (M1:
-1596 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>-1374 bp, M2: -159 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>217 bp and M3: 1058 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>1524 bp), one region 
of GATA4 (M: -392 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>107 bp) and three regions of HAND1 (M1: -887 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>-414 bp,
M2: -436 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>2 bp and M3: 37 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>398 bp) using the Sequenom MassARRAY platform.
QRT-PCR was used to analyze NKX2-5 and HAND1 mRNA levels in the right ventricular
myocardium of TOF patients.
RESULTS: TOF patients had a significantly higher NKX2-5_M3 median methylation
level than controls (41.65% vs. 22.18%; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0074; interquartile range [IQR]:
30.46%-53.35%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30 and 20.07%-24.31%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>5; respectively). The HAND1_M1
median methylation level was also significantly higher in TOF patients than
controls (30.05% vs. 17.54%; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0054; IQR: 20.77%-40.89%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30 and IQR:
14.69%-20.64%; N<U+2009>=<U+2009>6; respectively). The methylation statuses of NKX2-5_M1,
NKX2-5_M2, GATA4_M, HAND1_M2 or HAND1_M3 were not significantly different in TOF 
patients compared to controls. The methylation values for NKX2-5_M3 were
negatively correlated with mRNA levels (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>- 0.463, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) and there
was a significant association between HAND1_M1 methylation status and mRNA levels
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>- 0.524, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) in TOF patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant methylation statuses of the NKX2-5 gene body and HAND1
promoter regions are associated with the regulation of gene transcription in TOF 
patients and may play an important role in the pathogenesis of TOF.

PMCID: PMC3819647
PMID: 24182332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biometals. 2013 Dec;26(6):1051-65. doi: 10.1007/s10534-013-9683-6. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

Friend of GATA and GATA-6 modulate the transcriptional up-regulation of hepcidin 
in hepatocytes during inflammation.

Bagu ET(1), Layoun A, Calvé A, Santos MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Institut du Cancer de Montréal, (ICM), University of Montreal, Pavillon
De Sève Porte Y-5625, 2099 rue Alexandre De Sève, Montreal, QC, H2L 4M1, Canada, 
ebagu@yahoo.com.

Hepcidin is an antimicrobial peptide hormone that plays a central role in the
metabolism of iron and its expression in the liver can be induced through two
major pathways: the inflammatory pathway, mainly via IL-6; and the iron-sensing
pathway, mediated by BMP-6. GATA-proteins are group of evolutionary conserved
transcriptional regulators that bind to the consensus motif-WGATAR-in the
promoter region. In hepatoma cells, GATA-proteins 4 and 6 in conjunction with the
co-factor friend of GATA (FOG) were shown to modulate the transcription of HAMP. 
However, it is unclear as to which of the GATA-proteins drive the expression of
HAMP in vivo. In this study, using in vitro and in vivo approaches, we
investigated the relevance of GATA and FOG proteins in the expression of hepcidin
following treatment with IL-6 and BMP-6. We found that treatment of Huh7 cells
with either IL-6 or BMP-6 increased the HAMP promoter activity. The HAMP promoter
activity following treatment with IL-6 or BMP-6 was further increased by
co-transfection of the promoter with GATA proteins 4 and 6. However,
co-transfection of the HAMP promoter with FOG proteins 1 or 2 repressed the
promoter response to treatments with either IL-6 or BMP-6. The effects of both
GATA and FOG proteins on the promoter activity in response to IL-6 or BMP-6
treatment were abrogated by mutation of the GATA response element-TTATCT-in the
HAMP promoter region -103/-98. In vivo, treatment of mice with lipopolysaccharide
led to a transient increase of Gata-6 expression in the liver that was positively
correlated with the expression of hepcidin. Our results indicate that during
inflammation GATA-6 is up-regulated in concert with hepcidin while GATA-4 and FOG
(1 and 2) are repressed.

PMID: 24179092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jun;229(6):801-12. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24501.

Direct differentiation of homogeneous human adipose stem cells into functional
hepatocytes by mimicking liver embryogenesis.

Li X(1), Yuan J, Li W, Liu S, Hua M, Lu X, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Municipal Laboratory for Liver Protection and
Regulation of Regeneration, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

The potential of adult human adipose tissue stem cells (hASCs) to differentiate
into hepatocytes has generated much excitement over the possible use of hASCs in 
therapeutic applications. An understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
underlie the plasticity of hASCs toward hepatocytes will help to make this
possibility a reality. Herein, we show that a homogenous population of hASCs
characterized by a high level of CD73, CD90, and CD105 express the pluripotent
transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and SALL4 under proliferation
conditions. A high level of activin A allows for hASCs acquiring the fate of
definitive endoderm (DE) cells and expressing the specific transcription factors 
HEX, FOXA2, SOX17, and GATA4 synchronously. Using a reproducible three-stage
method by mimicking liver embryogenesis, hASCs were directed to differentiate
into functional hepatocytes. In the first stage, hASCs were induced to become DE 
cells by 2 days cultured in serum-free medium and 3 days of activin A treatment. 
Next, the presence of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 4 and bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) 2 in the medium for 5 days induced efficient hepatic
differentiation from DE cells. After 10 days of further maturated by the
sequential exposure to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), oncostatin M (OSM), and
dexamethasone (DEX), the hASC-derived hepatocytes expressed mature hepatocytes
marker and exhibited functional characterization, including albumin secretion,
glycogen storage, urea production, activity of drug transporters, and cytochrome 
P450 activity. These findings will be useful for the implementation of
hASC-derived hepatocytes in therapeutic purposes, metabolic analyses, drug
toxicity screening, and studies of hepatocyte function.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24166453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(24):3805-18. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0444. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Estrogen regulates histone deacetylases to prevent cardiac hypertrophy.

Pedram A(1), Razandi M, Narayanan R, Dalton JT, McKinsey TA, Levin ER.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92717 Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, CA 90822 GTx, Inc., Memphis, TN 38163 Division of Cardiology, Department
of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045.

The development and progression of cardiac hypertrophy often leads to heart
failure and death, and important modulators of hypertrophy include the histone
deacetylase proteins (HDACs). Estrogen inhibits cardiac hypertrophy and
progression in animal models and humans. We therefore investigated the influence 
of 17-ß-estradiol on the production, localization, and functions of
prohypertrophic (class I) and antihypertrophic (class II) HDACs in cultured
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. 17-ß-Estradiol or estrogen receptor ß agonists
dipropylnitrile and ß-LGND2 comparably suppressed angiotensin II-induced HDAC2
(class I) production, HDAC-activating phosphorylation, and the resulting
prohypertrophic mRNA expression. In contrast, estrogenic compounds derepressed
the opposite effects of angiotensin II on the same parameters for HDAC4 and 5
(class II), resulting in retention of these deacetylases in the nucleus to
inhibit hypertrophic gene expression. Key aspects were confirmed in vivo from the
hearts of wild-type but not estrogen receptor ß (ERß) gene-deleted mice
administered angiotensin II and estrogenic compounds. Our results identify a
novel dual regulation of cardiomyocyte HDACs, shown here for the antihypertrophic
sex steroid acting at ERß. This mechanism potentially supports using ERß agonists
as HDAC modulators to treat cardiac disease.

PMCID: PMC3861078
PMID: 24152730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 17;8(10):e77690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077690.
eCollection 2013.

Islet-1 may function as an assistant factor for histone acetylation and
regulation of cardiac development-related transcription factor Mef2c expression.

Yu Z(1), Kong J, Pan B, Sun H, Lv T, Zhu J, Huang G, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China ; Key Laboratory of Developmental Disease in Childhood (Chongqing
Medical University), Ministry of Education, Chongqing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Islet-1 is an important transcription factor for cardiac development
through mediating extensive interactions between DNA and proteins. The present
study was to investigate the role of Islet-1 in regulating the expression of
cardiac development-related transcription factors and mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of Islet-1 and histone acetylases (HATs)
subtype p300 was determined in newborn mouse hearts and mouse embryonic hearts at
different development stages using Western blot. The expression of Islet-1 and
cardiac development-related transcription factors Mef2c, GATA4 and Tbx5 as well
as histone H3 acetylation level were determined in cardiac progenitor cells with 
and without transfection of Islet-1 interference RNA (RNAi) in lentivirus using
PCR and Western blot. Islet-1 peak expression occurred on day E14.5 in mouse
embryonic heart, and was present in the promoter regions of Mef2c, GATA4 and Tbx5
that were precipitated with p300 antibody. When Islet-1 was inhibited with
specific RNAi in cardiac progenitor cells, the expression of Mef2c and Tbx5, but 
not GATA4, was significantly suppressed along with selective reduction in histone
H3 acetylation in the promoter region of Mef2c, but not GATA4 and Tbx5. The level
of Mef2c DNA, not GATA4 and Tbx5, in the complex associated with p300 was
significantly decreased in the cells with Islet-1 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggested that Islet-1 might function as an assistant
factor that was involved in the regulation of histone acetylation and Mef2c
expression via assisting p300 on specifically targeting the promoter of Mef2c.

PMCID: PMC3798409
PMID: 24147056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Dec;157(4):294-7. doi: 
10.5507/bp.2013.079. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Importance of promoter methylation of GATA4 gene in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Chmelarova M(1), Dvorakova E, Spacek J, Laco J, Palicka V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine in
Hradec Kralove, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Hradec
Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.

AIMS: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy, with typically 
late diagnosis. Altered DNA methylation of tumor suppressor gene promoters
probably plays a relevant role in ovarian carcinogenesis and frequently occurs as
an early event in the development of different types of cancer including ovarian 
carcinoma. GATA4 methylation has been reported in a variety of human cancers. The
aim of this study was to investigate promoter methylation of the GATA4 gene in
ovarian cancer by comparison with that in normal ovarian tissue.
METHODS: To search for promoter methylation of the GATA4 gene we used MSP
(methylation-specific PCR) to compare the methylation status in 67 tissue samples
of ovarian cancer with that in 40 control samples.
RESULTS: In our study, methylation-specific PCR revealed GATA4 promoter
methylation in 21 of 67 specimens with ovarian cancer (31.3%), and in none of the
control ovarian tissue samples.
CONCLUSION: These results confirm that methylation in the GATA4 promoter region
could play an important role in ovarian carcinogenesis, and show new loci which
are highly methylated only in ovarian cancer samples and which are associated
predominantly with the endometrioid type of ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 24145767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Cell. 2013 Oct 14;27(1):5-18. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.09.003.

WT1 maintains adrenal-gonadal primordium identity and marks a population of
AGP-like progenitors within the adrenal gland.

Bandiera R(1), Vidal VP, Motamedi FJ, Clarkson M, Sahut-Barnola I, von Gise A, Pu
WT, Hohenstein P, Martinez A, Schedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Valrose, iBV, University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, 06108 
Nice Cedex 2, France; INSERM UMR 1091, CNRS UMR 7277 Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice
Cedex 2, France.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4446-9.

Adrenal glands and gonads share a common primordium (AGP), but the molecular
events driving differentiation are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that
the Wilms tumor suppressor WT1 is a key factor defining AGP identity by
inhibiting the steroidogenic differentiation process. Indeed, ectopic expression 
of WT1 precludes differentiation into adrenocortical steroidogenic cells by
locking them into a progenitor state. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
identify Tcf21 and Gli1 as direct targets of WT1. Moreover, cell lineage tracing 
analyses identify a long-living progenitor population within the adrenal gland,
characterized by the expression of WT1, GATA4, GLI1, and TCF21, that can generate
steroidogenic cells in vivo. Strikingly, gonadectomy dramatically activates these
WT1(+) cells and leads to their differentiation into gonadal steroidogenic
tissue. Thus, our data describe a mechanism of response to organ loss by
recreating hormone-producing cells at a heterotopic site.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4032791
PMID: 24135228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):397-406. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36291. Epub 2013 
Oct 11.

Identification of novel candidate gene loci and increased sex chromosome
aneuploidy among infants with conotruncal heart defects.

Osoegawa K(1), Iovannisci DM, Lin B, Parodi C, Schultz K, Shaw GM, Lammer EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetics, Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute,
Children's Hospital Research Center Oakland, Oakland, California.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Jan;167A(1):268-70.

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are common malformations, affecting four to eight
per 1,000 total births. Conotruncal defects are an important pathogenetic subset 
of CHDs, comprising nearly 20% of the total. Although both environmental and
genetic factors are known to contribute to the occurrence of conotruncal defects,
the causes remain unknown for most. To identify novel candidate genes/loci, we
used array comparative genomic hybridization to detect chromosomal
microdeletions/duplications. From a population base of 974,579 total births born 
during 1999-2004, we screened 389 California infants born with tetralogy of
Fallot or d-transposition of the great arteries. We found that 1.7% (5/288) of
males with a conotruncal defect had sex chromosome aneuploidy, a sevenfold
increased frequency (relative risk<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.0; 95% confidence interval 2.9-16.9). We
identified eight chromosomal microdeletions/duplications for conotruncal defects.
From these duplications and deletions, we found five high priority candidate
genes (GATA4, CRKL, BMPR1A, SNAI2, and ZFHX4). This is the initial report that
sex chromosome aneuploidy is associated with conotruncal defects among boys.
These chromosomal microduplications/deletions provide evidence that GATA4, SNAI2,
and CRKL are highly dosage sensitive genes involved in outflow tract development.
Genome wide screening for copy number variation can be productive for identifying
novel genes/loci contributing to non-syndromic common malformations.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3946915
PMID: 24127225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cell Biol Int. 2014 Feb;38(2):219-27. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10194. Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Comparing the effect of equiaxial cyclic mechanical stimulation on GATA4
expression in adipose-derived and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Amin S(1), Banijamali SE, Tafazoli-Shadpour M, Shokrgozar MA, Dehghan MM,
Haghighipour N, Mahdian R, Bayati V, Abbasnia P.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Lab, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Amirkabir University
of Technology, Tehran, Iran.

Myocardium is prone to mechanical stimuli among which pulsatile blood flow exerts
both radial and longitudinal strains on the heart. Recent studies have shown that
mechanical stimulation can notably influence regeneration of cardiac muscle
cells. GATA4 is a cardiac-specific transcription factor that plays an important
role in late embryonic heart development. Our study aimed at investigating the
effect of equiaxial cyclic strain on GATA4 expression in adipose-derived (ASCs)
and bone marrow-derived (BMSCs) mesenchymal stem cells. For this reason, both
ASCs and BMSCs were studied in four distinct groups of chemical, mechanical,
mechano-chemical and negative control. According to this categorisation, the
cells were exposed to cyclic mechanical loading and/or 5-azacytidine as the
chemical factor. The level of GATA4 expression was then quantified using
real-time PCR method on the first, fourth and seventh days. The results show
that: (1) equiaxial cyclic stimulation of mesenchymal stem cells could promote
GATA4 expression from the early days of induction and as it went on, its
combination with chemical factor elevated expression; (2) cyclic strain could
accelerate GATA4 expression compared to the chemical factor; (3) in this regard, 
these results indicate a higher capacity of ASCs than BMSCs to express GATA4.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 24123331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Formos Med Assoc. 2013 Oct;112(10):635-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2013.01.002.
Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Mechanical stretch via transforming growth factor-ß1 activates microRNA-208a to
regulate hypertrophy in cultured rat cardiac myocytes.

Wang BW(1), Wu GJ, Cheng WP, Shyu KG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, Taipei County, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: MicroRNA-208a (miR208a) and mechanical stress play a key role
in cardiac hypertrophy. The relationship between miR208a and mechanical stress in
cultured cardiomyocytes has not been investigated. The molecular mechanisms
underlying miR208a-induced hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes by mechanical stress is 
poorly understood. This study investigated whether miR208a is a critical
regulator in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy under mechanical stretch.
METHODS: Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes grown on a flexible membrane base were
stretched at 60 cycles/minute. MiR real-time quantitative assays were used to
quantify miRs. A quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique was used to
measure transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1). A (3)H-proline incorporation
assay was used to measure protein synthesis.
RESULTS: Mechanical stretch significantly enhanced miR208a expression. Stretch
significantly induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophic protein expression such as
ß-myosin heavy chain (MHCß), thyroid hormone receptor-associated protein 100,
myostatin, connexin 40, GATA4, and brain natriuretic peptide. MHCa was not
induced by stretch. Overexpression of miR208a significantly increased MHCß
protein expression while pretreatment with antagomir208a significantly attenuated
MHCß protein expression induced by stretch and overexpression of miR208a.
Mechanical stretch significantly increased the secretion of TGF-ß1 from cultured 
cardiomyocytes. Exogenous addition of TGF-ß1 recombinant protein significantly
increased miR208a expression and pretreatment with TGF-ß1 antibody attenuated
miR208a expression induced by stretch. Mechanical stretch and overexpression of
miR208a increased protein synthesis while antagomir208a attenuated protein
synthesis induced by stretch and overexpression of miR208a.
CONCLUSION: Cyclic stretch enhances miR208a expression in cultured rat
cardiomyocytes. MiR208a plays a role in stretch-induced cardiac hypertrophy. The 
stretch-induced miR208a is mediated by TGF-ß1.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24120154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Hum Mutat. 2013 Dec;34(12):1628-31. doi: 10.1002/humu.22449. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Congenital heart defects in patients with deletions upstream of SOX9.

Sanchez-Castro M(1), Gordon CT, Petit F, Nord AS, Callier P, Andrieux J, Guérin
P, Pichon O, David A, Abadie V, Bonnet D, Visel A, Pennacchio LA, Amiel J,
Lyonnet S, Le Caignec C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR1087, l'institut du thorax, Nantes, France; Université de Nantes,
Nantes, France.

Heterozygous loss-of-function coding-sequence mutations of the transcription
factor SOX9 cause campomelic dysplasia, a rare skeletal dysplasia with congenital
bowing of long bones (campomelia), hypoplastic scapulae, a missing pair of ribs, 
pelvic, and vertebral malformations, clubbed feet, Pierre Robin sequence (PRS),
facial dysmorphia, and disorders of sex development. We report here two unrelated
families that include patients with isolated PRS, isolated congenital heart
defect (CHD), or both anomalies. Patients from both families carried a very
similar ~1 Mb deletion upstream of SOX9. Analysis of ChIP-Seq from mouse cardiac 
tissue for H3K27ac, a marker of active regulatory elements, led us to identify
several putative cardiac enhancers within the deleted region. One of these
elements is known to interact with Nkx2.5 and Gata4, two transcription factors
responsible for CHDs. Altogether, these data suggest that disruption of cardiac
enhancers located upstream of SOX9 may be responsible for CHDs in humans.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 24115316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Science. 2013 Nov 8;342(6159):734-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1241359. Epub 2013 Oct 
3.

Mitochondrial fusion directs cardiomyocyte differentiation via calcineurin and
Notch signaling.

Kasahara A(1), Cipolat S, Chen Y, Dorn GW 2nd, Scorrano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, 1206
Geneva, Switzerland.

Mitochondrial morphology is crucial for tissue homeostasis, but its role in cell 
differentiation is unclear. We found that mitochondrial fusion was required for
proper cardiomyocyte development. Ablation of mitochondrial fusion proteins
Mitofusin 1 and 2 in the embryonic mouse heart, or gene-trapping of Mitofusin 2
or Optic atrophy 1 in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), arrested mouse heart
development and impaired differentiation of ESCs into cardiomyocytes. Gene
expression profiling revealed decreased levels of transcription factors
transforming growth factor-ß/bone morphogenetic protein, serum response factor,
GATA4, and myocyte enhancer factor 2, linked to increased Ca(2+)-dependent
calcineurin activity and Notch1 signaling that impaired ESC differentiation.
Orchestration of cardiomyocyte differentiation by mitochondrial morphology
reveals how mitochondria, Ca(2+), and calcineurin interact to regulate Notch1
signaling.

PMID: 24091702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Dec;27(8):2249-55. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.09.018. Epub
2013 Sep 30.

Effect of bisphenol A on pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells and
differentiation capacity in mouse embryoid bodies.

Chen X(1), Xu B, Han X, Mao Z, Talbot P, Chen M, Du G, Chen A, Liu J, Wang X, Xia
Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China; Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Bisphenol A (BPA) poses potential risks to reproduction and development. However,
the mechanism of BPA's effects on early embryonic development is still unknown.
Embryonic stem cells (ESC) and embryoid bodies (EB) provide valuable in vitro
models for testing the toxic effects of environmental chemicals in early
embryogenesis. In this study, mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) were acutely
exposed to BPA for 24h, and general cytotoxicity and the effect of BPA on
pluripotency were then evaluated. Meanwhile, mouse embryoid bodies (mEB) were
exposed to BPA up to 6 days and their differentiation capacity was evaluated. In 
mESC and mEB, we found that BPA up-regulated pluripotency markers (Oct4, Sox2 and
Nanog) at mRNA and/or protein levels. Moreover, BPA increased the mRNA levels of 
endodermal markers (Gata4,Sox17) and mesodermal markers (Sma,Desmin), and reduced
the mRNA levels of ectodermal markers (Nestin,Fgf5) in mEB. Furthermore,
microRNA(miR)-134, an expression inhibitor of pluripotency markers including
Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog, was decreased both in BPA-treated mESC and mEB. These
results firstly indicate that BPA may disturb pluripotency in mESC and
differentiation of mEB, and may inhibit ectodermal lineage differentiation of mEB
while miR-134 may play a key role underlying this effect.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24090592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33049-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501601. Epub
2013 Oct 2.

Nicotine induces the up-regulation of the a7-nicotinic receptor (a7-nAChR) in
human squamous cell lung cancer cells via the Sp1/GATA protein pathway.

Brown KC(1), Perry HE, Lau JK, Jones DV, Pulliam JF, Thornhill BA, Crabtree CM,
Luo H, Chen YC, Dasgupta P.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Toxicology, Joan C.
Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia 25755.

Nicotine, the addictive component of cigarettes, promotes lung cancer
proliferation via the a7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (a7-nAChR) subtype. The
present manuscript explores the effect of nicotine exposure on a7-nAChR levels in
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (SCC-L) in vitro and in vivo. Nicotine (at
concentrations present in the plasma of average smokers) increased a7-nAChR
levels in human SCC-L cell lines. Nicotine-induced up-regulation of a7-nAChR was 
confirmed in vivo by chicken chorioallantoic membrane models. We also observed
that the levels of a7-nAChR in human SCC-L tumors (isolated from patients who are
active smokers) correlated with their smoking history. Nicotine increased the
levels of a7-nAChR mRNA and a7-nAChR transcription in human SCC-L cell lines and 
SCC-L tumors. Nicotine-induced up-regulation of a7-nAChR required GATA4 and
GATA6. ChIP assays showed that nicotine induced the binding of GATA4 or GATA6 to 
Sp1 on the a7-nAChR promoter, thereby inducing its transcription and increasing
its levels in human SCC-L. Our data are clinically relevant because SCC-L
patients smoked for decades before being diagnosed with cancer. It may be
envisaged that continuous exposure to nicotine (in such SCC-L patients) causes
up-regulation of a7-nAChRs, which facilitates tumor growth and progression. Our
results will also be relevant to many SCC-L patients exposed to nicotine via
second-hand smoke, electronic cigarettes, and patches or gums to quit smoking.

PMCID: PMC3829154
PMID: 24089524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Dec;65:88-97. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 29.

Estrogen-related receptor gamma induces cardiac hypertrophy by activating GATA4.

Kwon DH(1), Eom GH, Kee HJ, Nam YS, Cho YK, Kim DK, Koo JY, Kim HS, Nam KI, Kim
KK, Lee IK, Park SB, Choi HS, Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea.

Estrogen-related receptor gamma (ERR<U+03B3>) is an orphan nuclear receptor that has
biological roles mainly in metabolism and that controls metabolic switching in
perinatal heart. In adult heart diseases, however, the functional roles of ERR<U+03B3>
have not yet been elucidated. In the present study, we aimed to characterize the 
role of ERR<U+03B3> in cardiac hypertrophy. The functional roles of ERR<U+03B3> in the
development of cardiac hypertrophy were examined in primary cultured
cardiomyocytes and in animal models. ERR<U+03B3> expression was increased in hearts from
human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients and in both cellular and animal models
of cardiac hypertrophy. Transgenic overexpression in mouse heart as well as
forced expression of ERR<U+03B3> in cardiomyocytes induced hypertrophic phenotypes.
Knock-down of ERR<U+03B3> blocked agonist-induced hypertrophic phenotypes. ERR<U+03B3> bound
directly to the proximal ERR-responsive element in the GATA4 promoter in a
sequence-specific manner and thereby induced transcription. ERR<U+03B3>-induced
hypertrophy was blocked by inhibition of GATA4. GSK-5182, an inverse agonist of
ERR<U+03B3>, completely blocked cardiac hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes. It also prevented
aortic banding-induced cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in mouse heart. These
findings demonstrate a novel ERR<U+03B3>/GATA4 signal cascade in the development of
cardiac hypertrophy and suggest GSK-5182 as a possible therapeutic.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24083978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Nov;96(5):1686-94; discussion 1694. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.06.063. Epub 2013 Sep 29.

Injectable small intestine submucosal extracellular matrix in an acute myocardial
infarction model.

Toeg HD(1), Tiwari-Pandey R, Seymour R, Ahmadi A, Crowe S, Vulesevic B, Suuronen 
EJ, Ruel M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms involved in myocardial regeneration and cardiac
remodeling were examined by injecting porcine-derived small intestine submucosal 
extracellular matrix (SIS-ECM), with and without circulating angiogenic cells
(CACs), in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction (MI).
METHODS: Nine- to 10-week-old female C57BL/6J mice had the left anterior
descending (LAD) coronary artery ligated. Seven days after ligation, 38 randomly 
allocated animals received echocardiographically guided intramyocardial
injections of phosphate buffered saline (PBS), CACs, SIS-ECM, or SIS-ECM + CACs. 
Repeated echocardiography and immunohistochemical analysis were performed at 28
days after ligation.
RESULTS: Baseline postligation left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was
equivalent in all groups. Twenty-one days after treatment, ejection fraction
improved in the SIS-ECM + CAC treatment group (by 38% ± 2.12%) and the SIS-ECM
treatment group (by 36% ± 3.71%), compared with the CAC-alone and PBS treatment
groups (p < 0.1). Masson's trichrome staining showed reduced infarct size in
SIS-ECM + CACs (34.2% ± 3.1%) and SIS-ECM alone (34.5% ± 4.7%) compared with CACs
alone (47.3% ± 6.0%) and PBS (61.9% ± 5.5%; p < 0.002). Arteriolar density in
periinfarct regions was enhanced in both SIS-ECM-treated groups (by = 78% ± 7%; p
= 0.03). More GATA4- and ß-catenin-positive cardiac cells were found in the
myocardium of SIS-ECM-treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Intramyocardial delivery of SIS-ECM 7 days after MI in a mouse model
reduced infarct size and improved myocardial vessel density and function; when
combined with CACs it helped restore myocardial cellularity, suggesting a
potential therapeutic role for SIS-ECM in cardiac regeneration.

Copyright © 2013 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24083799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2013 Dec;6(6):989-99. doi: 10.1007/s12265-013-9510-z.
Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Electrical stimulation promotes maturation of cardiomyocytes derived from human
embryonic stem cells.

Chan YC(1), Ting S, Lee YK, Ng KM, Zhang J, Chen Z, Siu CW, Oh SK, Tse HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

While human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can differentiate into functional
cardiomyocytes, their immature phenotypes limit their therapeutic application for
myocardial regeneration. We sought to determine whether electrical stimulation
could enhance the differentiation and maturation of hESC-derived cardiomyocytes. 
Cardiac differentiation was induced in a HES3 hESC line via embryoid bodies
formation treated with a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor. Detailed molecular and
functional analysis were performed in those hESC-derived cardiomyocytes cultured 
for 4 days in the absence or presence of electrical field stimulation (6.6 V/cm, 
1 Hz, and 2 ms pulses) using an eight-channel C-Pace stimulator (Ion-Optics Co., 
MA). Upon electrical stimulation, quantitative polymerase chain reaction
demonstrated significant upregulation of cardiac-specific gene expression
including HCN1, MLC2V, SCN5A, SERCA, Kv4.3, and GATA4; immunostaining and flow
cytometry analysis revealed cellular elongation and an increased proportion of
troponin-T positive cells (6.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.2% vs. 15.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.1%; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
Electrophysiological studies showed an increase in the proportion of
ventricular-like hESC-derived cardiomyocytes (48 vs. 29%, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with
lengthening of their action potential duration at 90% repolarization
(387.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>35.35; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11 vs. 291.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>20.82; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and 50%
repolarization (313.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>27.94; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11 vs. 234.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>16.10; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) after 
electrical stimulation. Nonetheless, the membrane diastolic potentials and action
potential upstrokes of different hESC-derived cardiomyocyte phenotypes, and the
overall beating rate remained unchanged (all P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Fluorescence confocal
imaging revealed that electrical stimulation significantly increased both
spontaneous and caffeine-induced calcium flux in the hESC-derived cardiomyocytes 
(approximately 1.6-fold for both cases; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). In conclusion, electrical
field stimulation increased the expression of cardiac-specific genes and the
yield of differentiation, promoted ventricular-like phenotypes, and improved the 
calcium handling of hESC-derived cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 24081385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Oct;15(5):471-80. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0002.

Effect of exogenous Oct4 overexpression on cardiomyocyte differentiation of human
amniotic mesenchymal cells.

Nagura S(1), Otaka S, Koike C, Okabe M, Yoshida T, Fathy M, Fukahara K, Yoshimura
N, Misaki T, Nikaido T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Regenerative Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama , Toyama 9300194, Japan .

Regenerative therapy is a new strategy for the end-stage heart failure; however, 
the ideal cell source has not yet been established for this therapy. We expected 
that the amnion might be an ideal cell source for cardiac regenerative therapy
and that the differentiation potency of the human amnion mesenchymal cells
(hAMCs) could be improved by overexpression of Oct4, a key factor that maintains 
the undifferentiated state. A plasmid vector was made by insertion of the Oct4
open reading frame (ORF) under control of a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter
(pCMV-hOct4) and transfected into hAMCs by electroporation. The optimum induction
time was investigated by comparing the quantity of stem cell-specific mRNAs,
cardiac-specific mRNAs, and cardiac-specific proteins with time. hAMCs already
expressed cardiac-specific proteins such as Nkx2.5 and Connexin43. After
pCMV-hOct4 transfection, endogenous Oct4 mRNA and other stem cell markers showed 
a transient increase. With 5-azacytidine treatment, quantities of the
cardiac-specific mRNAs, such as GATA4 and myosin light-chain-2v (Mlc-2v), were
increased significantly. After Oct4 overexpression, the highest expression of
cardiac-specific mRNAs and stem cell makers was seen at almost the same time.
Furthermore, more mature myocardial contraction proteins were observed when hAMCs
were induced at specific optimal times after gene transfection. In conclusion,
hAMCs were activated to an undifferentiated state by overexpression of Oct4, and 
their cardiac differentiation potency was improved. Thus, the single-time
transfection of the Oct4 expression vector may be a useful strategy for effective
cell therapy. The use of cryopreserved hAMCs in cell therapy still requires more 
investigation.

PMID: 24073944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;45(12):2724-35. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.007. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Enhanced mesenchymal stem cell survival induced by GATA-4 overexpression is
partially mediated by regulation of the miR-15 family.

Yu B(1), Gong M, He Z, Wang YG, Millard RW, Ashraf M, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

We reported previously that pre-programming mesenchymal stem cells with the
GATA-4 gene increases significantly cell survival in an ischemic environment. In 
this study, we tested whether regulation of microRNAs and their target proteins
was associated with the cytoprotective effects of GATA-4.METHODS AND RESULTS:
Mesenchymal stem cells were harvested from adult rat bone marrow and transduced
with GATA-4 (MSC(GATA-4)) using the murine stem cell virus retroviral expression 
system. Cells transfected with empty vector (MSC(Null)) were used as controls.
Quantitative real-time PCR data showed that the expression levels of miR-15
family members (miR-15b, miR-16, and miR-195) were significantly down-regulated
in MSC(GATA-4). The protein expression of Bcl-w (Bcl-2-like-2), an anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family protein, was increased in MSC(GATA-4). Hypoxic culture (low glucose 
and low oxygen) induced the release of lactate dehydrogenase from mesenchymal
stem cells and reduced cell survival. Compared to MSC(Null), MSC(GATA-4) showed
less lactate dehydrogenase release and greater cell survival following 72 h
hypoxia exposure. The mitochondrial membrane potential, detected with the dye
JC-1, was well maintained, and mitochondrial membrane permeability, expressed as 
caspase 3 and 7 activities in response to the ischemic environment was lower in
MSC(GATA-4). Moreover, transfection with miR-195 significantly down-regulated
Bcl-w expression in mesenchymal stem cells through a binding site in the 3'-UTR
of the Bcl-w mRNA and reduced mesenchymal stem cell resistance to ischemic
injury.
CONCLUSIONS: The overexpression of GATA-4 in mesenchymal stem cells
down-regulates miR-15 family members, causing increased resistance to ischemia
through the up-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins in the Bcl-2 family.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3863644
PMID: 24070634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Development. 2013 Nov;140(21):4311-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.093922. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Atypical protein kinase C couples cell sorting with primitive endoderm maturation
in the mouse blastocyst.

Saiz N(1), Grabarek JB, Sabherwal N, Papalopulu N, Plusa B.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road,
Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

During mouse pre-implantation development, extra-embryonic primitive endoderm
(PrE) and pluripotent epiblast precursors are specified in the inner cell mass
(ICM) of the early blastocyst in a 'salt and pepper' manner, and are subsequently
sorted into two distinct layers. Positional cues provided by the blastocyst
cavity are thought to be instrumental for cell sorting; however, the sequence of 
events and the mechanisms that control this segregation remain unknown. Here, we 
show that atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), a protein associated with apicobasal 
polarity, is specifically enriched in PrE precursors in the ICM prior to cell
sorting and prior to overt signs of cell polarisation. aPKC adopts a polarised
localisation in PrE cells only after they reach the blastocyst cavity and form a 
mature epithelium, in a process that is dependent on FGF signalling. To assess
the role of aPKC in PrE formation, we interfered with its activity using either
chemical inhibition or RNAi knockdown. We show that inhibition of aPKC from the
mid blastocyst stage not only prevents sorting of PrE precursors into a polarised
monolayer but concomitantly affects the maturation of PrE precursors. Our results
suggest that the processes of PrE and epiblast segregation, and cell fate
progression are interdependent, and place aPKC as a central player in the
segregation of epiblast and PrE progenitors in the mouse blastocyst.

PMCID: PMC4007710
PMID: 24067354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4845-58. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1410. Epub 2013 Sep
24.

GATA4 and GATA6 silencing in ovarian granulosa cells affects levels of mRNAs
involved in steroidogenesis, extracellular structure organization, IGF-I
activity, and apoptosis.

Bennett J(1), Baumgarten SC, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 606012. costocco@uic.edu.

Knockdown of the transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 in granulosa cells (GCs)
impairs folliculogenesis and induces infertility. To investigate the pathways and
genes regulated by these factors, we performed microarray analyses on wild-type
GCs or GCs lacking GATA4, GATA6, or GATA4/6 (G4(gcko), G6(gcko), and G4/6(gcko)) 
after in vivo treatment with equine chorionic gonadotropin. GATA4 deletion
affected a greater number of genes than GATA6, which correlates with the
subfertility observed in G4(gcko) mice and the normal reproductive function found
in G6(gcko) animals. An even greater number of genes were affected by the
deletion of both factors. Moreover, the expression of FSH receptor, LH receptor, 
inhibin a and ß, versican, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, and the
regulatory unit 2b of protein kinase A, which are known to be crucial for ovarian
function, was greatly affected in double GATA4 and GATA6 knockouts when compared 
with single GATA-deficient animals. This suggests that GATA4 and GATA6
functionally compensate for each other in the regulation of key ovarian genes.
Functional enrichment revealed that ovulation, growth, intracellular signaling,
extracellular structure organization, gonadotropin and growth factor actions, and
steroidogenesis were significantly regulated in G4/6(gcko) mice. The results of
this analysis were confirmed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction,
immunohistochemical, and biological assays. Treatment of GCs with cAMP/IGF-I, to 
bypass FSH and IGF-I signaling defects, revealed that most of the affected genes 
are direct targets of GATA4/6. The diversity of pathways affected by the
knockdown of GATA underscores the important role of these factors in the
regulation of GC function.

PMCID: PMC3836082
PMID: 24064357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):111-26. doi: 10.1159/000353942. Epub 2013 Sep
21.

Culture of mouse amniotic fluid-derived cells on irradiated STO feeders results
in the generation of primitive endoderm cell lines capable of self-renewal in
vitro.

Babic AM(1), Jang S, Nicolov E, Voicu H, Luckey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Tex., USA.

The cells present in amniotic fluid (AF) are currently used for prenatal
diagnosis of fetal anomalies but are also a potential source of cells for cell
therapy. To better characterize putative progenitor cell populations present in
AF, we used culture conditions that support self-renewal to determine if these
promoted the generation of stable cell lines from AF-derived cells (AFC). Cells
isolated from E11.5 mouse were cultured on irradiated STO fibroblast feeder
layers in human embryonic germ cell derivation conditions. The cultures grew
multicellular epithelial colonies that could be repropagated from single cells.
Reverse transcription semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction of established
cell lines revealed that they belonged to the extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn)
expressing high levels of Gata6, Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2 and Sox7 mRNA. Hierarchical 
clustering based on the whole transcriptome expression profile of the AFC lines
(AFCL) shows significant correlation between transcription profiles of AFCL and
blastocyst-derived XEN, an ExEn cell line. In vitro differentiation of AFCL
results in the generation of cells expressing albumin and a-fetoprotein (AFP),
while intramuscular injection of AFCL into immunodeficient mice produced
AFP-positive tumors with primitive endodermal appearance. Hence, E11.5 mouse AF
contains cells that efficiently produce XEN lines. These AF-derived XEN lines do 
not spontaneously differentiate into embryonic-type cells but are phenotypically 
stable and have the capacity for extensive expansion. The lack of requirement for
reprogramming factors to turn AF-derived progenitor cells into stable cell lines 
capable of massive expansion together with the known ability of ExEn to
contribute to embryonic tissue suggests that this cell type may be a candidate
for banking for cell therapies.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC3914766
PMID: 24060676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 4;439(4):591-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.023. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

GATA4 loss-of-function mutation underlies familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Li RG(1), Li L, Qiu XB, Yuan F, Xu L, Li X, Xu YJ, Jiang WF, Jiang JQ, Liu X,
Fang WY, Zhang M, Peng LY, Qu XK, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China.

The cardiac transcription factor GATA4 is essential for cardiac development, and 
mutations in this gene have been implicated in a wide variety of congenital heart
diseases in both animal models and humans. However, whether mutated GATA4
predisposes to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) remains unknown. In this study, the
whole coding region and splice junction sites of the GATA4 gene was sequenced in 
110 unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available relatives of the index 
patient harboring an identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched
healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped. The functional effect of the
mutant GATA4 was characterized in contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a
luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA4
mutation, p.C271S, was identified in a family with DCM inherited as an autosomal 
dominant trait, which co-segregated with DCM in the family with complete
penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in 400 control chromosomes and the
altered amino acid was completely conserved evolutionarily among species.
Functional analysis demonstrated that the GATA4 mutant was associated with
significantly decreased transcriptional activity and remarkably reduced
synergistic activation between GATA4 and NKX2-5, another transcription factor
crucial for cardiogenesis. The findings provide novel insight into the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of DCM, suggesting the potential
implications in the prenatal diagnosis and gene-specific treatment for this
common form of myocardial disorder.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2013 Oct;6(5):444-51. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000189. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

Effect of copy number variants on outcomes for infants with single ventricle
heart defects.

Carey AS(1), Liang L, Edwards J, Brandt T, Mei H, Sharp AJ, Hsu DT, Newburger JW,
Ohye RG, Chung WK, Russell MW, Rosenfeld JA, Shaffer LG, Parides MK, Edelmann L, 
Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute.

BACKGROUND: Human genomes harbor copy number variants (CNVs), which are regions
of DNA gains or losses. Although pathogenic CNVs are associated with congenital
heart disease (CHD), their effect on clinical outcomes is unknown. This study
sought to determine whether pathogenic CNVs among infants with single ventricle
physiology were associated with inferior neurocognitive and somatic growth
outcomes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Genomic DNAs from 223 subjects of 2 National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute-sponsored randomized clinical trials in infants with single
ventricle CHD and 270 controls from The Cancer Genome Atlas project were analyzed
for rare CNVs>300 kb using array comparative genomic hybridization.
Neurocognitive and growth outcomes at 14 months from the CHD trials were compared
among subjects with and without pathogenic CNVs. Putatively pathogenic CNVs,
comprising 25 duplications and 6 deletions, had a prevalence of 13.9%,
significantly greater than the 4.4% rate of such CNVs among controls. CNVs
associated with genomic disorders were found in 13 cases but not in controls.
Several CNVs likely to be causative of single ventricle CHD were observed,
including aberrations altering the dosage of GATA4, MYH11, and GJA5. Subjects
with pathogenic CNVs had worse linear growth, and those with CNVs associated with
known genomic disorders had the poorest neurocognitive and growth outcomes. A
minority of children with pathogenic CNVs were noted to be dysmorphic on clinical
genetics examination.
CONCLUSIONS: Pathogenic CNVs seem to contribute to the cause of single ventricle 
forms of CHD in =10% of cases and are clinically subtle but adversely affect
outcomes in children harboring them.

PMCID: PMC3987966
PMID: 24021551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Dev Growth Differ. 2013 Sep;55(7):676-86. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12075. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Insulin induces proliferation and cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells in a
dose-dependent manner.

Li WY(1), Song YL, Xiong CJ, Lu PQ, Xue LX, Yao CX, Wang WP, Zhang SF, Zhang SF, 
Wei QX, Zhang YY, Zhao JM, Zang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450001, China.

Insulin is a peptide hormone produced by beta cells of the pancreas. The roles of
insulin in energy metabolism have been well studied, with most of the attention
focused on glucose utilization, but the roles of insulin in cell proliferation
and differentiation remain unclear. In this study, we observed for the first time
that 10 nmol/L insulin treatment induces cell proliferation and cardiac
differentiation of P19CL6 cells, whereas 50 and 100 nmol/L insulin treatment
induces P19CL6 cell apoptosis and blocks cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells.
By using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blotting analysis,
we found that the mRNA levels of cyclin D1 and a myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) are
induced upon 10 nmol/L insulin stimulation and inhibited upon 50/100 nmol/L
insulin treatment, whereas the mRNA levels of BCL-2-antagonist of cell death
(BAD) exists a reverse trend. The similar results were observed in P19CL6 cells
expressing GATA-6 or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa). Our
results identified the downstream targets of insulin, cyclin D1, BAD, a-MHC, and 
GATA-4, elucidate a novel molecular mechanism of insulin in promoting cell
proliferation and differentiation.

© 2013 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2013 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24020834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 7;51(3):313-24. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0089. Print 2013
Dec.

GATA augments GNRH-mediated increases in Adcyap1 gene expression in pituitary
gonadotrope cells.

Thomas RL(1), Crawford NM, Grafer CM, Zheng W, Halvorson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-9032, USA.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide 1 (PACAP or ADCYAP1) regulates
gonadotropin biosynthesis and secretion, both alone and in conjunction with GNRH.
Initially identified as a hypothalamic-releasing factor, ADCYAP1 subsequently has
been identified in pituitary gonadotropes, suggesting it may act as an
autocrine-paracrine factor in this tissue. GNRH has been shown to increase
pituitary Adcyap1 gene expression through the interaction of CREB and jun/fos
with CRE/AP1 cis-elements in the proximal promoter. In these studies, we were
interested in identifying additional transcription factors and cognate
cis-elements which regulate Adcyap1 gene promoter activity and chose to focus on 
the GATA family of transcription factors known to be critical for both pituitary 
cell differentiation and gonadotropin subunit expression. By transient
transfection and electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis, we demonstrate
that GATA2 and GATA4 stimulate Adcyap1 promoter activity via a GATA cis-element
located at position -191 in the rat Adcyap1 gene promoter. Furthermore, we show
that addition of GATA2 or GATA4 significantly augments GNRH-mediated stimulation 
of Adcyap1 gene promoter activity in the gonadotrope LßT2 cell line. Conversely, 
blunting GATA expression with specific siRNA inhibits the ability of GNRH to
stimulate ADCYAP1 mRNA levels in these cells. These data demonstrate a complex
interaction between GNRH and GATA on ADCYAP1 expression, providing important new 
insights into the regulation of gonadotrope function.

PMCID: PMC3825478
PMID: 24018543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 28;8(8):e73304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073304. eCollection
2013.

Cardiomyocyte protection by GATA-4 gene engineered mesenchymal stem cells is
partially mediated by translocation of miR-221 in microvesicles.

Yu B(1), Gong M, Wang Y, Millard RW, Pasha Z, Yang Y, Ashraf M, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: microRNAs (miRs), a novel class of small non-coding RNAs, are
involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, development, and death. In this 
study, we found that miR-221 translocation by microvesicles (MVs) plays an
important role in cardioprotection mediated by GATA-4 overexpressed mesenchymal
stem cells (MSC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adult rat bone marrow MSC and neonatal rat ventricle
cardiomyocytes (CM) were harvested as primary cultures. MSC were transduced with 
GATA-4 (MSC(GATA-4)) using the murine stem cell virus (pMSCV) retroviral
expression system. Empty vector transfection was used as a control (MSC(Null)).
The expression of miRs was assessed by real-time PCR and localized using in situ 
hybridization (ISH). MVs collected from MSC cultures were characterized by
expression of CD9, CD63, and HSP70, and photographed with electron microscopy.
Cardioprotection during hypoxia afforded by conditioned medium (CdM) from MSC
cultures was evaluated by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, MTS uptake by CM, 
and caspase 3/7 activity. Expression of miR-221/222 was significantly higher in
MSC than in CM and miR-221 was upregulated in MSC(GATA-4). MSC overexpression of 
miR-221 significantly enhanced cardioprotection by reducing the expression of p53
upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA). Moreover, expression of PUMA was
significantly decreased in CM co-cultured with MSC. MVs derived from MSC
expressed high levels of miR-221, and were internalized quickly by CM as
documented in images obtained from a Time-Lapse Imaging System.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that cardioprotection by MSC(GATA-4) may be 
regulated in part by a transfer of anti-apoptotic miRs contained within MVs.

PMCID: PMC3756018
PMID: 24015301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biol Reprod. 2013 Oct 24;89(4):98. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.111849. Print 2013
Oct.

Expression, regulation, and promoter activation of vanin-2 (VNN2) in bovine
follicles prior to ovulation.

Sayasith K(1), Sirois J, Lussier JG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en reproduction animale and the département de biomedicine
vétérinaire, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.

Vanin-2 (VNN2) is known to be involved in inflammation and leukocyte migration,
but its regulation in follicles remains unknown. The objectives of this work were
to study the regulation of VNN2 transcripts in bovine follicles prior to
ovulation and to characterize the control of its expression in bovine granulosa
cells. VNN2 expression was studied using total RNA extracted from granulosa cells
of small follicles (2-4 mm in diameter), dominant follicles obtained on Day 5 of 
the estrous cycle, ovulatory follicles obtained 0-24 h after human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG), and corpora lutea on Day 5 of the cycle. The results from
RT-PCR analyses showed that levels of VNN2 mRNA were high in ovulatory follicles 
24 h post-hCG but low in the other tissues. In ovulatory follicles, levels of
VNN2 mRNA were low at 0 h but significantly up-regulated 12-24 h post-hCG. To
determine factors controlling VNN2 gene expression, established primary cultures 
of granulosa cells isolated from bovine dominant follicles were used. Treatment
with forskolin elevated VNN2 mRNA expression as observed in vivo. Mutation
studies identified the minimal region conferring basal and forskolin-stimulated
VNN2 promoter activities, which were dependent on chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF), GATA, and Ebox cis-elements.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified COUP-TF, GATA4, and upstream
stimulating factor proteins as key factors interacting with these elements.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed basal and forskolin-induced
interactions between these proteins and the VNN2 promoter in bovine granulosa
cell cultures. VNN2 promoter activity and mRNA expression were markedly
stimulated by forskolin and overexpression of the catalytic subunit of PKA, but
inhibited by PKA and ERK1/2 inhibitors. Collectively, the findings from this
study describe for the first time the gonadotropin/forskolin-dependent
up-regulation of VNN2 transcripts in granulosa cells of preovulatory follicles
and provide insights into some of the molecular bases of VNN2 gene expression in 
follicular cells.

PMID: 24006283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Hum Mutat. 2013 Dec;34(12):1662-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22434. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

GATA4 loss-of-function mutations underlie familial tetralogy of fallot.

Yang YQ(1), Gharibeh L, Li RG, Xin YF, Wang J, Liu ZM, Qiu XB, Xu YJ, Xu L, Qu
XK, Liu X, Fang WY, Huang RT, Xue S, Nemer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) represents the most common form of cyanotic congenital 
heart disease and accounts for significant morbidity and mortality in humans.
Emerging evidence has implicated genetic defects in the pathogenesis of TOF.
However, TOF is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic basis for TOF in most
patients remains unclear. In this study, the GATA4 gene were sequenced in 52
probands with familial TOF, and three novel heterozygous mutations, including A9P
and L51V both located in the putative first transactivational domain and N285S in
the C-terminal zinc finger, were identified in three probands, respectively.
Genetic analysis of the pedigrees demonstrated that in each family the mutation
cosegregated with TOF with complete penetrance. The missense mutations were
absent in 800 control chromosomes and the altered amino acids were highly
conserved evolutionarily. Functional analysis showed that the GATA4 mutants were 
consistently associated with diminished DNA-binding affinity and decreased
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the N285S mutation completely disrupted
the physical interaction between GATA4 and TBX5. To our knowledge, this report
associates GATA4 loss-of-function mutations with familial TOF for the first time,
providing novel insight into the molecular mechanism involved in TOF and
suggesting potential implications for the early prophylaxis and allele-specific
therapy of TOF.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 24000169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;133(1):11-27. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1353-9. Epub 2013 Aug
25.

The contribution of de novo and rare inherited copy number changes to congenital 
heart disease in an unselected sample of children with conotruncal defects or
hypoplastic left heart disease.

Warburton D(1), Ronemus M, Kline J, Jobanputra V, Williams I, Anyane-Yeboa K,
Chung W, Yu L, Wong N, Awad D, Yu CY, Leotta A, Kendall J, Yamrom B, Lee YH,
Wigler M, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics and Development, Columbia University,
New York, NY, USA, dw9@columbia.edu.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common congenital malformation, with
evidence of a strong genetic component. We analyzed data from 223 consecutively
ascertained families, each consisting of at least one child affected by a
conotruncal defect (CNT) or hypoplastic left heart disease (HLHS) and both
parents. The NimbleGen HD2-2.1 comparative genomic hybridization platform was
used to identify de novo and rare inherited copy number variants (CNVs).
Excluding 10 cases with 22q11.2 DiGeorge deletions, we validated de novo CNVs in 
8 % of 148 probands with CNTs, 12.7 % of 71 probands with HLHS and none in 4
probands with both. Only 2 % of control families showed a de novo CNV. We also
identified a group of ultra-rare inherited CNVs that occurred de novo in our
sample, contained a candidate gene for CHD, recurred in our sample or were
present in an affected sibling. We confirmed the contribution to CHD of copy
number changes in genes such as GATA4 and NODAL and identified several genes in
novel recurrent CNVs that may point to novel CHD candidate loci. We also found
CNVs previously associated with highly variable phenotypes and reduced
penetrance, such as dup 1q21.1, dup 16p13.11, dup 15q11.2-13, dup 22q11.2, and
del 2q23.1. We found that the presence of extra-cardiac anomalies was not related
to the frequency of CNVs, and that there was no significant difference in CNV
frequency or specificity between the probands with CNT and HLHS. In agreement
with other series, we identified likely causal CNVs in 5.6 % of our total sample,
half of which were de novo.

PMCID: PMC3880624
PMID: 23979609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Endocrinology. 2013 Nov;154(11):4352-64. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1358. Epub 2013 Aug
22.

ERß selective agonist inhibits angiotensin-induced cardiovascular pathology in
female mice.

Pedram A(1), Razandi M, Korach KS, Narayanan R, Dalton JT, Levin ER.

Author information: 
(1)MD, Medical Service (111-I), Long Beach Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 5901 
East Seventh Street, Long Beach, California 90822. ellis.levin@va.gov.

Cardiac hypertrophy in humans can progress to cardiac failure if the underlying
impetus is poorly controlled. An important direct stimulator of hypertrophy and
its progression is the angiotensin II (AngII) peptide. AngII also causes
hypertension that indirectly contributes to cardiac hypertrophy. Others and we
have shown that estrogens acting through the estrogen receptor (ER)-ß can inhibit
AngII-induced or other forms of cardiac hypertrophy in mice. However, the
proliferative effects of estrogen in breast and uterus that promote the
development of malignancy preclude using the steroid to prevent cardiac disease
progression. We therefore tested whether an ERß selective agonist, ß-LGND2, can
prevent hypertension and cardiac pathology in female mice. AngII infusion over 3 
weeks significantly stimulated systolic and diastolic hypertension, cardiac
hypertrophy, and cardiac fibrosis, all significantly prevented by ß-LGND2 in
wild-type but not in ERß genetically deleted mice. AngII stimulated the Akt
kinase to phosphorylate and inhibit the glycogen synthase kinase-3ß kinase,
leading to GATA4 transcription factor activation and hypertrophic mRNA
expression. As a novel mechanism, all these actions were opposed by estradiol and
ß-LGND2. Our findings provide additional understanding of the antihypertrophic
effects of ERß and serve as an impetus to test specific receptor agonists in
humans to prevent the worsening of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 23970786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2498. doi: 10.1038/srep02498.

Induction of Pax3 gene expression impedes cardiac differentiation.

Li Q(1), Le May M, Lacroix N, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. qiaoli@uottawa.ca

Cell-based therapies using pluripotent stem cells hold great promise as
regenerative approaches to treat many types of diseases. Nevertheless many
challenges remain and, perhaps foremost, is the issue of how to direct and
enhance the specification and differentiation of a desired cell type for
potential therapeutics. We have examined the molecular basis for the inverse
correlation of cardiac and skeletal myogenesis in small molecule-enhanced stem
cell differentiation. Our study shows that activation of premyogenic factor Pax3 
coincides with inhibiting gene expression of early cardiac factor GATA4.
Interestingly, the inhibitory effect of small molecules on cardiac
differentiation depends on the function of Pax3, but not the mesoderm factor
Meox1. Thus Pax3 is an inhibitor of cardiac differentiation in lineage
specification. Our studies reveal the dual roles of Pax3 in stem cell fate
determinations and provide new molecular insights into small molecule-enhanced
lineage specification.

PMCID: PMC3750538
PMID: 23970178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 1;193:210-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.07.020.
Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Analysis of protein expression in zebrafish during gonad differentiation by
targeted proteomics.

Groh KJ(1), Schönenberger R, Eggen RI, Segner H, Suter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, 8600
Dübendorf, Switzerland. Electronic address: ksenia.groh@eawag.ch.

The molecular mechanisms governing sex determination and differentiation in the
zebrafish (Danio rerio) are not fully understood. To gain more insights into the 
function of specific genes in these complex processes, the expression of multiple
candidates needs to be assessed, preferably on the protein level. Here, we
developed a targeted proteomics method based on selected reaction monitoring
(SRM) to study the candidate sex-related proteins in zebrafish which were
selected based on a global proteomics analysis of adult gonads and
representational difference analysis of male and female DNA, as well as on
published information on zebrafish and other vertebrates. We employed the
developed SRM protocols to acquire time-resolved protein expression profiles
during the gonad differentiation period in vas::EGFP transgenic zebrafish.
Evidence on protein expression was obtained for the first time for several
candidate genes previously studied only on the mRNA level or suggested by
bioinformatic predictions. Tuba1b (tubulin alpha 1b), initially included in the
study as one of the potential housekeeping proteins, was found to be
preferentially expressed in the adult testis with nearly absent expression in the
ovary. The revealed changes in protein expression patterns associated with gonad 
differentiation suggest that several of the examined proteins, especially Ilf2
and Ilf3 (interleukin enhancer-binding factors 2 and 3), Raldh3 (retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase type 3), Zgc:195027 (low density lipoprotein-related receptor
protein 3) and Sept5a (septin 5a), may play a specific role in the sexual
differentiation in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23968773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2013;76(11):635-50. doi:
10.1080/15287394.2013.789415.

Perfluorooctanoic acid induced-developmental cardiotoxicity: are peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor a (PPARa) and bone morphorgenic protein 2 (BMP2) 
pathways involved?

Jiang Q(1), Lust RM, DeWitt JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) is an environmental contaminant known to induce
developmental toxicity in animal models through activation of the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa). Previously, it was demonstrated that
in ovo exposure to PFOA induced cardiotoxicity in chicken embryos and hatchlings.
To investigate potential PPARa-mediated mechanisms, fertile chicken eggs were
injected prior to incubation with WY 14,643, a PPARa agonist. Cardiac morphology 
and function were evaluated in late-stage embryos and hatchlings. Histologically,
unlike PFOA, WY 14,643 did not induce thinning of the right ventricular wall. Via
echocardiography, however, WY 14,643 induced effects similar to those of PFOA,
including increased left ventricular wall thickness and mass, elevated heart
rate, ejection fraction, fractional shortening, and decreased stroke volume.
Additionally, to investigate mechanisms associated with early heart development, 
a separate group of fertile chicken eggs was injected prior to incubation with
PFOA or WY 14,643 and in early-stage embryos, gene expression and protein
concentration associated with the bone morphogenic protein (BMP2) pathway were
determined. Although changes were not statistically consistent among doses,
expression of BMP2, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 mRNA in early embryos was altered by PFOA
exposure; however, protein concentrations of these targets were not markedly
altered by either PFOA or WY 14,643. Protein levels of pSMAD1/5, a
transcriptional regulator stimulated by BMPs, were altered by both PFOA and WY
14,643, but in different directions; PFOA reduced cytoplasmic pSMAD1/5, whereas
WY 14,643 decreased nuclear pSMAD1/5. Taken together, these data suggest that
developmental cardiotoxicity induced by PFOA likely involves both PPARa and BMP2 
pathways.

PMID: 23941634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. ScientificWorldJournal. 2013 Jun 27;2013:491546. doi: 10.1155/2013/491546. Print 
2013.

RhoA regulation of cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Kaarbø M(1), Crane DI, Murrell WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital,
Rikshospitalet, 0454 Oslo, Norway.

Earlier findings from our laboratory implicated RhoA in heart developmental
processes. To investigate factors that potentially regulate RhoA expression, RhoA
gene organisation and promoter activity were analysed. Comparative analysis
indicated strict conservation of both gene organisation and coding sequence of
the chick, mouse, and human RhoA genes. Bioinformatics analysis of the derived
promoter region of mouse RhoA identified putative consensus sequence binding
sites for several transcription factors involved in heart formation and
organogenesis generally. Using luciferase reporter assays, RhoA promoter activity
was shown to increase in mouse-derived P19CL6 cells that were induced to
differentiate into cardiomyocytes. Overexpression of a dominant negative mutant
of mouse RhoA (mRhoAN19) blocked this cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6
cells and led to the accumulation of the cardiac transcription factors SRF and
GATA4 and the early cardiac marker cardiac a -actin. Taken together, these
findings indicate a fundamental role for RhoA in the differentiation of
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3712199
PMID: 23935420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Development. 2013 Sep;140(18):3799-808. doi: 10.1242/dev.094789. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Transmembrane protein 88: a Wnt regulatory protein that specifies cardiomyocyte
development.

Palpant NJ(1), Pabon L, Rabinowitz JS, Hadland BK, Stoick-Cooper CL, Paige SL,
Bernstein ID, Moon RT, Murry CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7470,
USA.

Genetic regulation of the cell fate transition from lateral plate mesoderm to the
specification of cardiomyocytes requires suppression of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, 
but the mechanism for this is not well understood. By analyzing gene expression
and chromatin dynamics during directed differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs), we identified a suppressor of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling,
transmembrane protein 88 (TMEM88), as a potential regulator of cardiovascular
progenitor cell (CVP) specification. During the transition from mesoderm to the
CVP, TMEM88 has a chromatin signature of genes that mediate cell fate decisions, 
and its expression is highly upregulated in advance of key cardiac transcription 
factors in vitro and in vivo. In early zebrafish embryos, tmem88a is expressed
broadly in the lateral plate mesoderm, including the bilateral heart fields.
Short hairpin RNA targeting of TMEM88 during hESC cardiac differentiation
increases Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, confirming its role as a suppressor of this
pathway. TMEM88 knockdown has no effect on NKX2.5 or GATA4 expression, but 80% of
genes most highly induced during CVP development have reduced expression,
suggesting adoption of a new cell fate. In support of this, analysis of later
stage cell differentiation showed that TMEM88 knockdown inhibits cardiomyocyte
differentiation and promotes endothelial differentiation. Taken together, TMEM88 
is crucial for heart development and acts downstream of GATA factors in the
pre-cardiac mesoderm to specify lineage commitment of cardiomyocyte development
through inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3754478
PMID: 23924634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):753-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.081. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

N-Cadherin is a prospective cell surface marker of human mesenchymal stem cells
that have high ability for cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Ishimine H(1), Yamakawa N, Sasao M, Tadokoro M, Kami D, Komazaki S, Tokuhara M,
Takada H, Ito Y, Kuno S, Yoshimura K, Umezawa A, Ohgushi H, Asashima M, Kurisaki 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Stem Cell Engineering, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are among the most promising sources of stem cells 
for regenerative medicine. However, the range of their differentiation ability is
very limited. In this study, we explored prospective cell surface markers of
human MSCs that readily differentiate into cardiomyocytes. When the
cardiomyogenic differentiation potential and the expression of cell surface
markers involved in heart development were analyzed using various immortalized
human MSC lines, the MSCs with high expression of N-cadherin showed a higher
probability of differentiation into beating cardiomyocytes. The differentiated
cardiomyocytes expressed terminally differentiated cardiomyocyte-specific markers
such as a-actinin, cardiac troponin T, and connexin-43. A similar correlation was
observed with primary human MSCs derived from bone marrow and adipose tissue.
Moreover, N-cadherin-positive MSCs isolated with N-cadherin antibody-conjugated
magnetic beads showed an apparently higher ability to differentiate into
cardiomyocytes than the N-cadherin-negative population. Quantitative polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated that the N-cadherin-positive population
expressed significantly elevated levels of cardiomyogenic progenitor-specific
transcription factors, including Nkx2.5, Hand1, and GATA4 mRNAs. Our results
suggest that N-cadherin is a novel prospective cell surface marker of human MSCs 
that show a better ability for cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23899519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 26;11:72. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-11-72.

Low-dose monobutyl phthalate stimulates steroidogenesis through steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein regulated by SF-1, GATA-4 and C/EBP-beta in mouse Leydig
tumor cells.

Hu Y(1), Dong C, Chen M, Lu J, Han X, Qiu L, Chen Y, Qin J, Li X, Gu A, Xia Y,
Sun H, Li Z, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, School
of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

BACKGROUND: The ubiquitous use of dibutyl phthalate (DBP), one of the most widely
used plasticizers, results in extensive exposure to humans and the environment.
DBP and its major metabolite, monobutyl phthalate (MBP), may alter steroid
biosynthesis and their exposure may lead to damage to male reproductive function.
Low-doses of DBP/MBP may result in increased steroidogenesis in vitro and in
vivo. However, the mechanisms of possible effects of low-dose MBP on
steroidogenesis remain unclear. The aim of present study was to elaborate the
role of transcription factors and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein in
low-dose MBP-induced distruption of steroidogenesis in mouse Leydig tumor cells
(MLTC-1 cells).
METHODS: In the present study, MLTC-1 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 2 g/L sodium bicarbonate. Progesterone level was examined by
I125-pregesterone Coat-A-Count radioimmunoassay (RIA) kits. mRNA and protein
levels were assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
and western blot, respectively. DNA-binding of several transcription factors was 
examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: In this study, various doses of MBP (0, 10(-9), 10(-8), 10(-7), or
10(-6) M) were added to the medium followed by stimulation of MLTC-1 cells with
human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). The results showed that MBP increased
progesterone production and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) mRNA
and protein levels. However, the protein levels of cytochrome P450scc and 3
beta-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase (3 beta-HSD) were unchanged after MBP
treatment. EMSA assay showed that DNA-binding of steroidogenic factors 1(SF-1),
GATA-4 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBP-beta) was increased in a
dose-dependent manner after MBP exposure. Western blot tests were next employed
and confirmed that the protein levels of SF-1, GATA-4 and C/EBP-beta were also
increased. Additionally, western blot tests confirmed the expression of DAX-1,
negative factor of SF-1, was dose-dependently down regulated after MBP exposure, 
which further confirmed the role of SF-1 in MBP-stimulated steroid biosynthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we firstly delineated the regulation of StAR by
transcription factors including SF-1, GATA-4 and C/EBP-beta maybe critical
mechanism involved in low-dose MBP-stimulated steroidogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3734203
PMID: 23889939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 May-Jun;47(3):433-40.

[Expression profile of calcineurin pathway genes in myocardium tissues in
relation to ischemic heart remodeling in humans].

[Article in Russian]

Polovlkova OG, Makeeva OA, Lezhnev AA, Goncharova IA, Kulish EV, Shipulin VM,
Puzyrev VP.

Calcineurin pathway plays the critical role in the cardiac remodeling of various 
origin, development of chambers dilatation and progression of heart failure.
Components of calcineurin pathway are involved in myocardium hypertrophy
regulation, angiogenesis and apoptosis. Results of quantitative expression
profiling study of main calcineurin pathway genes PPP3CA, PPP3R1, PPP3CB, GATA4
and NFATC4 in myocardium of right atrium auricle of patients with a coronary
heart disease, exposed to various types of surgical treatments depending on
weight of a clinical finding (surgical reconstruction of the geometry of left
ventricle (LV) (postinfarction aneurysm) or coronary artery bypass grafting in
case of unaltered morphology of LV) are presented. In patients with sizable
postinfarction LV dilatation (n = 21) expression level of calcineurin catalytic
subunit genes PPP3CA and PPP3CB was 1.3 and 1.6 times lower (p = 0.018 and 0.023,
accordingly) compared to patients with unaltered shape of the heart (n = 34).
Expression level of PPP3R1 gene encoding calcineurin regulatory subunit B and
GATA4 and NFATC4 genes for transcription factors did not differ in studied
subgroups of patients. Thus, lower expression of PPP3CA and PPP3CB genes in
atrium myocardium can be related to expressed postinfarction LV remodeling.
Further studies of relation quantitative expression profiling of calcineurin
pathway genes with the level of damage of myocardium is essential what may have
important outcome for the prevention of adverse events of cardiosurgical
treatments in patients with postinfarction remodeling.

PMID: 23888774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 22;23(14):R619-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.006.

Cardiovascular biology: play it again, Gata4.

Miura GI(1), Yelon D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):1221-7.

To function properly, the vertebrate heart must navigate challenging periods by
utilizing appropriate stress-response pathways. A new study highlights a crucial 
role for the transcription factor Gata4 in mediating diverse stress responses in 
the zebrafish heart.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23885880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;383(1-2):161-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1764-x. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Genetic isolation of stem cell-derived pacemaker-nodal cardiac myocytes.

Hashem SI(1), Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido Street, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Dysfunction of the cardiac pacemaker tissues due to genetic defects, acquired
diseases, or aging results in arrhythmias. When arrhythmias occur, artificial
pacemaker implants are used for treatment. However, the numerous limitations of
electronic implants have prompted studies of biological pacemakers that can
integrate into the myocardium providing a permanent cure. Embryonic stem (ES)
cells cultured as three-dimensional (3D) spheroid aggregates termed embryoid
bodies possess the ability to generate all cardiac myocyte subtypes. Here, we
report the use of a SHOX2 promoter and a Cx30.2 enhancer to genetically identify 
and isolate ES cell-derived sinoatrial node (SAN) and atrioventricular node (AVN)
cells, respectively. The ES cell-derived Shox2 and Cx30.2 cardiac myocytes
exhibit a spider cell morphology and high intracellular calcium loading
characteristic of pacemaker-nodal myocytes. These cells express abundant levels
of pacemaker genes such as endogenous HCN4, Cx45, Cx30.2, Tbx2, and Tbx3. These
cells were passaged, frozen, and thawed multiple times while maintaining their
pacemaker-nodal phenotype. When cultured as 3D aggregates in an attempt to create
a critical mass that simulates in vivo architecture, these cell lines exhibited
an increase in the expression level of key regulators of cardiovascular
development, such as GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors. In addition, the
aggregate culture system resulted in an increase in the expression level of
several ion channels that play a major role in the spontaneous diastolic
depolarization characteristic of pacemaker cells. We have isolated pure
populations of SAN and AVN cells that will be useful tools for generating
biological pacemakers.

PMID: 23877224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(7):e1003629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003629. Epub 2013 Jul 
11.

Gata4 is required for formation of the genital ridge in mice.

Hu YC(1), Okumura LM, Page DC.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

In mammals, both testis and ovary arise from a sexually undifferentiated
precursor, the genital ridge, which first appears during mid-gestation as a
thickening of the coelomic epithelium on the ventromedial surface of the
mesonephros. At least four genes (Lhx9, Sf1, Wt1, and Emx2) have been
demonstrated to be required for subsequent growth and maintenance of the genital 
ridge. However, no gene has been shown to be required for the initial thickening 
of the coelomic epithelium during genital ridge formation. We report that the
transcription factor GATA4 is expressed in the coelomic epithelium of the genital
ridge, progressing in an anterior-to-posterior (A-P) direction, immediately
preceding an A-P wave of epithelial thickening. Mouse embryos conditionally
deficient in Gata4 show no signs of gonadal initiation, as their coelomic
epithelium remains a morphologically undifferentiated monolayer. The failure of
genital ridge formation in Gata4-deficient embryos is corroborated by the absence
of the early gonadal markers LHX9 and SF1. Our data indicate that GATA4 is
required to initiate formation of the genital ridge in both XX and XY fetuses,
prior to its previously reported role in testicular differentiation of the XY
gonad.

PMCID: PMC3708810
PMID: 23874227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):328-40. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.06.017. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Reprogramming fibroblasts into bipotential hepatic stem cells by defined factors.

Yu B(1), He ZY, You P, Han QW, Xiang D, Chen F, Wang MJ, Liu CC, Lin XW, Borjigin
U, Zi XY, Li JX, Zhu HY, Li WL, Han CS, Wangensteen KJ, Shi Y, Hui LJ, Wang X, Hu
YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

Recent studies have demonstrated direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into a range
of somatic cell types, but to date stem or progenitor cells have only been
reprogrammed for the blood and neuronal lineages. We previously reported
generation of induced hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells by transduction of Gata4,
Hnf1a, and Foxa3 in p19 Arf null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Here, we
show that Hnf1ß and Foxa3, liver organogenesis transcription factors, are
sufficient to reprogram MEFs into induced hepatic stem cells (iHepSCs). iHepSCs
can be stably expanded in vitro and possess the potential of bidirectional
differentiation into both hepatocytic and cholangiocytic lineages. In the injured
liver of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (Fah)-deficient mice, repopulating iHepSCs
become hepatocyte-like cells. They also engraft as cholangiocytes into bile ducts
of mice with DDC-induced bile ductular injury. Lineage conversion into
bipotential expandable iHepSCs provides a strategy to enable efficient derivation
of both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes for use in disease modeling and tissue
engineering.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23871605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;30(3):556-61.

[Effects of electrical stimulation on the differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan Z(1), Yang G, Cui L, He X, Kuang W, Wu W, Liu X, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, West China College of Preclinical
Medicine and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of electrical stimulation ES)
on the induction of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (rBMSCs) to
differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro. The third or
fourth-generation of the rBMSCs was randomly divided into three groups, i. e. ES 
group, 5-Azacytidine (5-Aza) group, and control group. Those in the ES group with
complete medium were exposed to 1,2,4 and 6V, 2Hz, 5ms ES for 2h everyday,lasting
for 10d. Those in the 5-Aza group were induced by 10 micromol/L 5-Aza for 24h,
then the medium was changed to complete medium without 5-Aza. Those in the
control group were only cultured with complete medium. The growth status and
morphological features of rBMSCs were observed by inverted phase microscope. The 
mRNA expressions of GATA4, a-actin, ACTN2 and TNNT2 were determined by Real-time 
fluorescent quantification PCR, and the protein expression of TNNT2 was detected 
with immunofluorescence staining. The results showed that the mRNA expression
level of the GATA4, a-actin, ACTN2 and TNNT2 and the protein expression level of 
the TNNT2 were significantly higher in the ES group and 5-Aza group, compared to 
those in the control group(P<0. 05). It suggested that ES could induce rBMSCs
differentiation into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro.

PMID: 23865318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 30;110(31):12667-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304053110. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Induction of human cardiomyocyte-like cells from fibroblasts by defined factors.

Wada R(1), Muraoka N, Inagawa K, Yamakawa H, Miyamoto K, Sadahiro T, Umei T,
Kaneda R, Suzuki T, Kamiya K, Tohyama S, Yuasa S, Kokaji K, Aeba R, Yozu R,
Yamagishi H, Kitamura T, Fukuda K, Ieda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Heart disease remains a leading cause of death worldwide. Owing to the limited
regenerative capacity of heart tissue, cardiac regenerative therapy has emerged
as an attractive approach. Direct reprogramming of human cardiac fibroblasts
(HCFs) into cardiomyocytes may hold great potential for this purpose. We reported
previously that induced cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) can be directly generated
from mouse cardiac fibroblasts in vitro and vivo by transduction of three
transcription factors: Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5, collectively termed GMT. In the
present study, we sought to determine whether human fibroblasts also could be
converted to iCMs by defined factors. Our initial finding that GMT was not
sufficient for cardiac induction in HCFs prompted us to screen for additional
factors to promote cardiac reprogramming by analyzing multiple cardiac-specific
gene induction with quantitative RT-PCR. The addition of Mesp1 and Myocd to GMT
up-regulated a broader spectrum of cardiac genes in HCFs more efficiently
compared with GMT alone. The HCFs and human dermal fibroblasts transduced with
GMT, Mesp1, and Myocd (GMTMM) changed the cell morphology from a spindle shape to
a rod-like or polygonal shape, expressed multiple cardiac-specific proteins,
increased a broad range of cardiac genes and concomitantly suppressed fibroblast 
genes, and exhibited spontaneous Ca(2+) oscillations. Moreover, the cells matured
to exhibit action potentials and contract synchronously in coculture with murine 
cardiomyocytes. A 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine assay revealed that the iCMs thus
generated do not pass through a mitotic cell state. These findings demonstrate
that human fibroblasts can be directly converted to iCMs by defined factors,
which may facilitate future applications in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3732928
PMID: 23861494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Hepatol. 2013 Nov;59(5):1147-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.07.003. Epub 2013 Jul 
10.

Intestinal GATA4 deficiency induces proximal fibroblast growth factor 15
expression and represses hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Patankar JV(1), Sachdev V, Obrowsky S, Levak-Frank S, Kratky D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center of Molecular Medicine,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. Electronic address:
jpatankar@cmmt.ubc.ca.

PMID: 23850878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Biol. 2013 Sep 15;381(2):389-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.06.025. Epub 2013
Jul 11.

Small heat shock proteins Hspb7 and Hspb12 regulate early steps of cardiac
morphogenesis.

Rosenfeld GE(1), Mercer EJ, Mason CE, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY 10065, USA.

Cardiac morphogenesis is a complex multi-stage process, and the molecular basis
for controlling distinct steps remains poorly understood. Because gata4 encodes a
key transcriptional regulator of morphogenesis, we profiled transcript changes in
cardiomyocytes when Gata4 protein is depleted from developing zebrafish embryos. 
We discovered that gata4 regulates expression of two small heat shock genes,
hspb7 and hspb12, both of which are expressed in the embryonic heart. We show
that depletion of Hspb7 or Hspb12 disrupts normal cardiac morphogenesis, at least
in part due to defects in ventricular size and shape. We confirmed that gata4
interacts genetically with the hspb7/12 pathway, but surprisingly, we found that 
hspb7 also has an earlier, gata4-independent function. Depletion perturbs
Kupffer's vesicle (KV) morphology leading to a failure in establishing the
left-right axis of asymmetry. Targeted depletion of Hspb7 in the yolk syncytial
layer is sufficient to disrupt KV morphology and also causes an even earlier
block to heart tube formation and a bifid phenotype. Recently, several
genome-wide association studies found that HSPB7 SNPs are highly associated with 
idiopathic cardiomyopathies and heart failure. Therefore, GATA4 and HSPB7 may act
alone or together to regulate morphogenesis with relevance to congenital and
acquired human heart disease.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3777613
PMID: 23850773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 26;8(6):e67266. Print 2013.

Igf Signaling is Required for Cardiomyocyte Proliferation during Zebrafish Heart 
Development and Regeneration.

Huang Y(1), Harrison MR, Osorio A, Kim J, Baugh A, Duan C, Sucov HM, Lien CL.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, The Saban Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America ; Program of
Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, The Saban Research Institute of 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America ; Craniofacial Biology Graduate Program, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

Unlike its mammalian counterpart, the adult zebrafish heart is able to fully
regenerate after severe injury. One of the most important events during the
regeneration process is cardiomyocyte proliferation, which results in the
replacement of lost myocardium. Growth factors that induce cardiomyocyte
proliferation during zebrafish heart regeneration remain to be identified.
Signaling pathways important for heart development might be reutilized during
heart regeneration. IGF2 was recently shown to be important for cardiomyocyte
proliferation and heart growth during mid-gestation heart development in mice,
although its role in heart regeneration is unknown. We found that expression of
igf2b was upregulated during zebrafish heart regeneration. Following resection of
the ventricle apex, igf2b expression was detected in the wound, endocardium and
epicardium at a time that coincides with cardiomyocyte proliferation. Transgenic 
zebrafish embryos expressing a dominant negative form of Igf1 receptor (dn-Igf1r)
had fewer cardiomyocytes and impaired heart development, as did embryos treated
with an Igf1r inhibitor. Moreover, inhibition of Igf1r signaling blocked
cardiomyocyte proliferation during heart development and regeneration. We found
that Igf signaling is required for a subpopulation of cardiomyocytes marked by
gata4:EGFP to contribute to the regenerating area. Our findings suggest that Igf 
signaling is important for heart development and myocardial regeneration in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC3694143
PMID: 23840646  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


400. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;14(8):529-41. doi: 10.1038/nrm3619. Epub 2013 Jul
10.

Mending broken hearts: cardiac development as a basis for adult heart
regeneration and repair.

Xin M(1), Olson EN, Bassel-Duby R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

As the adult mammalian heart has limited potential for regeneration and repair,
the loss of cardiomyocytes during injury and disease can result in heart failure 
and death. The cellular processes and regulatory mechanisms involved in heart
growth and development can be exploited to repair the injured adult heart through
'reawakening' pathways that are active during embryogenesis. Heart function has
been restored in rodents by reprogramming non-myocytes into cardiomyocytes, by
expressing transcription factors (GATA4, HAND2, myocyte-specific enhancer factor 
2C (MEF2C) and T-box 5 (TBX5)) and microRNAs (miR-1, miR-133, miR-208 and
miR-499) that control cardiomyocyte identity. Stimulating cardiomyocyte
dedifferentiation and proliferation by activating mitotic signalling pathways
involved in embryonic heart growth represents a complementary approach for heart 
regeneration and repair. Recent advances in understanding the mechanistic basis
of heart development offer exciting opportunities for effective therapies for
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3757945
PMID: 23839576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24429-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.463083. Epub
2013 Jul 8.

The transcription factor Atonal homolog 8 regulates Gata4 and Friend of Gata-2
during vertebrate development.

Rawnsley DR(1), Xiao J, Lee JS, Liu X, Mericko-Ishizuka P, Kumar V, He J, Basu A,
Lu M, Lynn FC, Pack M, Gasa R, Kahn ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

GATA and Friend of GATA (FOG) form a transcriptional complex that plays a key
role in cardiovascular development in both fish and mammals. In the present study
we demonstrate that the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Atonal
homolog 8 (Atoh8) is required for development of the heart in fish but not in
mice. Genetic studies reveal that Atoh8 interacts specifically with Gata4 and
Fog1 during development of the heart and swim bladder in the fish. Biochemical
studies reveal that ATOH8, GATA4, and FOG2 associate in a single complex in
vitro. In contrast to fish, ATOH8-deficient mice exhibit normal cardiac
development and loss of ATOH8 does not alter cardiac development in Gata4(+/-)
mice. This species difference in the role of ATOH8 is explained in part by LacZ
and GFP reporter alleles that reveal restriction of Atoh8 expression to atrial
but not ventricular myocardium in the mouse. Our findings identify ATOH8 as a
novel regulator of GATA-FOG function that is required for cardiac development in 
the fish but not the mouse. Whether ATOH8 modulates GATA-FOG function at other
sites or in more subtle ways in mammals is not yet known.

PMCID: PMC3750143
PMID: 23836893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;305(6):H829-42. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00761.2012. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Nox2 and Nox4 influence neonatal c-kit(+) cardiac precursor cell status and
differentiation.

Nadworny AS(1), Guruju MR, Poor D, Doran RM, Sharma RV, Kotlikoff MI, Davisson
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York; and.

Redox status has emerged as critical in modulating stemness and lineage
commitment in several precursor cell types. However, a role for redox genes,
specifically NADPH oxidases (Nox), in cardiac precursor cells (CPCs) has not been
established. We tested whether CPCs marked by type III receptor tyrosine kinase
c-kit (c-kit(+)) exhibit a unique NADPH oxidase signature that confers precursor 
status and whether alterations in this profile are functionally linked to changes
in lineage specification. Dihydroethidium (DHE) microfluorography indicated
reduced basal reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation within early postnatal
c-kit(+) CPCs. Real-time quantitative PCR revealed downregulation of ROS
generator Nox2 and its subunit p67(phox) in c-kit(+) CPCs under basal conditions 
but upregulation of Nox2 and Nox4 over the course of differentiation. Adenoviral 
silencing of Nox2 and Nox4 increased expression of CPC markers c-kit and Flk-1
and blunted smooth and cardiac muscle differentiation, respectively, while
overexpression of Nox2 and Nox4 significantly reduced c-kit expression. These
changes were accompanied by altered expression of transcription factors
regulating cardiac lineage commitment, Gata6 and Gata4, and cytokine transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß1. Similar to other precursor cell types, RT(2)Profiler PCR 
Arrays revealed that c-kit(+) CPCs also exhibit enhanced antioxidant capacity at 
the mRNA level. In conclusion, we report that c-kit(+) CPCs demonstrate reduced
Nox2 expression and ROS levels and that increases in Nox2 and Nox4 influence
their differentiation into mature cells. We speculate that ROS generators Nox2
and Nox4, along with the antioxidant genes identified by PCR Arrays, may be novel
targets in CPCs that could prove useful in cell-based therapy of the heart.

PMCID: PMC3761344
PMID: 23832701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003574. Epub 2013 
Jun 27.

DNA methylation restricts lineage-specific functions of transcription factor
Gata4 during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Oda M(1), Kumaki Y, Shigeta M, Jakt LM, Matsuoka C, Yamagiwa A, Niwa H, Okano M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Mammalian Epigenetic Studies, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN, Kobe, Japan.

DNA methylation changes dynamically during development and is essential for
embryogenesis in mammals. However, how DNA methylation affects developmental gene
expression and cell differentiation remains elusive. During embryogenesis, many
key transcription factors are used repeatedly, triggering different outcomes
depending on the cell type and developmental stage. Here, we report that DNA
methylation modulates transcription-factor output in the context of cell
differentiation. Using a drug-inducible Gata4 system and a mouse embryonic stem
(ES) cell model of mesoderm differentiation, we examined the cellular response to
Gata4 in ES and mesoderm cells. The activation of Gata4 in ES cells is known to
drive their differentiation to endoderm. We show that the differentiation of
wild-type ES cells into mesoderm blocks their Gata4-induced endoderm
differentiation, while mesoderm cells derived from ES cells that are deficient in
the DNA methyltransferases Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b can retain their response to Gata4, 
allowing lineage conversion from mesoderm cells to endoderm. Transcriptome
analysis of the cells' response to Gata4 over time revealed groups of endoderm
and mesoderm developmental genes whose expression was induced by Gata4 only when 
DNA methylation was lost, suggesting that DNA methylation restricts the ability
of these genes to respond to Gata4, rather than controlling their transcription
per se. Gata4-binding-site profiles and DNA methylation analyses suggested that
DNA methylation modulates the Gata4 response through diverse mechanisms. Our data
indicate that epigenetic regulation by DNA methylation functions as a heritable
safeguard to prevent transcription factors from activating inappropriate
downstream genes, thereby contributing to the restriction of the differentiation 
potential of somatic cells.

PMCID: PMC3694845
PMID: 23825962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Feb;28(1):113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.06.014. Epub 2013
Jun 29.

Characterization of hepatic markers in human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Buyl K(1), De Kock J, Najar M, Lagneaux L, Branson S, Rogiers V, Vanhaecke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Center for Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic 
address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.

Stem cell technology could offer a unique tool to develop human-based in vitro
liver models that are applicable for testing of potential liver toxicity early
during drug development. In this context, recent research has indicated that
human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hWJs) represent an
interesting stem cell population to develop human hepatocyte-like cells. Here, an
in-depth analysis of the expression of liver-specific transcription factors and
other key hepatic markers in hWJs is evaluated at both the mRNA and protein
level. Our results reveal that transcription factors that are mandatory to
acquire and maintain an adult hepatic phenotype (HNF4A and HNF1A), as well as
adult hepatic markers (ALB, CX32, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) are not
expressed in hWJs with the exception of K18. On the contrary, transcription
factors involved in liver development (GATA4, GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and liver
progenitor markers (DKK1, DPP4, DSG2, CX43 and K19) were found to be highly
expressed in hWJs. These findings provide additional indication that hWJs could
be a promising stem cell source to generate hepatocyte-like cells necessary for
the development of a functional human-based in vitro liver model.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Stem Cells. 2013 Oct;31(10):2279-85. doi: 10.1002/stem.1464.

Brief report: SRF-dependent MiR-210 silences the sonic hedgehog signaling during 
cardiopoesis.

Zheng G(1), Tao Y, Yu W, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF) wields potent gene silencing activity through its
regulation over numerous microRNAs (miRs). Here, SRF directs embryonic stem cell 
(ESC) progenitor cell lineage specification in part by silencing genes through
miR-210. Viral expression of miR-210 in murine ESCs-derived embryoid bodies (EBs)
inhibited cell growth and inhibited the appearance of cardiac progenitor markers 
Nkx2.5 and Gata4 and terminal differentiated contractile proteins Mlc2v and ßMHC.
Knockdown of miR-210 expression via antisense RNA activated cardiac progenitor
gene activity. miR-210 inhibitory activity was attributed to silencing of the
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway, which fosters the cardiac progenitor
program. miR-210 directly silenced Shh via targeting of the Shh 3'UTR, comparable
to the chemical Shh inhibitor, cyclopamine. miR-210 silencing of Shh/Gli1
signaling also blocked expression of the cell cycle regulators Cyclin D1 and
Cyclin D2, and EB cell expansion. Absence of SRF expression in SRF null EBs
blocked miR-210 expression, coincident with enhanced Shh, and Gli1 gene activity.
Thus, SRF-dependent miR-210 expression may operate as a novel silencer of the Shh
signaling pathway.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23818299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Cytogenet. 2013 Jul 1;6:24. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-6-24. eCollection 2013.

Chromosomal imbalance letter: Phenotypic consequences of combined deletion 8pter 
and duplication 15qter.

Sheth F(1), Andrieux J(2), Tewari S(1), Sheth H(3), Desai M(1), Kumari P(1),
Nanavaty N(1), Sheth J(1).

Author information: 
(1)FRIGE's Institute of Human Genetics, FRIGE House, Jodhpur Gam Road, Satellite,
Ahmedabad, 380 015, India. (2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Jeanne de Flandre
Hospital CHRU de Lille, Lille Cedex, France. (3)Institute of Genetic Medicine,
Newcastle University, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1
4EP, UK.

Exact breakpoint determination by oligonucleotide array-CGH has improved the
analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations in cases with chromosome aberrations 
allowing a more accurate definition of relevant genes, particularly their
isolated or combined impact on the phenotype in an unbalanced state. Chromosomal 
imbalances have been identified as one of the major causes of mental retardation 
and/or malformation syndromes and they are observed in ~2-5% of the cases. Here
we report a female child born to non-consanguineous parents and having multiple
congenital anomalies such as atrial septal defect and multiple ventricular septal
defects, convergent strabismus, micropthalmia, seizures and mental retardation,
with her head circumference and stature normal for her age. Cytogenetic study
suggested 46,XX,add(8)(p23). Further analysis by array-CGH using 44K
oligonucleotide probe confirmed deletion on 8p23.3p23.1 of 7.1 Mb and duplication
involving 15q23q26.3 of 30 Mb size leading to
46,XX,der(8)t(8;15)(p23.3;q23)pat.arr
8p23.3p23.1(191,530-7,303,237)x1,15q23q26.3(72,338,961-102,35,195)x3. The unique 
phenotypic presentation in our case may have resulted from either loss or gain of
a series of contiguous genes which may have resulted in a direct phenotypic
effect and/or caused a genetic regulatory disturbance. Double segmental
aberrations may have conferred phenotypic variability, as in our case, making it 
difficult to predict the characteristics that evolved as a result of the global
gene imbalance, caused by the concomitant deletion and duplication.

PMCID: PMC3750467
PMID: 23815819  [PubMed]


407. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(7):1126-33.

Erythropoietin prevents hypoxia-induced GATA-4 ubiquitination via phosphorylation
of serine 105 of GATA-4.

Jun JH(1), Shin EJ, Kim JH, Kim SO, Shim JK, Kwak YL.

Author information: 
(1)Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 120752, Republic of Korea.

Erythropoietin (EPO), an essential hormone for erythropoiesis, can provide
protection against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury and hypoxic
apoptosis. GATA-4 is a zinc finger transcription factor, and its activation and
post-translational modification are essential components in the transcriptional
response to hypoxia. GATA-4 has also been reported to play a role in the cellular
mechanisms of EPO-induced myocardial protection against I/R injury. In this
study, we aimed to investigate the influence of EPO on GATA-4 protein stability
and post-translational modification under hypoxic conditions without reperfusion.
EPO induced cell viability under long-term hypoxia. EPO significantly increased
phosphorylation of GATA-4 via the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
signaling pathway and reduced hypoxia-induced GATA-4 ubiquitination, which
enhanced GATA-4 stability under hypoxia. ERK activation by over-expression of
constitutively active mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MEK1) strongly
increased GATA-4 phosphorylation and its protein levels and decreased GATA-4
ubiquitination under hypoxia. Despite ERK activation, GATA-4 ubiquitination was
not affected under hypoxia in a GATA-4-S105A mutant. Under hypoxic condition
without reperfusion, EPO-induced ERK activation was associated with
post-translational modification of GATA-4, mediated by enhancement of
phosphorylation of GATA-4 at Ser-105. Subsequent attenuation of GATA-4
ubiquitination led to increases in GATA-4 protein stability, which resulted in
increased cell viability under hypoxia.

PMID: 23811561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Aug;8(2):385-92. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1548. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Rosuvastatin prevents pressure overload-induced myocardial hypertrophy via
inactivation of the Akt, ERK1/2 and GATA4 signaling pathways in rats.

Xu X(1), Zhang L, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Affiliated
Hospital of Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250014,
P.R. China.

Pressure overload-induced myocardial hypertrophy is associated with a poor
prognosis in humans and contributes to the development of cardiac arrhythmias,
diastolic dysfunction and ultimate congestive heart failure.
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors, also known as
statins, have been previously shown to induce regression of myocardial
hypertrophy in aortic banding models. However, there is limited knowledge
regarding the underlying molecular mechanisms. Therefore, we hypothesized that
the myocardial hypertrophy-related signaling pathways protein kinase B (Akt),
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 or 2 (ERK1/2) and GATA binding protein 4
(GATA4) activation pathways constitute targets of rosuvastatin (RSV). Therefore, 
the above-mentioned activation pathways were hypothesized to be involved in the
regression of pressure overload-induced myocardial hypertrophy treated by RSV.
Twenty-eight Wistar rats were randomly allocated into 4 groups: the sham
operation-vehicle (SH-V), abdominal aortic constriction-vehicle (AAC-V),
abdominal aortic constriction-RSV 10 mg/kg/day (AAC-LO) and the abdominal aortic 
constriction-RSV 20 mg/kg/day (AAC-HI) group. Following the establishment of the 
abdominal aorta constriction model, we investigated the effect of RSV, a new
hydrophilic statin, on abdominal aortic constriction-induced myocardial
hypertrophy as well as the underlying intercellular signaling pathways after 5
days and 4 weeks of drug intervention. Moreover, echocardiographic features and
the left ventricular weight to final body weight ratio (LVW/BW) were determined. 
Cross-sectional areas (CSAs) of cardiomyocytes were assessed by hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining. Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), ß-myosin heavy chain
(ß-MHC) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) messenger RNA
(mRNA) expression was assessed using RT-PCR. The phosphorylation of Akt, ERK1/2
and GATA4 were also examined using western blot analysis. Our results showed that
RSV significantly attenuates pressure overload-induced myocardial hypertrophy by 
preventing myocardial hypertrophy-related activation of Akt, ERK1/2 and GATA4
signaling pathways.

PMID: 23799547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. BMB Rep. 2013 Jun;46(6):322-7.

Cooperative transcriptional activation of ATP-binding cassette sterol
transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8 genes by nuclear receptors including
Liver-X-Receptor.

Back SS(1), Kim J, Choi D, Lee ES, Choi SY, Han K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, Korea.

The ATP-binding cassette transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8 form heterodimers that
limit absorption of dietary sterols in the intestine and promote cholesterol
elimination from the body through hepatobiliary secretion. To identify
cis-regulatory elements of the two genes, we have cloned and analyzed
twenty-three evolutionary conserved region (ECR) fragments using the
CMV-luciferase reporter system in HepG2 cells. Two ECRs were found to be
responsive to the Liver-X-Receptor (LXR). Through elaborate deletion studies,
regions containing putative LXREs were identified and the binding of LXRa was
demonstrated by EMSA and ChIP assay. When the LXREs were inserted upstream of the
intergenic promoter, synergistic activation by LXRa/RXRa in combination with
GATA4, HNF4a, and LRH-1, which had been shown to bind to the intergenic region,
was observed. In conclusion, we have identified two LXREs in ABCG5/ABCG8 genes
for the first time and propose that these LXREs, especially in the ECR20, play
major roles in regulating these genes.

PMCID: PMC4133900
PMID: 23790976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Oct 1;100(1):105-13. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt167. Epub 2013 Jun 
20.

Accelerated direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells
with the MyoD transactivation domain.

Hirai H(1), Katoku-Kikyo N, Keirstead SA, Kikyo N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, MTRF Room 2-216, University of Minnesota, 2001 6th St SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

AIMS: Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed to cardiomyocyte-like cells by
introducing defined genes. However, the reprogramming efficiency remains low,
delaying the clinical application of this strategy to regenerative cardiology. We
previously showed that fusion of the MyoD transactivation domain to the
pluripotency transcription factor Oct4 facilitated the transcriptional activity
of Oct4, resulting in highly efficient production of induced pluripotent stem
cells. We examined whether the same approach can be applied to cardiac
transcription factors to facilitate cardiac reprogramming.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We fused the MyoD domain to Mef2c, Gata4, Hand2, and Tbx5
and transduced these genes in various combinations into mouse non-cardiac
fibroblasts. Transduction of the chimeric Mef2c with the wild-types of the other 
three genes produced much larger beating clusters of cardiomyocyte-like cells
faster than the combination of the four wild-type genes, with an efficiency of
3.5%, >15-fold greater than the wild-type genes.
CONCLUSION: Fusion of a powerful transactivation domain to heterologous factors
can increase the efficiency of direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3778960
PMID: 23794713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):1221-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.028. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

An injury-responsive gata4 program shapes the zebrafish cardiac ventricle.

Gupta V(1), Gemberling M, Karra R, Rosenfeld GE, Evans T, Poss KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 22;23(14):R619-21.

A common principle of tissue regeneration is the reactivation of previously
employed developmental programs. During zebrafish heart regeneration,
cardiomyocytes in the cortical layer of the ventricle induce the transcription
factor gene gata4 and proliferate to restore lost muscle. A dynamic cellular
mechanism initially creates this cortical muscle in juvenile zebrafish, where a
small number of internal cardiomyocytes breach the ventricular wall and expand
upon its surface. Here, we find that emergent juvenile cortical cardiomyocytes
induce expression of gata4 in a manner similar to during regeneration. Clonal
analysis indicates that these cardiomyocytes make biased contributions to build
the ventricular wall, whereas gata4(+) cardiomyocytes have little or no
proliferation hierarchy during regeneration. Experimental microinjuries or
conditions of rapid organismal growth stimulate production of ectopic gata4(+)
cortical muscle, implicating biomechanical stress in morphogenesis of this tissue
and revealing clonal plasticity. Induced transgenic inhibition defined an
essential role for Gata4 activity in morphogenesis of the cortical layer and the 
preservation of normal cardiac function in growing juveniles, and again in adults
during heart regeneration. Our experiments uncover an injury-responsive program
that prevents heart failure in juveniles by fortifying the ventricular wall, one 
that is reiterated in adults to promote regeneration after cardiac damage.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3759223
PMID: 23791730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Biol. 2013 Sep 1;381(1):144-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.06.004. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

The transcription factor GATA4 is required for follicular development and normal 
ovarian function.

Efimenko E(1), Padua MB, Manuylov NL, Fox SC, Morse DA, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Sex determination in mammals requires interaction between the transcription
factor GATA4 and its cofactor FOG2. We have recently described the function of
both proteins in testis development beyond the sex determination stage; their
roles in the postnatal ovary, however, remain to be defined. Here, we use gene
targeting in mice to determine the requirement of GATA4 and FOG2 in ovarian
development and folliculogenesis. The results from this study identify an
essential role of the GATA4 protein in the ovarian morphogenetic program. We show
that in contrast to the sex determination phase, which relies on the GATA4-FOG2
complex, the subsequent regulation of ovarian differentiation is dependent upon
GATA4 but not FOG2. The loss of Gata4 expression within the ovary results in
impaired granulosa cell proliferation and theca cell recruitment as well as fewer
primordial follicles in the ovarian cortex, causing a failure in follicular
development. Preantral follicular atresia is observed within the few follicles
that develop despite Gata4 deficiency. The depletion of the follicular pool in
GATA4 deficient ovary results in the formation of ovarian cysts and sterility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4089064
PMID: 23769843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Stem Cells. 2013 Oct;31(10):2084-94. doi: 10.1002/stem.1453.

Defined extracellular matrix components are necessary for definitive endoderm
induction.

Taylor-Weiner H(1), Schwarzbauer JE, Engler AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA; Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla,
California, USA.

Differentiation methods often rely exclusively on growth factors to direct mouse 
embryonic stem cell (ESC) fate, but the niche also contains fibrillar
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, including fibronectin (FN) and laminin,
which could also direct cell fate. Soluble differentiation factors are known to
increase ECM expression, yet ECM's ability to direct ESC fate is not well
understood. To address the extent to which these proteins regulate
differentiation when assembled into a matrix, we examined mouse ESC embryoid
bodies (EBs) and found that their ability to maintain pluripotency marker
expression was impaired by soluble serum FN. EBs also showed a spatiotemporal
correlation between expression of FN and GATA4, a marker of definitive endoderm
(DE), and an inverse correlation between FN and Nanog, a pluripotency marker.
Maintenance of mouse ESC pluripotency prevented fibrillar matrix production, but 
induction medium created lineage-specific ECM containing varying amounts of FN
and laminin. Mouse ESC-derived matrix was unlike conventional fibroblast-derived 
matrix, which did not contain laminin. Naïve mouse ESCs plated onto ESC- and
fibroblast-derived matrix exhibited composition-specific differentiation. With
exogenously added laminin, fibroblast-derived matrix is more similar in
composition to mouse ESC-derived matrix and lacks residual growth factors that
mouse ESC matrix may contain. Naïve mouse ESCs in DE induction medium exhibited
dose-dependent DE differentiation as a function of the amount of exogenous
laminin in the matrix in an a3 integrin-dependent mechanism. These data imply
that fibrillar FN is necessary for loss of pluripotency and that laminin within a
FN matrix improves DE differentiation.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3812380
PMID: 23766144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Oct;58(10):2850-7. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2742-6. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Methylation pattern of THBS1, GATA-4, and HIC1 in pediatric and adult patients
infected with Helicobacter pylori.

Alvarez MC(1), Ladeira MS, Scaletsky IC, Pedrazzoli J Jr, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade Integrada de Farmacologia e Gastroenterologia, Universidade São
Francisco, Av. São Francisco de Assis, 218. Jd. São José, Bragança Paulista, SP, 
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori infection is usually acquired in childhood and
persists into adulthood if untreated. The bacterium induces a chronic
inflammatory response, which is associated with epigenetic alterations in
oncogenes, tumor-suppressor genes, cell-cycle regulators, and cell-adhesion
molecules.
AIM: The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of H. pylori infection on
the methylation status of Thrombospondin-1 (THBS1), Hypermethylated in cancer 1
(HIC1) and Gata binding protein-4 (GATA-4) in gastric biopsy samples from
children and adults infected or uninfected with the bacterium and in samples
obtained from gastric cancer patients.
METHODS: The methylation pattern was analyzed with methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Our results showed that H. pylori infection was associated with
methylation of the promoter regions of the THBS1 and GATA-4 genes in pediatric
and adult samples (p < 0.01). HIC1 showed the lowest level of methylation, which 
was not an early event during gastric carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study indicate that methylation of THBS1 and
GATA-4 occurs in the early stages of chronic gastritis and gastric cancer in
association with H. pylori infection; however, in gastric cancer samples, other
mechanisms cooperate with the down-regulation of these genes. Methylation of HIC1
may not be the principal mechanism implicated in its down-regulation in gastric
cancer samples.

PMID: 23765259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Sep;62:237-46. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.05.020. Epub
2013 Jun 7.

Lrrc10 is a novel cardiac-specific target gene of Nkx2-5 and GATA4.

Brody MJ(1), Cho E, Mysliwiec MR, Kim TG, Carlson CD, Lee KH, Lee Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
WI 53706, USA.

Cardiac gene expression is precisely regulated and its perturbation causes
developmental defects and heart disease. Leucine-rich repeat containing 10
(Lrrc10) is a cardiac-specific factor that is crucial for proper cardiac
development and deletion of Lrrc10 in mice results in dilated cardiomyopathy.
However, the mechanisms regulating Lrrc10 expression in cardiomyocytes remain
unknown. Therefore, we set out to determine trans-acting factors and cis-elements
critical for mediating Lrrc10 expression. We identify Lrrc10 as a transcriptional
target of Nkx2-5 and GATA4. The Lrrc10 promoter region contains two highly
conserved cardiac regulatory elements, which are functional in cardiomyocytes but
not in fibroblasts. In vivo, Nkx2-5 and GATA4 endogenously occupy the proximal
and distal cardiac regulatory elements of Lrrc10 in the heart. Moreover,
embryonic hearts of Nkx2-5 knockout mice have dramatically reduced expression of 
Lrrc10. These data demonstrate the importance of Nkx2-5 and GATA4 in regulation
of Lrrc10 expression in vivo. The proximal cardiac regulatory element located at 
around -200bp is synergistically activated by Nkx2-5 and GATA4 while the distal
cardiac regulatory element present around -3kb requires SRF in addition to Nkx2-5
and GATA4 for synergistic activation. Mutational analyses identify a pair of
adjacent Nkx2-5 and GATA binding sites within the proximal cardiac regulatory
element that are necessary to induce expression of Lrrc10. In contrast, only the 
GATA site is functional in the distal regulatory element. Taken together, our
data demonstrate that the transcription factors Nkx2-5 and GATA4 cooperatively
regulate cardiac-specific expression of Lrrc10.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3940241
PMID: 23751912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Folia Biol (Praha). 2013;59(2):87-92.

Promoter methylation of GATA4, WIF1, NTRK1 and other selected tumour suppressor
genes in ovarian cancer.

Chmelarová M(1), Dvoráková E, pacek J, Laco J, Mik M, Palicka V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Charles University in
Prague - Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové and University Hospital Hradec
Králové, Czech Republic. ChmelarovaMarcela@seznam.cz

Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynaecologic tumours, but the
molecular and especially epigenetic events underlying the transformation are
poorly understood. Various methylation changes have been identified and show
promise as potential cancer biomarkers. The aim of this study was to investigate 
promoter methylation of selected tumour suppressor genes in ovarian cancer by
comparison with normal ovarian tissue. To search for epigenetic events we used
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification to compare 
the methylation status of 44 tissue samples of ovarian cancer with 30 control
samples. Using a 20% cut-off for methylation, we observed significantly higher
methylation in genes NTKR1, GATA4 and WIF1 in the ovarian cancer group compared
with the control group. These findings could potentially be used in screening of 
ovarian cancer, and may have implications for future chemotherapy based on
epigenetic changes.

PMID: 23746174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Oct 15;22(20):2706-13. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0083. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

Spontaneously differentiated GATA6-positive human embryonic stem cells represent 
an important cellular step in human embryonic development; they are not just an
artifact of in vitro culture.

Lee JH(1), Hong KS, Mantel C, Broxmeyer HE, Lee MR, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Hanyang University , Seoul, Korea.

In this study, we isolated and characterized spontaneously differentiated human
embryonic stem cells (SD-hESCs) found in hESC colonies in comparison to the
morphologically premature ESCs in the colonies to investigate the potential role 
of SD-hESCs in embryogenesis. SD-hESCs were distinguished from undifferentiated
hESCs by their higher expression of GATA6, a marker for primitive endoderm and
transthyretin, a marker visceral endoderm in embryoid bodies (EBs). SD-hESCs
expressed OCT4 and NANOG, markers for pluripotent stem cells, at significantly
lower levels than undifferentiated hESCs. EBs derived from isolated SD-hESCs were
morphologically distinct from cells directly derived from the undifferentiated
hESCs; they contained higher number of cysts compared to EBs from
undifferentiated hESC-derived EBs (42% vs. 20%). Furthermore, the extracellular
signal molecule, BMP2/4, induced a higher GATA4/6 expression and cystic EB
formation than control and noggin-treated EBs. Since cystic formation in EBs play
a role in primitive endoderm formation during embryogenesis, the SD-hESC may be a
relevant cell type equipped to differentiate into primitive endoderm. Our results
suggest that SD-ESCs generated during routine hESC culture are not just an
artifact of in vitro culture and these cells could serve as a useful model to
study the process of embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3787399
PMID: 23746070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Jul;13(6):993-9.

Mutation p.S335X in GATA4 reduces its DNA binding affinity and enhances cell
apoptosis associated with ventricular septal defect.

Yang F(1), Wu M, Li Y, Zheng GY, Cao HQ, Sun W, Yang R, Zhang H, Sheng YH, Kong
XQ, Tian XL, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Genetic mutations in GATA4, a transcriptional factor, have been found to cause
congenital heart diseases. The underlying mechanism, however, remains largely
unknown. We previously reported 7 heterozygous variants in patients with
ventricular septal defects (VSD). Here we functionally characterized a de novo
mutation p.S335X and demonstrated that this mutation led to the pre-termination
of its translation, producing a truncated GATA4 lacking a conservative region at 
C-terminus. Truncated GATA4 did not disturb its subcellular localization;
however, it delayed the cardiomyocyte differentiation in P19cl6 model and
prohibited Bcl2 expression that led to apoptosis proved by fragmented genomic DNA
and positive TUNEL staining in H9C2 cells. By ChIP assay, we showed that GATA4
without C-terminus reduced its DNA binding affinity and suppressed the
expressions of its target genes. These findings suggest that C-terminus of GATA4 
is critical to maintain DNA binding, and genetic mutations in this region may
affect genes important for myocyte apoptosis and differentiation associated with 
congenital heart defects.

PMID: 23745586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nat Protoc. 2013 Jun;8(6):1204-15. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2013.067. Epub 2013 May 30.

Reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro.

Qian L(1), Berry EC, Fu JD, Ieda M, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Cardiac fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to cardiomyocyte-like cells by the
introduction of three transcription factors: Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (collectively 
referred to here as GMT). Resident cardiac fibroblasts can be converted in vivo
into induced cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) that closely resemble endogenous
cardiomyocytes and electrically integrate with the host myocardium. In contrast, 
in vitro reprogramming yields many partially reprogrammed iCMs, with a few that
reprogram fully into contracting myocytes (~3 out of 10,000 GMT-transduced
cells). iCMs can be observed as early as 3 d after viral infection, and they
continue to mature over 2 months before beating is observed. Despite the success 
of multiple groups, the inefficiency of in vitro reprogramming has made it
challenging for others. However, given the advantages of in vitro iCMs for
performing mechanistic studies and, if refined, for testing drugs or small
molecules for personalized medicine and modeling cardiac disease in a dish, it is
important to standardize the protocol to improve reproducibility and enhance the 
technology further. Here we describe a detailed step-by-step protocol for in
vitro cardiac reprogramming using retroviruses encoding GMT.

PMID: 23722259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063577. Print 2013.

Transcription factors MYOCD, SRF, Mesp1 and SMARCD3 enhance the cardio-inducing
effect of GATA4, TBX5, and MEF2C during direct cellular reprogramming.

Christoforou N(1), Chellappan M, Adler AF, Kirkton RD, Wu T, Addis RC, Bursac N, 
Leong KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America.

Transient overexpression of defined combinations of master regulator genes can
effectively induce cellular reprogramming: the acquisition of an alternative
predicted phenotype from a differentiated cell lineage. This can be of particular
importance in cardiac regenerative medicine wherein the heart lacks the capacity 
to heal itself, but simultaneously contains a large pool of fibroblasts. In this 
study we determined the cardio-inducing capacity of ten transcription factors to 
actuate cellular reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts into
cardiomyocyte-like cells. Overexpression of transcription factors MYOCD and SRF
alone or in conjunction with Mesp1 and SMARCD3 enhanced the basal but necessary
cardio-inducing effect of the previously reported GATA4, TBX5, and MEF2C. In
particular, combinations of five or seven transcription factors enhanced the
activation of cardiac reporter vectors, and induced an upregulation of
cardiac-specific genes. Global gene expression analysis also demonstrated a
significantly greater cardio-inducing effect when the transcription factors MYOCD
and SRF were used. Detection of cross-striated cells was highly dependent on the 
cell culture conditions and was enhanced by the addition of valproic acid and JAK
inhibitor. Although we detected Ca(2+) transient oscillations in the reprogrammed
cells, we did not detect significant changes in resting membrane potential or
spontaneously contracting cells. This study further elucidates the
cardio-inducing effect of the transcriptional networks involved in cardiac
cellular reprogramming, contributing to the ongoing rational design of a robust
protocol required for cardiac regenerative therapies.

PMCID: PMC3660533
PMID: 23704920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Stem Cells. 2013 Jan;31(1):71-82. doi: 10.1002/stem.1272.

Gata4 blocks somatic cell reprogramming by directly repressing Nanog.

Serrano F(1), Calatayud CF, Blazquez M, Torres J, Castell JV, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, CIBERehd, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by
ectopic expression of the four factors Oct4, Klf4, Sox2, and Myc. Here, we
investigated the role of Gata4 in the reprogramming process and present evidence 
for a negative role of this family of transcription factors in the induction of
pluripotency. Coexpression of Gata4 with Oct4, Klf4, and Sox2 with or without Myc
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts greatly impaired reprogramming and endogenous
Nanog expression. The lack of Nanog upregulation was associated with a blockade
in the transition from the initiation phase of reprogramming to the full
pluripotent state characteristic of iPS cells. Addition of Nanog to the
reprogramming cocktail blocked the deleterious effects observed with Gata4
expression. Downregulation of endogenous Gata4 by short hairpin RNAs during
reprogramming both accelerated and increased the efficiency of the process and
augmented the mRNA levels of endogenous Nanog. Using comparative genomics, we
identified a consensus binding site for Gata factors in an evolutionary conserved
region located 9 kb upstream of the Nanog gene. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, gel retardation, and luciferase assays, we found that Gata4 
bound to this region and inhibited Nanog transcription in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Overall, our results describe for first time the negative effect of Gata4 
in the reprogramming of somatic cells and highlight the role of Gata factors in
the transcriptional networks that control cell lineage choices in the early
embryo.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23132827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Dev Cell. 2012 Nov 13;23(5):1032-42. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.014. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

GADD45G functions in male sex determination by promoting p38 signaling and Sry
expression.

Gierl MS(1), Gruhn WH, von Seggern A, Maltry N, Niehrs C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, 55128 Mainz, Germany.

Male sex determination in mammals is induced by Sry, a gene whose regulation is
poorly understood. Here we show that mice mutant for the stress-response gene
Gadd45g display complete male-to-female sex reversal. Gadd45g and Sry have a
strikingly similar expression pattern in the genital ridge, and they are
coexpressed in gonadal somatic cells. In Gadd45g mutants, Sry expression is
delayed and reduced, and yet Sry seemed to remain poised for expression, because 
its promoter is demethylated on schedule and is occupied by active histone marks.
Instead, p38 MAPK signaling is impaired in Gadd45g mutants. Moreover, the
transcription factor GATA4, which is required for Sry expression, binds to the
Sry promoter in vivo in a MAPK-dependent manner. The results suggest that a
signaling cascade, involving GADD45G <U+2192> p38 MAPK <U+2192> GATA4 <U+2192> SRY, regulates male sex
determination.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23102581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Cell. 2012 Nov 13;23(5):1020-31. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.016. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

Gadd45<U+03B3> and Map3k4 interactions regulate mouse testis determination via p38
MAPK-mediated control of Sry expression.

Warr N(1), Carre GA, Siggers P, Faleato JV, Brixey R, Pope M, Bogani D, Childers 
M, Wells S, Scudamore CL, Tedesco M, del Barco Barrantes I, Nebreda AR, Trainor
PA, Greenfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell, Oxfordshire OX11
0RD, UK.

Loss of the kinase MAP3K4 causes mouse embryonic gonadal sex reversal due to
reduced expression of the testis-determining gene, Sry. However, because of
widespread expression of MAP3K4, the cellular basis of this misregulation was
unclear. Here, we show that mice lacking Gadd45<U+03B3> also exhibit XY gonadal sex
reversal caused by disruption to Sry expression. Gadd45<U+03B3> is expressed in a
dynamic fashion in somatic cells of the developing gonads from 10.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) to 12.5 dpc. Gadd45<U+03B3> and Map3k4 genetically interact during sex 
determination, and transgenic overexpression of Map3k4 rescues gonadal defects in
Gadd45<U+03B3>-deficient embryos. Sex reversal in both mutants is associated with
reduced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and GATA4. In addition, embryos lacking both 
p38a and p38ß also exhibit XY gonadal sex reversal. Taken together, our data
suggest a requirement for GADD45<U+03B3> in promoting MAP3K4-mediated activation of p38 
MAPK signaling in embryonic gonadal somatic cells for testis determination in the
mouse.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3526779
PMID: 23102580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;14(10):800-3.

[Post-transcriptional protein modification of Gata4].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu LW(1), Gui YH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.

Gata4 is an important transcription factor in heart development. Gata4
post-transcriptional protein modification regulates transcriptional activity and 
DNA binding, which in turn affects expression of downstream genes and
transcription factors, differentiation of embryonic stem cells and cardiogenesis.
This article summarizes the effect of post-transcriptional protein modification
on transcriptional activity of Gata4 and the relationship between this effect and
congenital heart disease. It was shown that acetylation, phosphorylation and
SUMOylation upregulate transcriptional activity, DNA binding, downstream gene
expression and embryonic stem cell differentiation. On the other hand,
methylation and deacetylation downregulate Gata4 transcriptional activity.
Post-transcriptional protein modification of Gata4 is very important in clinical 
research on congenital and other heart diseases.

PMID: 23092578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Basic Res Cardiol. 2012 Nov;107(6):301. doi: 10.1007/s00395-012-0301-5. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Cardiac progenitors derived from reprogrammed mesenchymal stem cells contribute
to angiomyogenic repair of the infarcted heart.

Buccini S(1), Haider KH, Ahmed RP, Jiang S, Ashraf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati, OH,
45267-0529, USA.

The strategy to reprogram somatic stem cells to pluripotency status has provided 
an alternative source of surrogate ES cells (ESC). We report efficient
reprogramming of multipotent bone marrow (BM) mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) to
pluripotent status and the resultant MSC derived iPS cells (MiPS) and their
derived progenitors effectively repaired the infarcted heart. MSC from young,
male, Oct4-GFP transgenic mice were reprogrammed by retroviral transduction with 
Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc stemness factors. MiPS thus generated displayed
characteristics of mouse ESC including morphology, surface antigens, gene and miR
expression profiles. MiPS also formed spontaneously beating cardiac progenitors
which expressed cardiac specific transcription factors and protein markers
including Gata4, Mef2c, Nkx2.5, myosin heavy chain, troponin-I, and troponin-T,
and showed ultra structural characteristics typical of cardiomyocytes.
Intramyocardial delivery of MiPS (group-2) and their derivative cardiac-like
cells (MiPS-CP; group-3) in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction showed
extensive survival and engraftment at 4 weeks with resultant attenuation of
infarct size (p < 0.001 vs. DMEM injected control; n = 4). Engraftment of MiPS-CP
was without cardiac tumorigenesis as compared to 21 % in MiPS transplanted
animals. Furthermore, angiogenesis was improved in groups-2 and 3 (p < 0.001 vs. 
control). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed significantly preserved indices
of cardiac contractility (ejection fraction p < 0.001 and fractional shortening p
< 0.001 vs. control; n = 7). MSC were successfully reprogrammed into MiPS that
displayed ESC-like characteristics and differentiated into spontaneously beating 
cardiomyocytes. Cardiac progenitors derived from MiPS repopulated the infarcted
heart without tumorigenesis and improved global cardiac function.

PMCID: PMC3505546
PMID: 23076626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Tsitologiia. 2012;54(8):637-51.

[Developing of a new feeder-free system and characterization of human embryonic
stem cell sublines derived in this system under autogenic and allogenic
culturing].

[Article in Russian]

Kol'tsova AM, Voronkina IV, Gordeeva OF, Zenin VV, Lifantseva NV, Musorina AS,
Smagina LV, Iakovleva TK, Polianskaia GG.

A new feeder-free culture system for human embryonic stem cells (hESC) was
developed. It consist of extracellular matrix proteins synthesized by feeder
cells--mesenchymal stem cell line SC5-MSC, which was derived from initial hESC
line SC5. The major ECM proteins--fibronectin and laminin--that maintain hESC
growth in feeder-free system were identified. An essential component of this
system is a SC5-MSC-conditioned medium. Two hESC sublines were derived. The
subline SC5-FF was cultured in autogenic and subline SC7-FF in allogenic system. 
Sublines SC5-FF and SC7-FF passed through more than 300 and 115 cell population
doublings, retained normal diploid karyotype and an ability of in vitro
differentiation into derivates of three germ layers. These sublines express
markers of undifferentiated hESC: alkaline phosphatase, Oct-4, SSEA-4, TRA-1-81
and multidrug resistance transporter--ABCG2. The RT-PCR analysis revealed that
undifferentiated cells SC5-FF subline, like cells of initial feeder-maintained
hESC line SC5, expressed genes OCT4 and NANOG, and germ line specific genes such 
as DPPA3/STELLA and DAZL. An expression of OCT4, NANOG, DPPA3/STELLA ans DAZL was
down-regulated during embryonic bodies differentiation, whereas expression of
somatic lineages specific genes like GATA4 and AFP (extra embryonic and embryonic
endoderm), PAX6 (neuroectoderm) and BRY (mesoderm) was up-regulated. The
comparative analysis of some typical features (karyotype structure, the average
population doubling time and the number of undifferentiated cells in populations)
did not reveal essential differences between initial SC5 and SC7 lines and their 
sublines SC5-FF and SC7-FF. This shows that feeder-free culture systems, which
are much more stable than any feeder systems, do not break main hESC features
during long cultivation and can be recommended for fundamental, biomedicine and
pharmacological investigations, using hESCs.

PMID: 23074854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1108-10. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.278820.

An emerging strategy of gene therapy for cardiac disease.

Yoshida Y, Yamanaka S.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1147-56.

PMID: 23065338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Nov 2;91(5):823-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.032. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Large-scale gene-centric meta-analysis across 32 studies identifies multiple
lipid loci.

Asselbergs FW, Guo Y, van Iperen EP, Sivapalaratnam S, Tragante V, Lanktree MB,
Lange LA, Almoguera B, Appelman YE, Barnard J, Baumert J, Beitelshees AL,
Bhangale TR, Chen YD, Gaunt TR, Gong Y, Hopewell JC, Johnson T, Kleber ME,
Langaee TY, Li M, Li YR, Liu K, McDonough CW, Meijs MF, Middelberg RP, Musunuru
K, Nelson CP, O'Connell JR, Padmanabhan S, Pankow JS, Pankratz N, Rafelt S,
Rajagopalan R, Romaine SP, Schork NJ, Shaffer J, Shen H, Smith EN, Tischfield SE,
van der Most PJ, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Verweij N, Volcik KA, Zhang L, Bailey 
KR, Bailey KM, Bauer F, Boer JM, Braund PS, Burt A, Burton PR, Buxbaum SG, Chen
W, Cooper-Dehoff RM, Cupples LA, deJong JS, Delles C, Duggan D, Fornage M,
Furlong CE, Glazer N, Gums JG, Hastie C, Holmes MV, Illig T, Kirkland SA,
Kivimaki M, Klein R, Klein BE, Kooperberg C, Kottke-Marchant K, Kumari M, LaCroix
AZ, Mallela L, Murugesan G, Ordovas J, Ouwehand WH, Post WS, Saxena R, Scharnagl 
H, Schreiner PJ, Shah T, Shields DC, Shimbo D, Srinivasan SR, Stolk RP, Swerdlow 
DI, Taylor HA Jr, Topol EJ, Toskala E, van Pelt JL, van Setten J, Yusuf S,
Whittaker JC, Zwinderman AH; LifeLines Cohort Study, Anand SS, Balmforth AJ,
Berenson GS, Bezzina CR, Boehm BO, Boerwinkle E, Casas JP, Caulfield MJ, Clarke
R, Connell JM, Cruickshanks KJ, Davidson KW, Day IN, de Bakker PI, Doevendans PA,
Dominiczak AF, Hall AS, Hartman CA, Hengstenberg C, Hillege HL, Hofker MH,
Humphries SE, Jarvik GP, Johnson JA, Kaess BM, Kathiresan S, Koenig W, Lawlor DA,
März W, Melander O, Mitchell BD, Montgomery GW, Munroe PB, Murray SS, Newhouse
SJ, Onland-Moret NC, Poulter N, Psaty B, Redline S, Rich SS, Rotter JI, Schunkert
H, Sever P, Shuldiner AR, Silverstein RL, Stanton A, Thorand B, Trip MD, Tsai MY,
van der Harst P, van der Schoot E, van der Schouw YT, Verschuren WM, Watkins H,
Wilde AA, Wolffenbuttel BH, Whitfield JB, Hovingh GK, Ballantyne CM, Wijmenga C, 
Reilly MP, Martin NG, Wilson JG, Rader DJ, Samani NJ, Reiner AP, Hegele RA,
Kastelein JJ, Hingorani AD, Talmud PJ, Hakonarson H, Elbers CC, Keating BJ,
Drenos F.

Collaborators: de Boer R, Hillege H, van der Klauw M, Navis G, Ormel H, Postma D,
Rosmalen J, Slaets J, Stolk R, Wolffenbuttel B, Alizadeh B, Boezen M, Bruinenberg
M, Festen N, Franke L, van der Harst P, Navis G, Postma D, Snieder H, Wijmenga C,
Wolffenbuttel B.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified many SNPs underlying
variations in plasma-lipid levels. We explore whether additional loci associated 
with plasma-lipid phenotypes, such as high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), total cholesterol (TC), and
triglycerides (TGs), can be identified by a dense gene-centric approach. Our
meta-analysis of 32 studies in 66,240 individuals of European ancestry was based 
on the custom ~50,000 SNP genotyping array (the ITMAT-Broad-CARe array) covering 
~2,000 candidate genes. SNP-lipid associations were replicated either in a cohort
comprising an additional 24,736 samples or within the Global Lipid Genetic
Consortium. We identified four, six, ten, and four unreported SNPs in established
lipid genes for HDL-C, LDL-C, TC, and TGs, respectively. We also identified
several lipid-related SNPs in previously unreported genes: DGAT2, HCAR2, GPIHBP1,
PPARG, and FTO for HDL-C; SOCS3, APOH, SPTY2D1, BRCA2, and VLDLR for LDL-C;
SOCS3, UGT1A1, BRCA2, UBE3B, FCGR2A, CHUK, and INSIG2 for TC; and SERPINF2, C4B, 
GCK, GATA4, INSR, and LPAL2 for TGs. The proportion of explained phenotypic
variance in the subset of studies providing individual-level data was 9.9% for
HDL-C, 9.5% for LDL-C, 10.3% for TC, and 8.0% for TGs. This large meta-analysis
of lipid phenotypes with the use of a dense gene-centric approach identified
multiple SNPs not previously described in established lipid genes and several
previously unknown loci. The explained phenotypic variance from this approach was
comparable to that from a meta-analysis of GWAS data, suggesting that a focused
genotyping approach can further increase the understanding of heritability of
plasma lipids.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3487124
PMID: 23063622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2013 Mar;14(1):41-50. doi:
10.1177/1470320312460070. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Molecular changes in the early phase of renin-dependent cardiac hypertrophy in
hypertensive cyp1a1ren-2 transgenic rats.

Kunert-Keil C(1), Landsberger M, Jantzen F, Niessner F, Kroemer HK, Felix SB,
Brinkmeier H, Peters J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany.

An early response to high arterial pressure is the development of cardiac
hypertrophy. Functional and transcriptional regulation of ion channels and Ca(2+)
handling proteins are involved in this process but the relative contribution of
each is unclear. In this study, we investigated the expression of genes involved 
in action potential generation and Ca(2+) homeostasis of cardiomyocytes in
hypertensive cyp1a1ren-2 transgenic rats. In this model, the transgene prorenin
was induced by indole-3-carbinol for 2 weeks allowing the induction of
hypertension. Electrophysiological recordings from cardiomyocytes of hypertensive
rats revealed a slight increase in membrane capacitance consistent with cellular 
hypertrophy. L-type calcium current density was reduced by 30%. Left ventricles
of hypertensive rats showed a significant increase in transcript and protein
levels of the cation channel TRPC6 and FK506-binding protein, whereas levels of
SERCA2 and voltage-dependent potassium channels K(v)4.2 and K(v)4.3 were found to
be decreased. Further, a marked nuclear localization of the transcription factors
GATA4 and NFATC4 was observed in cardiac tissue of hypertensive rats. The
cyp1a1ren-2 transgenic rat thus appears to be a valid model to investigate early 
changes in cardiac hypertrophy. This study points to roles for TRPC6, FK506BP,
SERCA2, K(v)4.2, and K(v)4.3 in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 23060473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(7):1227-35. doi: 10.3727/096368912X657297. Epub 2012 Oct
2.

Radio electric conveyed fields directly reprogram human dermal skin fibroblasts
toward cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle-like lineages.

Maioli M(1), Rinaldi S, Santaniello S, Castagna A, Pigliaru G, Gualini S,
Cavallini C, Fontani V, Ventura C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Somatic cells can be directly reprogrammed to alternative differentiated fates
without first becoming stem/progenitor cells. Nevertheless, the initial need for 
viral-mediated gene delivery renders this strategy unsafe in humans. Here, we
provide evidence that exposure of human skin fibroblasts to a Radio Electric
Asymmetric Conveyer (REAC), an innovative device delivering radio electric
conveyed fields at a radiofrequency of 2.4 GHz, afforded remarkable commitment
toward cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle lineages. REAC induced the
transcription of tissue-restricted genes, including Mef2c, Tbx5, GATA4, Nkx2.5,
and prodynorphin for cardiac reprogramming, as well as myoD, and neurogenin 1 for
skeletal myogenesis and neurogenesis, respectively. Conversely, REAC treatment
elicited a biphasic effect on a number of stemness-related genes, leading to
early transcriptional increase of Oct4, Sox2, cMyc, Nanog, and Klf4 within 6-20
h, followed by a downregulation at later times. The REAC action bypassed a
persistent reprogramming toward an induced pluripotent stem cell-like state and
involved the transcriptional induction of the NADPH oxidase subunit Nox4. Our
results show for the first time the feasibility of using a physical stimulus to
afford the expression of pluripotentiality in human adult somatic cells up to the
attainment of three major target lineages for regenerative medicine.

PMID: 23057961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46844. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046844. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Regulation of a vascular plexus by gata4 is mediated in zebrafish through the
chemokine sdf1a.

Torregroza I(1), Holtzinger A, Mendelson K, Liu TC, Hla T, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
United States of America.

Using the zebrafish model we describe a previously unrecognized requirement for
the transcription factor gata4 controlling embryonic angiogenesis. The
development of a vascular plexus in the embryonic tail, the caudal hematopoietic 
tissue (CHT), fails in embryos depleted of gata4. Rather than forming a normal
vascular plexus, the CHT of gata4 morphants remains fused, and cells in the CHT
express high levels of osteogenic markers ssp1 and runx1. Definitive progenitors 
emerge from the hemogenic aortic endothelium, but fail to colonize the poorly
vascularized CHT. We also found abnormal patterns and levels for the chemokine
sdf1a in gata4 morphants, which was found to be functionally relevant, since the 
embryos also show defects in development of the lateral line, a mechano-sensory
organ system highly dependent on a gradient of sdf1a levels. Reduction of sdf1a
levels was sufficient to rescue lateral line development, circulation, and CHT
morphology. The result was surprising since neither gata4 nor sdf1a is obviously 
expressed in the CHT. Therefore, we generated transgenic fish that conditionally 
express a dominant-negative gata4 isoform, and determined that gata4 function is 
required during gastrulation, when it is co-expressed with sdf1a in lateral
mesoderm. Our study shows that the gata4 gene regulates sdf1a levels during early
embryogenesis, which impacts embryonic patterning and subsequently the
development of the caudal vascular plexus.

PMCID: PMC3463525
PMID: 23056483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):650-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101135.

De novo copy number variants are associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Wynn J, Ma L, Guha S, Mychaliska GB, Crombleholme TM, Azarow KS, Lim FY,
Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, LeDuc CA, Costa K, Stolar C, Aspelund G,
Arkovitz MS, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with
significant morbidity and mortality. Although the aetiology of CDH remains poorly
understood, studies from animal models and patients with CDH suggest that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. Chromosomal anomalies
have been reported in CDH.
METHODS: In this study, the authors investigated the frequency of chromosomal
anomalies and copy number variants (CNVs) in 256 parent-child trios of CDH using 
clinical conventional cytogenetic and microarray analysis. The authors also
selected a set of CDH related training genes to prioritise the genes in those
segmental aneuploidies and identified the genes and gene sets that may contribute
to the aetiology of CDH.
RESULTS: The authors identified chromosomal anomalies in 16 patients (6.3%) of
the series including three aneuploidies, two unbalanced translocation, and 11
patients with de novo CNVs ranging in size from 95 kb to 104.6 Mb. The authors
prioritised the genes in the CNV segments and identified KCNA2, LMNA, CACNA1S,
MYOG, HLX, LBR, AGT, GATA4, SOX7, HYLS1, FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6, COL4A1,
COL4A2, HOMER2, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 as genes that may be involved in diaphragm
development. Gene enrichment analysis identified the most relevant gene ontology 
categories as those involved in tissue development (p=4.4×10(-11)) or regulation 
of multicellular organismal processes (p=2.8×10(-10)) and 'receptor binding'
(p=8.7×10(-14)) and 'DNA binding transcription factor activity' (p=4.4×10(-10)).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings support the role of chromosomal anomalies in
CDH and provide a set of candidate genes including FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6,
COL4A1, COL4A2, SOX7, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 for further analysis in CDH.

PMCID: PMC3696999
PMID: 23054247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Jan;40(1):491-5. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2085-y. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Overexpression of APRIN inhibits differentiation and proliferation and promotes
apoptosis in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Zhou X(1), Kong X, Xu W, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, No. 1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou 215004, China.

We have previously demonstrated that androgen-induced proliferation inhibitor
(APRIN) expression was upregulated in ventricular septum tissues from patients
with ventricular septal defect (VSD). The present study was designed to
investigate the effects of APRIN on P19 cell differentiation, proliferation and
apoptosis. In this study, we established a stable APRIN-overexpressing P19
embryonal carcinoma cell line that can differentiate into myocardial cells when
treated with 1 % dimethyl sulfoxide. Our data showed that mRNA expressions of
myocardial cell differentiation-related genes (such as cTnT, a-MHC, GATA4, and
MEF2C) in the APRIN-overexpressing P19 cells were downregulated compared to the
empty-vector controls. Our findings also indicated that P19 cells overexpressing 
APRIN had a reduced growth rate and a decreased S phase of the cell cycle.
Moreover, the apoptotic rate in P19 cells overexpressing APRIN was significantly 
higher than that in the controls. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that
overexpression of APRIN inhibits differentiation and proliferation and promotes
apoptosis in P19 cells, suggesting that APRIN may be involved in the pathogenesis
of VSD.

PMID: 23054015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Oct;1270:66-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06696.x.

Cardiac repair with thymosin ß4 and cardiac reprogramming factors.

Srivastava D(1), Ieda M, Fu J, Qian L.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. dsrivastava@gladstone.ucsf.edu

Heart disease is a leading cause of death in newborns and in adults. We
previously reported that the G-actin-sequestering peptide thymosin ß4 promotes
myocardial survival in hypoxia and promotes neoangiogenesis, resulting in cardiac
repair after injury. More recently, we showed that reprogramming of cardiac
fibroblasts to cardiomyocyte-like cells in vivo after coronary artery ligation
using three cardiac transcription factors (Gata4/Mef2c/Tbx5) offers an
alternative approach to regenerate heart muscle. We have combined the delivery of
thymosin ß4 and the cardiac reprogramming factors to further enhance the degree
of cardiac repair and improvement in cardiac function after myocardial
infarction. These findings suggest that thymosin ß4 and cardiac reprogramming
technology may synergistically limit damage to the heart and promote cardiac
regeneration through the stimulation of endogenous cells within the heart.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 23050819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Eur Heart J. 2014 Apr;35(14):920-31. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs306. Epub 2012 Oct
9.

Nitric oxide synthase-3 deficiency results in hypoplastic coronary arteries and
postnatal myocardial infarction.

Liu Y(1), Lu X, Xiang FL, Poelmann RE, Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Robbins J, Feng 
Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western University, London,
Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1.

AIMS: Hypoplastic coronary artery disease is a rare congenital abnormality that
is associated with sudden cardiac death. However, molecular mechanisms
responsible for this disease are not clear. The aim of the present study was to
assess the role of nitric oxide synthase-3 (NOS3) in the pathogenesis of
hypoplastic coronary arteries.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Wild-type (WT), NOS3(-/-), and a novel cardiac-specific NOS3
overexpression mouse model were employed. Deficiency in NOS3 resulted in coronary
artery hypoplasia in foetal mice and spontaneous myocardial infarction in
postnatal hearts. Coronary artery diameters, vessel density, and volume were
significantly decreased in NOS3(-/-) mice at postnatal day 0. In addition,
NOS3(-/-) mice showed a significant increase in the ventricular wall thickness,
myocardial volume, and cardiomyocyte cell size compared with WT mice. Lack of
NOS3 also down-regulated the expression of Gata4, Wilms tumour-1, vascular
endothelial growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor and erythropoietin, and
inhibited migration of epicardial cells. These abnormalities and hypoplastic
coronary arteries in the NOS3(-/-) mice were completely rescued by the
cardiac-specific overexpression of NOS3.
CONCLUSION: Nitric oxide synthase-3 is required for coronary artery development
and deficiency in NOS3 leads to hypoplastic coronary arteries.

PMID: 23048191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(9):1651-66. doi: 10.3727/096368912X657675. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Human umbilical cord perivascular cells exhibit enhanced cardiomyocyte
reprogramming and cardiac function after experimental acute myocardial
infarction.

Yannarelli G(1), Dayan V, Pacienza N, Lee CJ, Medin J, Keating A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Program, Prince Margaret Hospital, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G2M9. gyannare@uhnres.utoronto.ca

We were interested in evaluating the ability of the mesenchymal stromal cell
(MSC) population, human umbilical cord perivascular cells (HUCPVCs), to undergo
cardiomyocyte reprogramming in an established coculture system with rat embryonic
cardiomyocytes. Results were compared with human bone marrow-derived (BM) MSCs.
The transcription factors GATA4 and Mef 2c were expressed in HUCPVCs but not
BM-MSCs at baseline and, at 7 days, increased 7.6- and 3.5-fold, respectively,
compared with BM-MSCs. Although cardiac-specific gene expression increased in
both cell types in coculture, upregulation was more significant in HUCPVCs,
consistent with Mef 2c-GATA4 synergism. Using a lentivector with eGFP transcribed
from the a-myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) promoter, we found that cardiac gene
expression was greater in HUCPVCs than BM-MSCs after 14 days coculture (52±17%
vs. 29±6%, respectively). A higher frequency of HUCPVCs expressed a-MHC protein
compared with BM-MSCs (11.6±0.9% vs. 5.3±0.3%); however, both cell types retained
MSC-associated determinants. We also assessed the ability of the MSC types to
mediate cardiac regeneration in a NOD/SCID <U+03B3> mouse model of acute myocardial
infarction (AMI). Fourteen days after AMI, cardiac function was significantly
better in cell-treated mice compared with control animals and HUCPVCs exhibited
greater improvement. Although human cells persisted in the infarct area, the
frequency of a-MHC expression was low. Our results indicate that HUCPVCs exhibit 
a greater degree of cardiomyocyte reprogramming but that differentiation for both
cell types is partial. We conclude that HUCPVCs may be preferable to BM-MSCs in
the cell therapy of AMI.

PMID: 23043977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045914. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

GATA-4 and FOG-2 expression in pediatric ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors
replicates embryonal gonadal phenotype: results from the TREP project.

Virgone C(1), Cecchetto G, Ferrari A, Bisogno G, Donofrio V, Boldrini R, Collini 
P, Dall'Igna P, Alaggio R.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery, Departments of Pediatrics and Gynaecology-Obstetrics,
University Hospital, Padua, Italy. calogero.virgone@unipd.it

AIM: GATA proteins are a family of zinc finger transcription factors regulating
gene expression, differentiation and proliferation in various tissues. The
expression of GATA-4 and FOG-2, one of its modulators, was studied in pediatric
Sex Cord-Stromal tumors of the ovary, in order to evaluate their potential role
as diagnostic markers and prognostic factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical and histological data of 15 patients, enrolled
into the TREP Project since 2000 were evaluated. When available, immunostaines
for FOG-2, GATA-4, a-Inhibin, Vimentin and Pancytokeratin were also analyzed.
RESULTS: In our series there were 6 Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumors (JGCT), 6
Sertoli-Leydig Cell Tumors (SLCT), 1 Cellular Fibroma, 1 Theca Cell Tumor and 1
Stromal Sclerosing Tumor (SST). Thirteen patients obtained a complete remission
(CR), 1 reached a second CR after the removal of a metachronous tumor and 1 died 
of disease. Inhibin was detectable in 11/15, Vimentin in 13/15, Pancytokeratin in
6/15, GATA-4 in 5/13 and FOG-2 in 11/15. FOG-2 was highly expressed in 5/6 JGCT, 
while GATA-4 was weakly detectable only in 1 of the cases. SLCT expressed
diffusely FOG-2 (4/6) and GATA-4 (3/5). GATA-4 and FOG-2 were detected in fibroma
and thecoma but not in the SST.
CONCLUSIONS: Pediatric granulosa tumors appear to express a FOG-2/GATA-4
phenotype in keeping with primordial ovarian follicles. High expression of GATA-4
does not correlate with aggressive behaviour as seen in adults, but it is
probably involved in cell proliferation its absence can be associated with the
better outcome of JGCT. SLCTs replicate the phenotype of Sertoli cells during
embryogenesis in normal testis. In this group, the lack of expression of FOG-2 in
tumors in advanced stages might reveal a hypothetical role in inhibiting GATA-4
cell proliferation pathway. In fibroma/thecoma group GATA-4 and FOG-2 point out
the abnormal activation of GATA pathway and might be involved in the onset of
these tumors.

PMCID: PMC3454334
PMID: 23029311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Histol Histopathol. 2012 Nov;27(11):1361-83.

Genes promoting and disturbing testis development.

Barrionuevo FJ(1), Burgos M, Scherer G, Jiménez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Biotechnology, University of Granada, 
Laboratory 127 CIBM, Center for Biomedical Research, Armilla, Granada, Spain.

Mammals have an XX/XY sex chromosomal sex determination system in which males
represent the heterogametic sex. The Y-linked gene, SRY, determines sex by
inducing the undifferentiated, bipotential gonads to differentiate as testes,
which produce androgens and promote in this way the development of a male
phenotype. Thus, in mammals, sex determination can be equated to testis
determination, which involves several important cell processes, including Sertoli
cell differentiation, mesonephric cell migration, testis cord formation,
testis-specific vascularization, and myoid and Leydig cell differentiation. Many 
genes are currently known to be involved in testis development. Some of them,
including SF1, WT1, GATA4 and FOG2, are necessary for the formation of the
bipotential, undifferentiated gonad but also have important roles in testis
differentiation. Others can be considered testis-promoting, differentaition
and/or maintenance genes: these include SRY, SOX9, FGF9, PTGDS, SOX8, SOX3,
NR0B1, PDGFRa, DMRT1, AMH, NGF, NTF3 and NGFR as the most important examples.
Finally, there is a smaller group of genes which are involved in ovarian
development and which can cause aberrant testis development if mutated, including
RSPO1, WNT4, CTNNB1, FST, BMP2 and FOXL2. In this paper, we review our current
knowledge on the function, spatio-temporal expression pattern and mutant sexual
phenotypes associated with these genes, and discuss the various roles they play
in gonad development.

PMID: 23018237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3504-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI63240. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

GATA4 and GATA6 control mouse pancreas organogenesis.

Carrasco M(1), Delgado I, Soria B, Martín F, Rojas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER),
Sevilla, Spain.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71.

Recently, heterozygous mutations in GATA6 have been found in neonatal diabetic
patients with failed pancreatic organogenesis. To investigate the roles of GATA4 
and GATA6 in mouse pancreas organogenesis, we conditionally inactivated these
genes within the pancreas. Single inactivation of either gene did not have a
major impact on pancreas formation, indicating functional redundancy. However,
double Gata4/Gata6 mutant mice failed to develop pancreata, died shortly after
birth, and displayed hyperglycemia. Morphological defects in Gata4/Gata6 mutant
pancreata were apparent during embryonic development, and the epithelium failed
to expand as a result of defects in cell proliferation and differentiation. The
number of multipotent pancreatic progenitors, including PDX1+ cells, was reduced 
in the Gata4/Gata6 mutant pancreatic epithelium. Remarkably, deletion of only 1
Gata6 allele on a Gata4 conditional knockout background severely reduced
pancreatic mass. In contrast, a single WT allele of Gata4 in Gata6 conditional
knockout mice was sufficient for normal pancreatic development, indicating
differential contributions of GATA factors to pancreas formation. Our results
place GATA factors at the top of the transcriptional network hierarchy
controlling pancreas organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461915
PMID: 23006330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3516-28. doi: 10.1172/JCI63352. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Pancreas-specific deletion of mouse Gata4 and Gata6 causes pancreatic agenesis.

Xuan S(1), Borok MJ, Decker KJ, Battle MA, Duncan SA, Hale MA, Macdonald RJ,
Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71.

Pancreatic agenesis is a human disorder caused by defects in pancreas
development. To date, only a few genes have been linked to pancreatic agenesis in
humans, with mutations in pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) and
pancreas-specific transcription factor 1a (PTF1A) reported in only 5 families
with described cases. Recently, mutations in GATA6 have been identified in a
large percentage of human cases, and a GATA4 mutant allele has been implicated in
a single case. In the mouse, Gata4 and Gata6 are expressed in several
endoderm-derived tissues, including the pancreas. To analyze the functions of
GATA4 and/or GATA6 during mouse pancreatic development, we generated
pancreas-specific deletions of Gata4 and Gata6. Surprisingly, loss of either
Gata4 or Gata6 in the pancreas resulted in only mild pancreatic defects, which
resolved postnatally. However, simultaneous deletion of both Gata4 and Gata6 in
the pancreas caused severe pancreatic agenesis due to disruption of pancreatic
progenitor cell proliferation, defects in branching morphogenesis, and a
subsequent failure to induce the differentiation of progenitor cells expressing
carboxypeptidase A1 (CPA1) and neurogenin 3 (NEUROG3). These studies address the 
conserved and nonconserved mechanisms underlying GATA4 and GATA6 function during 
pancreas development and provide a new mouse model to characterize the underlying
developmental defects associated with pancreatic agenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461916
PMID: 23006325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71. doi: 10.1172/JCI65751. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

GATA believe it: new essential regulators of pancreas development.

Rodríguez-Seguí S(1), Akerman I, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut dInvestigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3504-15.
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3516-28.

Understanding the transcriptional mechanisms that underlie pancreas formation is 
central to the efforts to develop novel regenerative therapies for type 1
diabetes. Recently, mutations in the transcription factor GATA6 were unexpectedly
shown to be the most common cause of human pancreas agenesis. In this issue of
the JCI, Carrasco et al. and Xuan et al. investigate the role of Gata6 and its
paralogue Gata4 in mouse embryonic pancreas and show that GATA factors are
essential regulators of the proliferation, morphogenesis, and differentiation of 
multipotent pancreatic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3461932
PMID: 23006323  [PubMed]


22. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):654-67. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0181. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

The histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 enhances the cardiac potential
of bone marrow cells.

Mezentseva NV(1), Yang J, Kaur K, Iaffaldano G, Rémond MC, Eisenberg CA,
Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Department of Physiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

Bone marrow (BM) has long been considered a potential stem cell source for
cardiac repair due to its abundance and accessibility. Although previous
investigations have generated cardiomyocytes from BM, yields have been low, and
far less than produced from ES or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Since
differentiation of pluripotent cells is difficult to control, we investigated
whether BM cardiac competency could be enhanced without making cells pluripotent.
From screens of various molecules that have been shown to assist iPSC production 
or maintain the ES cell phenotype, we identified the G9a histone
methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 as a potential reprogramming agent for
converting BM cells to a cardiac-competent phenotype. BM cells exposed to
BIX01294 displayed significantly elevated expression of brachyury, Mesp1, and
islet1, which are genes associated with embryonic cardiac progenitors. In
contrast, BIX01294 treatment minimally affected ectodermal, endodermal, and
pluripotency gene expression by BM cells. Expression of cardiac-associated genes 
Nkx2.5, GATA4, Hand1, Hand2, Tbx5, myocardin, and titin was enhanced 114, 76,
276, 46, 635, 123, and 5-fold in response to the cardiogenic stimulator Wnt11
when BM cells were pretreated with BIX01294. Immunofluorescent analysis
demonstrated that BIX01294 exposure allowed for the subsequent display of various
muscle proteins within the cells. The effect of BIX01294 on the BM cell phenotype
and differentiation potential corresponded to an overall decrease in methylation 
of histone H3 at lysine9, which is the primary target of G9a histone
methyltransferase. In summary, these data suggest that BIX01294 inhibition of
chromatin methylation reprograms BM cells to a cardiac-competent progenitor
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3564468
PMID: 22994322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biomaterials. 2012 Dec;33(35):8943-54. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.08.069.
Epub 2012 Sep 15.

The calcium-dependent regulation of spheroid formation and cardiomyogenic
differentiation for MSCs on chitosan membranes.

Yeh HY(1), Liu BH, Hsu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were recently found to form three-dimensional (3D) 
multicellular spheroids on chitosan membranes. The exact mechanism of spheroid
formation, however, remains unclear. In this study, the regulation of spheroid
formation for adipose derived adult stem cells (ADAS) grown on chitosan membranes
was examined. By varying the membrane thickness, calcium concentration in culture
medium, and acetylation extent of chitosan, the physico-chemical characteristics 
of chitosan that modulated spheroid formation was elucidated. The capacity of
cardiomyogenic differentiation was further evaluated. Results suggested that the 
calcium binding capacity of chitosan may affect the cell-substrate and cell-cell 
interactions and critically influence the dynamics of spheroid formation. The
intracellular calcium level was elevated for ADAS spheroids on chitosan.
Chitosan-bound calcium was observed to enter the cells. The expression of
N-cadherin was upregulated for ADAS spheroids on chitosan, evidenced by
quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot. After the induction by 5-aza, the
expression levels of cardiac marker genes (Gata4, Nkx2.5, Tnnt2, and Myh6) were
remarkably enhanced (about four-fold) for ADAS on chitosan vs. tissue culture
polystyrene or polyvinyl alcohol. Immunofluorescence staining confirmed the
expression of cardiac-associated tight junction protein ZO-1 for ADAS grown on
chitosan membranes. The gene expression of Wnt11 was significantly upregulated
for ADAS spheroids on chitosan at 3 days and 12 days. We suggested that Wnt11 may
be involved in the spheroid formation and cardiomyogenic differentiation of MSCs 
on chitosan membranes. Spheroids formed on the acetylated chitosan or polyvinyl
alcohol membranes failed to show such behavior. The properties of MSC spheroids
were therefore determined by the culture substrate.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Jan;131(1):292-301. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs282. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

Comparative gene expression profiling in human-induced pluripotent stem
cell--derived cardiocytes and human and cynomolgus heart tissue.

Puppala D(1), Collis LP, Sun SZ, Bonato V, Chen X, Anson B, Pletcher M, Fermini
B, Engle SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Compound Safety Prediction, Pfizer, Inc., Groton, Connecticut 06340, USA.
Dinesh.Puppala@pfizer.com

Cardiotoxicity is one of the leading causes of drug attrition. Current in vitro
models insufficiently predict cardiotoxicity, and there is a need for alternative
physiologically relevant models. Here we describe the gene expression profile of 
human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiocytes (iCC) postthaw over a
period of 42 days in culture and compare this profile to human fetal and adult as
well as adult cynomolgus nonhuman primate (NHP, Macaca fascicularis) heart
tissue. Our results indicate that iCC express relevant cardiac markers such as
ion channels (SCN5A, KCNJ2, CACNA1C, KCNQ1, and KCNH2), tissue-specific
structural markers (MYH6, MYLPF, MYBPC3, DES, TNNT2, and TNNI3), and
transcription factors (NKX2.5, GATA4, and GATA6) and lack the expression of stem 
cell markers (FOXD3, GBX2, NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2, and ZFP42). Furthermore, we
performed a functional evaluation of contractility of the iCC and showed
functional and pharmacological correlations with myocytes isolated from adult NHP
hearts. These results suggest that stem cell-derived cardiocytes may represent a 
novel in vitro model to study human cardiac toxicity with potential ex vivo and
in vivo translation.

PMID: 22982684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Bioinformatics. 2012 Sep 15;28(18):i626-i632. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts385.

A novel approach for resolving differences in single-cell gene expression
patterns from zygote to blastocyst.

Buettner F(1), Theis FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Zentrum München,
85764 Neuherberg, Germany. f.buettner@helmholtz-muenchen.de

MOTIVATION: Single-cell experiments of cells from the early mouse embryo yield
gene expression data for different developmental stages from zygote to
blastocyst. To better understand cell fate decisions during differentiation, it
is desirable to analyse the high-dimensional gene expression data and assess
differences in gene expression patterns between different developmental stages as
well as within developmental stages. Conventional methods include univariate
analyses of distributions of genes at different stages or multivariate linear
methods such as principal component analysis (PCA). However, these approaches
often fail to resolve important differences as each lineage has a unique gene
expression pattern which changes gradually over time yielding different gene
expressions both between different developmental stages as well as heterogeneous 
distributions at a specific stage. Furthermore, to date, no approach taking the
temporal structure of the data into account has been presented.
RESULTS: We present a novel framework based on Gaussian process latent variable
models (GPLVMs) to analyse single-cell qPCR expression data of 48 genes from
mouse zygote to blastocyst as presented by (Guo et al., 2010). We extend GPLVMs
by introducing gene relevance maps and gradient plots to provide interpretability
as in the linear case. Furthermore, we take the temporal group structure of the
data into account and introduce a new factor in the GPLVM likelihood which
ensures that small distances are preserved for cells from the same developmental 
stage. Using our novel framework, it is possible to resolve differences in gene
expressions for all developmental stages. Furthermore, a new subpopulation of
cells within the 16-cell stage is identified which is significantly more
trophectoderm-like than the rest of the population. The trophectoderm-like
subpopulation was characterized by considerable differences in the expression of 
Id2, Gata4 and, to a smaller extent, Klf4 and Hand1. The relevance of Id2 as
early markers for TE cells is consistent with previously published results.
AVAILABILITY: The mappings were implemented based on Prof. Neil Lawrence's FGPLVM
toolbox(1); extensions for relevance analysis and including the structure of the 
data can be obtained from one of the authors' homepage.(2)
CONTACT: f.buettner@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

PMCID: PMC3436812
PMID: 22962491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013 Mar-Apr;22(2):141-5. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2012.07.001. 
Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Analyses of GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes in subjects from southern China with 
sporadic congenital heart disease.

Xiong F(1), Li Q, Zhang C, Chen Y, Li P, Wei X, Li Q, Zhou W, Li L, Shang X, Xu
X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease is the most common birth defect in newborns 
in southern China. The germline mutations in GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes have
been identified to be responsible for congenital heart disease. The frequency of 
GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B mutations in subjects with congenital heart disease in 
southern China and the correlation between their genotype and congenital heart
disease phenotype are not known.
METHODS: We screened germline mutations in the coding exons and the flanking
intron sequences of the GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes in 224 congenital heart
disease patients located in southern China by denaturing high-performance liquid 
chromatography and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Fifteen heterozygous mutations in the GATA4 gene were identified in 30
congenital heart disease patients, including a novel heterozygous missense
mutation (c.788 C>G) of GATA4 in one patient with ventricular septal defect. A
novel TFAP2B mutation (c.31 A>G) in a patient with endocardial cushion defect and
an unreported novel TFAP2B variant (c.1006 G>A) in six patients suffering from
tetralogy of Fallot (one patient), persistent truncus arteriosus (two patients)
and patent ductus arteriosus (three patients) was found. There were no reported
NKX2.5 mutations except for several single nucleotide polymorphisms in the
patients.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genomic GATA4 and TFAP2B missense
mutations may be associated with nonfamilial congenital heart disease with
diverse clinical phenotypes in patients with congenital heart disease from
southern China. They also revealed that the variation of the NKX2.5 gene may not 
be a risk factor for sporadic patients with congenital heart disease in this
population.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22959235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Sep 7;11(3):373-86. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.019.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into embryonic Sertoli-like cells by defined 
factors.

Buganim Y(1), Itskovich E, Hu YC, Cheng AW, Ganz K, Sarkar S, Fu D, Welstead GG, 
Page DC, Jaenisch R.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. yossib@wi.mit.edu

Sertoli cells are considered the "supporting cells" of the testis that play an
essential role in sex determination during embryogenesis and in spermatogenesis
during adulthood. Their essential roles in male fertility along with their
immunosuppressive and neurotrophic properties make them an attractive cell type
for therapeutic applications. Here we demonstrate the generation of induced
embryonic Sertoli-like cells (ieSCs) by ectopic expression of five transcription 
factors. We characterize the role of specific transcription factor combinations
in the transition from fibroblasts to ieSCs and identify key steps in the
process. Initially, transduced fibroblasts underwent a mesenchymal to epithelial 
transition and then acquired the ability to aggregate, formed tubular-like
structures, and expressed embryonic Sertoli-specific markers. These Sertoli-like 
cells facilitated neuronal differentiation and self-renewal of neural progenitor 
cells (NPCs), supported the survival of germ cells in culture, and cooperated
with endogenous embryonic Sertoli and primordial germ cells in the generation of 
testicular cords in the fetal gonad.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3438668
PMID: 22958931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cardiovasc Ther. 2013 Aug;31(4):201-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2012.00320.x.

DNA methylation inhibitors, 5-azacytidine and zebularine potentiate the
transdifferentiation of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells into
cardiomyocytes.

Naeem N(1), Haneef K, Kabir N, Iqbal H, Jamall S, Salim A.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research (PCMD),
International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS), University of 
Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have immense self-renewal capability.
They can be differentiated into many cell types and therefore hold great
potential in the field of regenerative medicine. MSCs can be converted into
beating cardiomyocytes by treating them with DNA-demethylating agents. Some of
these compounds are nucleoside analogs that are widely used for studying the role
of DNA methylation in biological processes as well as for the clinical treatment 
of leukemia and other carcinomas.
AIMS: To achieve a better therapeutic option for cardiovascular regeneration,
this study was carried out using MSCs treated with two synthetic compounds,
zebularine and 5-azacytidine. It can be expected that treated MSCs prior to
transplantation may increase the likelihood of successful regeneration of damaged
myocardium.
METHODS: The optimized concentrations of these compounds were added separately
into the culture medium and the treated cells were analyzed for the expression of
cardiac-specific genes by RT-PCR and cardiac-specific proteins by
immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry. Treated MSCs were cocultured with
cardiomyocytes to see the fusion capability of these cells.
RESULTS: mRNA and protein expressions of GATA4, Nkx2.5, and cardiac troponin T
were observed in the treated MSCs. Coculture studies of MSCs and cardiomyocytes
have shown improved fusion with zebularine-treated MSCs as compared to untreated 
and 5-azacytidine-treated MSCs.
CONCLUSION: The study is expected to put forth another valuable aspect of certain
compounds, that is, induction of transdifferentiation of MSCs into
cardiomyocytes. This would serve as a tool for modified cellular therapy and may 
increase the probability of better myocardial regeneration.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 22954287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013 Jan;65(1):43-55. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9402-x.

Mild electrical pulse current stimulation upregulates S100A4 and promotes
cardiogenesis in MSC and cardiac myocytes coculture monolayer.

Wen L(1), Zhang C, Nong Y, Yao Q, Song Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

Parietal endoderm-secreted S100A4 promotes early cardiomyogenesis in embryoid
bodies [1]. After an acute ischemic event, S100A4 protein appears in cardiac
myocytes only in the border zone in rat and human hearts [2]. In wound research, 
a large outward current of 4 µA/cm(2) was always measured at the wound edges of
rat cornea and human skin [3]. We hypothesize that a special electrical
circumstance at the border zone may contribute to the phenomenon. An electric
stimulation system was designed to give the cells electric pulse current
stimulation (EPCS), the feature of the signal is pulse polarity altered one after
another, rectangular 2 ms, 2 Hz, 40 µA. This intensity of stimulation is proved
to be safe to cardiac myocytes (both in structure and beating behavior compared
with the cardiac myocytes which do not receive stimulation) and MSCs (in cell
vitality, proliferation, cell cycle, and gap junction generation potential)
through our previous work. Canine MSCs are capable of generating
voltage-sensitive Ca(2+) channel and Na(+) channels and generating the Ca(2+)
handling system during differentiation. We found that CD44 was reduced in the
MSCs monolayer treated with EPCS, compared with non-stimulated MSCs; and EPCS
MSCs (3 h/day, 6 h/day, 5 days) showed an 14.04 ± 3.44 and 14.55 ± 3.97 %
reduction in CD44, compared with the cotemporary MSCs; these reveal that CD44
reduction amplitude is not correlated with time for EPCS disposure and CD29
(integrin ß1) expression is not affected by EPCS exposure. EPCS was given to the 
MSCs and cardiac myocytes coculture monolayer (ratio 3:1) for different time (1, 
3, and 6 h/day) for 4 days to see the biological effects. Gap junction protein
and troponin T show an increase after EPCS. We found that the gap junction
protein Cx43 increased with treating time-in the EPCS group, it exhibited 1.5 and
1.7 fold in the 3 h/day group and 6 h/day group (P < 0.01), and troponin T
exhibited to about 3.6 and 4.4 fold in the 3 h/day group (P < 0.01) and 6 h/day
group (P < 0.05). Since coculture was used as stimuli, immunofluorescence was
used to visualize the changes during EPCS for the purpose of elucidating the
impact of EPCS on cardiac myocytes and MSCs. We found that after 5 days exposure,
EPCS can enhance the expression of S100A4, which is 2.33 fold in cardiac myocytes
(P < 0.01) and 1.99 fold in MSCs (P < 0.01) in gray value. A significant
increasing expression of the myocyte enhancer factor (MEF) and GATA4 is detected 
in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (P < 0.01) compared with cotemporary coculture
monolayer in the control group. Also, EPCS can trigger the assembly of MEF2c in
the nuclei. In addition, more cardiac myocytes were found to have two nuclei. But
MSCs fail to active MEF2C transcriptional factor like that in cardiac myocytes
after EPCS exposure. The elevation of MEF2 in both cytoplasm and nuclei of
cardiac myocytes can always make a clear distinction of the cardiac myocytes and 
MSCs in coculture. Some factors show strong upregulation tendency with EPCS in
both cardiac myocytes and MSCs-these include the troponin T (P < 0.01) and Cx43
(P < 0.05) in cardiac myocytes, and troponin T (P < 0.01) and Cx43 (P < 0.01) in 
MSCs. Collagen I expression is not affected with EPCS. In conclusion, mild EPCS
can upregulate the secretion of S100A4 in both cardiac myocytes and MSCs, which
is a factor supporting the cardiomyogenesis and angiogenesis; it further triggers
the development of neonatal rat cardiac myocytes through upregulation of MEF2C
and GATA4, the number of cardiac myocytes with two nuclei increases with EPCS,
but this phenomenon does not appear in MSCs. Despite this, Cx43 and troponin T in
both cardiac myocytes and MSCs are very sensitive to EPCS. EPCS can act as an
effective and multi-targeted physical intervention method in cardiomyogenesis.

PMID: 22941361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Histochem Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;139(1):35-46. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-1022-4. Epub 
2012 Aug 31.

The role of PKCe-dependent signaling for cardiac differentiation.

Galli D(1), Gobbi G, Carrubbi C, Di Marcantonio D, Benedetti L, De Angelis MG,
Meschi T, Vaccarezza M, Sampaolesi M, Mirandola P, Vitale M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and Translational
Sciences-S.Bi.Bi.T., University of Parma, Via Gramsci 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.

Protein kinase Cepsilon (PKCe) exerts a well-known cardio-protective activity in 
ischemia-reperfusion injury and plays a pivotal role in stem cell proliferation
and differentiation. Although many studies have been performed on physiological
and morphological effects of PKCe mis-expression in cardiomyocytes, molecular
information on the role of PKCe on early cardiac gene expression are still
lacking. We addressed the molecular role of PKCe in cardiac cells using mouse
cardiomyocytes and rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. We show that PKCe is
modulated in cardiac differentiation producing an opposite regulation of the
cardiac genes NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5 (nkx2.5) and GATA binding
protein 4 (gata4) both in vivo and in vitro. Phospho-extracellular regulated
mitogen-activated protein kinase 1/2 (p-ERK1/2) levels increase in PKCe
over-expressing cells, while pkce siRNAs produce a decrease in p-ERK1/2. Indeed, 
pharmacological inhibition of ERK1/2 rescues the expression levels of both nkx2.5
and gata4, suggesting that a reinforced (mitogen-activated protein kinase) MAPK
signaling is at the basis of the observed inhibition of cardiac gene expression
in the PKCe over-expressing hearts. We demonstrate that PKCe is critical for
cardiac cell early gene expression evidencing that this protein is a regulator
that has to be fine tuned in precursor cardiac cells.

PMID: 22936275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1147-56. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.271148. Epub
2012 Aug 28.

Induction of cardiomyocyte-like cells in infarct hearts by gene transfer of
Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5.

Inagawa K(1), Miyamoto K, Yamakawa H, Muraoka N, Sadahiro T, Umei T, Wada R,
Katsumata Y, Kaneda R, Nakade K, Kurihara C, Obata Y, Miyake K, Fukuda K, Ieda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Department of
Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1108-10.

RATIONALE: After myocardial infarction (MI), massive cell death in the myocardium
initiates fibrosis and scar formation, leading to heart failure. We recently
found that a combination of 3 cardiac transcription factors, Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5 (GMT), reprograms fibroblasts directly into functional cardiomyocytes in
vitro.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether viral gene transfer of GMT into infarcted
hearts induces cardiomyocyte generation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coronary artery ligation was used to generate MI in the
mouse. In vitro transduction of GMT retrovirus converted cardiac fibroblasts from
the infarct region into cardiomyocyte-like cells with cardiac-specific gene
expression and sarcomeric structures. Injection of the green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) retrovirus into mouse hearts, immediately after MI, infected only
proliferating noncardiomyocytes, mainly fibroblasts, in the infarct region. The
GFP expression diminished after 2 weeks in immunocompetent mice but remained
stable for 3 months in immunosuppressed mice, in which cardiac induction did not 
occur. In contrast, injection of GMT retrovirus into a-myosin heavy chain
(aMHC)-GFP transgenic mouse hearts induced the expression of aMHC-GFP, a marker
of cardiomyocytes, in 3% of virus-infected cells after 1 week. A pooled GMT
injection into the immunosuppressed mouse hearts induced cardiac marker
expression in retrovirus-infected cells within 2 weeks, although few cells showed
striated muscle structures. To transduce GMT efficiently in vivo, we generated a 
polycistronic retrovirus expressing GMT separated by 2A "self-cleaving" peptides 
(3F2A). The 3F2A-induced cardiomyocyte-like cells in fibrotic tissue expressed
sarcomeric a-actinin and cardiac troponin T and had clear cross striations.
Quantitative RT-PCR also demonstrated that FACS-sorted 3F2A-transduced cells
expressed cardiac-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: GMT gene transfer induced cardiomyocyte-like cells in infarcted
hearts.

PMID: 22931955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1651-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23851. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Ectopic expression of Fgf3 leads to aberrant lineage segregation in the mouse
parthenote preimplantation embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Parthenogenetic mammalian embryos were reported to die in utero no
later than the 25-somite stage due to abnormal development of both embryonic and 
extraembryonic lineages. Interestingly, it has been shown that parthenogenetic
ICM cells tend to differentiate more into primitive endoderm cells and less into 
epiblast and ES cells. Hence we are interested in studying the molecular
mechanisms underlying lineage defects of parthenotes.
RESULTS: We found that parthenote inner cell masses (ICMs) contained decreased
numbers of Sox2(+) /Nanog(+) epiblast cells but increased numbers of Gata4(+)
primitive endoderm cells, indicating an unusual lineage segregation. We
demonstrate for the first time that the increased Gata4 level in parthenotes may 
be explained by the strong up-regulation of Fgf3 and Fgfr2 phosphorylation.
Inhibition of Fgfr2 activation by SU5402 in parthenotes restored normal Nanog and
Gata4 levels without affecting Fgf3, indicating that Fgf3 is upstream of Fgfr2
activation. In parthenote trophectoderm, we detected normal Cdx2 but ectopic
Gata4 expression and reduced Elf5 and Tbr2(Eomes) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our work provides for the first time the insight
into the molecular mechanisms of the developmental defects of parthenogenetic
embryos in both the trophectoderm and ICM.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22930543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb;21(2):173-81. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.155. Epub 2012 Aug
29.

Rare DNA copy number variants in cardiovascular malformations with extracardiac
abnormalities.

Lalani SR(1), Shaw C, Wang X, Patel A, Patterson LW, Kolodziejska K, Szafranski
P, Ou Z, Tian Q, Kang SH, Jinnah A, Ali S, Malik A, Hixson P, Potocki L, Lupski
JR, Stankiewicz P, Bacino CA, Dawson B, Beaudet AL, Boricha FM, Whittaker R, Li
C, Ware SM, Cheung SW, Penny DJ, Jefferies JL, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. seemal@bcm.tmc.edu

Clinically significant cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) occur in 5-8 per 1000 
live births. Recurrent copy number variations (CNVs) are among the known causes
of syndromic CVMs, accounting for an important fraction of cases. We hypothesized
that many additional rare CNVs also cause CVMs and can be detected in patients
with CVMs plus extracardiac anomalies (ECAs). Through a genome-wide survey of 203
subjects with CVMs and ECAs, we identified 55 CNVs >50<U+2009>kb in length that were not
present in children without known cardiovascular defects (n=872). Sixteen unique 
CNVs overlapping these variants were found in an independent CVM plus ECA cohort 
(n=511), which were not observed in 2011 controls. The study identified 12/16
(75%) novel loci including non-recurrent de novo 16q24.3 loss (4/714) and de novo
2q31.3q32.1 loss encompassing PPP1R1C and PDE1A (2/714). The study also narrowed 
critical intervals in three well-recognized genomic disorders of CVM, such as the
cat-eye syndrome region on 22q11.1, 8p23.1 loss encompassing GATA4 and SOX7 and
17p13.3-p13.2 loss. An analysis of protein-interaction databases shows that the
rare inherited and de novo CNVs detected in the combined cohort are enriched for 
genes encoding proteins that are direct or indirect partners of proteins known to
be required for normal cardiac development. Our findings implicate rare variants 
such as 16q24.3 loss and 2q31.3-q32.1 loss, and delineate regions within
previously reported structural variants known to cause CVMs.

PMCID: PMC3548268
PMID: 22929023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Oct 15;303(8):H1057-66. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00250.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Cyclin D2 rescues size and function of GATA4 haplo-insufficient hearts.

Yamak A(1), Temsah R, Maharsy W, Caron S, Paradis P, Aries A, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and Differentiation, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario
K1N 6N5, Canada.

Transcription factor GATA4 is a key regulator of cardiomyocyte growth, and
differentiation and 50% reduction in GATA4 levels results in hypoplastic hearts. 
Search for GATA4 targets/effectors revealed cyclin D(2) (CD2), a member of the
D-type cyclins (D(1), D(2), and D(3)) that play a vital role in cell growth and
differentiation as a direct transcriptional target and a mediator of GATA4 growth
in postnatal cardiomyocytes. GATA4 associates with the CD2 promoter in
cardiomyocytes and is sufficient to induce endogenous CD2 transcription and to
dose-dependently activate the CD2 promoter in heterologous cells.
Cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression of CD2 results in enhanced postnatal
cardiac growth because of increased cardiomyocyte proliferation. When these
transgenic mice are crossed with Gata4 heterozygote mice, they rescue the
hypoplastic cardiac phenotype of Gata4(+/-) mice and enhance cardiomyocyte
survival and heart function. The data uncover a role for CD2 in the postnatal
heart as an effector of GATA4 in myocyte growth and survival. The finding that
postnatal upregulation of a cell-cycle gene in GATA4 haplo-insufficient hearts
may be protective opens new avenues for maintaining or restoring cardiac function
in GATA4-dependent cardiac disease.

PMCID: PMC3469642
PMID: 22923619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Epigenomics. 2012 Aug;4(4):367. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.38.

Differential epigenetic regulation of GATA4 in gastric adenocarcinomas.

Varier RA(1), Vermeulen M.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center, Utrecht, Department of Molecular Cancer Research,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment on
    Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Aug;93(1):35-9.

PMID: 22920177  [PubMed]


36. FASEB J. 2012 Dec;26(12):4832-40. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-208843. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Telomerase expression in the mammalian heart.

Richardson GD(1), Breault D, Horrocks G, Cormack S, Hole N, Owens WA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK. gavin.richardson2@ncl.ac.uk

While the mammalian heart has low, but functionally significant, levels of
telomerase expression, the cellular population responsible remains incompletely
characterized. This study aimed to identify the cell types responsible for
cardiac telomerase activity in neonatal, adult, and cryoinjured adult hearts
using transgenic mice expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP), driven by the
promoter for murine telomerase reverse transcriptase (mTert), which is a
necessary and rate-limiting component of telomerase. A rare population of
mTert-GFP-expressing cells was identified that possessed all detectable cardiac
telomerase RNA and telomerase activity. It was heterogeneous and included cells
coexpressing markers of cardiomyocytic, endothelial, and mesenchymal lineages,
putative cardiac stem cell markers, and, interestingly, cardiomyocytes with a
differentiated phenotype. Quantification using both flow cytometry and
immunofluorescence identified a significant decline in mTert-GFP cells in adult
animals compared to neonates (~9- and ~20-fold, respectively). Cardiac injury
resulted in a ~6.45-fold expansion of this population (P<0.005) compared with
sham-operated controls. This study identifies the cells responsible for cardiac
telomerase activity, demonstrates a significant diminution with age but a marked 
response to injury, and, given the relationship between telomerase activity and
stem cell populations, suggests that they represent a potential target for
further investigation of cardiac regenerative potential.

PMCID: PMC3509052
PMID: 22919071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2012;111:265-84. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-398459-3.00012-5.

Genetically manipulated progenitor/stem cells restore function to the infarcted
heart via the SDF-1a/CXCR4 signaling pathway.

Wang Y(1), Luther K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Progenitor/stem cells are a viable option to replace myocytes lost subsequent to 
myocardial infarction (MI). The stromal cell-derived factor-1a/CXC-chemokine
receptor type 4 (SDF-1a/CXCR4) axis plays an important role in numerous
biological processes including hematopoiesis, cardiogenesis, vasculogenesis, and 
neuronal development, as well as endothelial progenitor cell trafficking. The
secretion of chemoattractants such as SDF-1a at the site of injury creates an
environment facilitating the homing of circulating CXCR4 positive and other stem 
cells (such as mast/stem cell growth factor receptor kit-positive (c-kit(+)) and 
c-kit(+)/GATA binding protein 4 positive (GATA4(+)) cells) for organ regeneration
and tissue repair. SDF-1a is also secreted by hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells
and is involved in the autocrine/paracrine regulation of their development and
survival. Hypoxic preconditioning activates SDF-1a/CXCR4 signaling and
upregulates several vascular/angiogenic factors that cause mobilization of
progenitor cells. The SDF-1a/CXCR4 signaling pathway can thus be effectively
exploited for cell-based therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22917235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2012;111:217-41. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-398459-3.00010-1.

Role of GATA-4 in differentiation and survival of bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells.

Xu M(1), Millard RW, Ashraf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Cell and tissue regeneration is a relatively new research field and it
incorporates a novel application of molecular genetics. Combinatorial approaches 
for stem-cell-based therapies wherein guided differentiation into cardiac lineage
cells and cells secreting paracrine factors may be necessary to overcome the
limitations and shortcomings of a singular approach. GATA-4, a GATA zinc-finger
transcription factor family member, has been shown to regulate differentiation,
growth, and survival of a wide range of cell types. In this chapter, we discuss
whether overexpression of GATA-4 increases mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
transdifferentiation into cardiac phenotype and enhances the MSC secretome,
thereby increasing cell survival and promoting postinfarction cardiac
angiogenesis. MSCs engineered with GATA-4 enhance their capacity to differentiate
into cardiac cell phenotypes, improve survival of the cardiac progenitor cells
and their offspring, and modulate the paracrine activity of stem cells to support
their angiomyogenic potential and cardioprotective effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22917233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35599-611. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.392530. Epub
2012 Aug 20.

Inhibition of cardiomyocytes differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by
CD38/cADPR/Ca2+ signaling pathway.

Wei WJ(1), Sun HY, Ting KY, Zhang LH, Lee HC, Li GR, Yue J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Cyclic adenosine diphosphoribose (cADPR) is an endogenous Ca(2+) mobilizing
messenger that is formed by ADP-ribosyl cyclases from nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD). The main ADP-ribosyl cyclase in mammals is CD38, a
multi-functional enzyme and a type II membrane protein. Here we explored the role
of CD38-cADPR-Ca(2+) in the cardiomyogenesis of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. 
We found that the mouse ES cells are responsive to cADPR and possess the key
components of the cADPR signaling pathway. In vitro cardiomyocyte (CM)
differentiation of mouse ES cells was initiated by embryoid body (EB) formation. 
Interestingly, beating cells appeared earlier and were more abundant in CD38
knockdown EBs than in control EBs. Real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analyses
further showed that the expression of several cardiac markers, including GATA4,
MEF2C, NKX2.5, and a-MLC, were increased markedly in CD38 knockdown EBs than
those in control EBs. Similarly, FACS analysis showed that more cardiac Troponin 
T-positive CMs existed in CD38 knockdown or 8-Br-cADPR, a cADPR antagonist,
treated EBs compared with that in control EBs. On the other hand, overexpression 
of CD38 in mouse ES cells significantly inhibited CM differentiation. Moreover,
CD38 knockdown ES cell-derived CMs possess the functional properties
characteristic of normal ES cell-derived CMs. Last, we showed that the CD38-cADPR
pathway negatively modulated the FGF4-Erks1/2 cascade during CM differentiation
of ES cells, and transiently inhibition of Erk1/2 blocked the enhanced effects of
CD38 knockdown on the differentiation of CM from ES cells. Taken together, our
data indicate that the CD38-cADPR-Ca(2+) signaling pathway antagonizes the CM
differentiation of mouse ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3471724
PMID: 22908234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Transl Res. 2013 Jan;161(1):59-61. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2012.07.003. Epub 2012 Aug
10.

Genetics of congenital heart defects: is it not all in the DNA?

Pulignani S, Cresci M, Andreassi MG.

Comment on
    Transl Res. 2012 May;159(5):376-82.

PMID: 22885174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Med Chem. 2012 Sep 13;55(17):7378-91. doi: 10.1021/jm3002845. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Low molecular weight amidoximes that act as potent inhibitors of lysine-specific 
demethylase 1.

Hazeldine S(1), Pachaiyappan B, Steinbergs N, Nowotarski S, Hanson AS, Casero RA 
Jr, Woster PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack
Avenue, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

The recently discovered enzyme lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) plays an
important role in the epigenetic control of gene expression, and aberrant gene
silencing secondary to LSD1 dysregulation is thought to contribute to the
development of cancer. We reported that (bis)guanidines, (bis)biguanides, and
their urea- and thiourea isosteres are potent inhibitors of LSD1 and induce the
re-expression of aberrantly silenced tumor suppressor genes in tumor cells in
vitro. We now report a series of small molecule amidoximes that are moderate
inhibitors of recombinant LSD1 but that produce dramatic changes in methylation
at the histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) chromatin mark, a specific target of LSD1, in
Calu-6 lung carcinoma cells. In addition, these analogues increase cellular
levels of secreted frizzle-related protein (SFRP) 2, H-cadherin (HCAD), and the
transcription factor GATA4. These compounds represent leads for an important new 
series of drug-like epigenetic modulators with the potential for use as antitumor
agents.

PMCID: PMC3482425
PMID: 22876979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Addict Biol. 2014 Mar;19(2):312-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2012.00482.x. Epub
2012 Aug 2.

Association of GATA4 sequence variation with alcohol dependence.

Karpyak VM(1), Winham SJ, Biernacka JM, Cunningham JM, Lewis KA, Geske JR, Colby 
CL, Abulseoud OA, Hall-Flavin DK, Loukianova LL, Schneekloth TD, Frye MA, Heit
JA, Mrazek DA.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

To further explore reports of association of alcohol dependence and response to
acamprosate treatment with the GATA4 rs13273672 single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP), we genotyped this and 10 other GATA4 SNPs in 816 alcohol-dependent cases
and 1248 controls. We tested for association of alcohol dependence with the 11
SNPs individually and performed a global test for association using a principle
components analysis. Our analyses demonstrate significant association between
GATA4 and alcohol dependence at the gene level (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) but no association
with rs13273672. Further studies are needed to identify potential causal GATA4
variation(s) and the functional mechanism(s) contributing to this association.

© 2012 The Authors, Addiction Biology © 2012 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMCID: PMC3504631
PMID: 22862823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Growth Factors. 2012 Oct;30(5):344-55. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Eosinophil cationic protein enhances cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6
embryonal carcinoma cells by stimulating the FGF receptor signaling pathway.

Jin G(1), Mizutani A, Fukuda T, Chen L, Nakanishi K, Yan T, Kudoh T, Hirohata S, 
Kasai T, Murakami H, Salomon DS, Seno M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nano-Biotechnology, Department of Medical Bioengineering
Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University,
Okayama 700-8530, Japan.

We investigated the functional role of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) in
regulating cardiomyogenesis using mouse P19CL6 embryonic carcinoma cells. ECP was
confirmed to accelerate the cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6 cells by
enhancing the rate and area size of beating of cardiomyocyte and by facilitating 
the expression of cardiomyocyte-specific genes, such as GATA4 and a-MHC. Since
cardiomyocyte differentiation in vivo is considered to follow mesoderm induction,
the induction of Brachyury, a marker of mesoderm, was assessed. Brachyury
expression was found to be enhanced after the addition of ECP. This enhancement
was due to the stimulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2
phosphorylation by ECP. In this context, treatment with SU5402, an inhibitor of
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 1, suppressed Brachyury expression,
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and cardiomyocyte differentiation induced by ECP. We
concluded that ECP might induce mesoderm differentiation through FGF signaling
pathway and enhance subsequent cardiomyocyte differentiation in concert with
dimethyl sulfoxide in P19CL6 cells. ECP may be a novel factor for cardiomyocyte
differentiation, which should be very useful to prepare adequate numbers of
cardiomyocytes for therapeutic cell transplantation.

PMID: 22845717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov 15;303(10):C1021-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00191.2012. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Activation of Toll-like receptor 3 amplifies mesenchymal stem cell trophic
factors and enhances therapeutic potency.

Mastri M(1), Shah Z, McLaughlin T, Greene CJ, Baum L, Suzuki G, Lee T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Center for Research in Cardiovascular Medicine,
University at Buffalo, 3435 Main St., Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov 15;303(10):C1004-5.

Clinical trials of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) therapy have thus far 
demonstrated moderate and inconsistent benefits, indicating an urgent need to
improve therapeutic efficacy. Although administration of sufficient cells is
necessary to achieve maximal therapeutic benefits, documented MSC clinical trials
have largely relied on injections of ~1 × 10(6) cells/kg, which appears too low
to elicit a robust therapeutic response according to published preclinical
studies. However, repeated cell passaging necessary for large-scale expansion of 
MSC causes cellular senescence and reduces stem cell potency. Using the RNA
mimetic polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)] to engage MSC Toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3), we found that poly(I:C), signaling through multiple
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, induced therapeutically relevant
trophic factors such as interleukin-6-type cytokines, stromal-derived factor 1,
hepatocyte growth factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor while slightly
inhibiting the proliferation and migration potentials of MSC. At the suboptimal
injection dose of 1 × 10(6) cells/kg, poly(I:C)-treated MSC, but not untreated
MSC, effectively stimulated regeneration of the failing hamster heart 1 mo after 
cell administration. The regenerating heart exhibited increased CD34(+)/Ki67(+)
and CD34(+)/GATA4(+) progenitor cells in the presence of decreased inflammatory
cells and cytokines. Cardiac functional improvement was associated with a ~50%
reduction in fibrosis, a ~40% reduction in apoptosis, and a ~55% increase in
angiogenesis, culminating in prominent cardiomyogenesis evidenced by abundant
distribution of small myocytes and a ~90% increase in wall thickening. These
functional, histological, and molecular characterizations thus establish the
utility of TLR3 engagement for enabling the low-dose MSC therapy that may be
translated to more efficacious clinical applications.

PMCID: PMC3492833
PMID: 22843797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):279-95. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0168. Epub 2012
Aug 29.

Lengthened G1 phase indicates differentiation status in human embryonic stem
cells.

Calder A(1), Roth-Albin I, Bhatia S, Pilquil C, Lee JH, Bhatia M, Levadoux-Martin
M, McNicol J, Russell J, Collins T, Draper JS.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, Michael G. DeGroote School
of Medicine, McMaster University , Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The cell cycle in pluripotent stem cells is notable for the brevity of the G1
phase, permitting rapid proliferation and reducing the duration of
differentiation signal sensitivity associated with the G1 phase. Changes in the
length of G1 phase are understood to accompany the differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs), but the timing and extent of such changes are
poorly defined. Understanding the early steps governing the differentiation of
hESCs will facilitate better control over differentiation for regenerative
medicine and drug discovery applications. Here we report the first use of
real-time cell cycle reporters in hESCs. We coexpressed the chromatin-decorating 
H2B-GFP fusion protein and the fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator
(FUCCI)-G1 fusion protein, a G1 phase-specific reporter, in hESCs to measure the 
cell cycle status in live cells. We found that FUCCI-G1 expression is weakly
detected in undifferentiated hESCs, but rapidly increases upon differentiation.
hESCs in the G1 phase display a reduction in undifferentiated colony-initiating
cell function, underscoring the relationship between G1 phase residence and
differentiation. Importantly, we demonstrate inter- and intracolony variation in 
response to chemicals that induce differentiation, implying extensive cell-cell
variation in the threshold necessary to alter the G1 phase length. Finally, gain 
of differentiation markers appears to be coincident with G1 phase lengthening,
with distinct G1 phase profiles associated with different markers of early hESC
differentiation. Our data demonstrate the tight coupling of cell cycle changes to
hESC differentiation, and highlight the cell cycle reporter system and assays we 
have implemented as a novel avenue for investigating pluripotency and
differentiation.

PMID: 22827698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gene. 2012 Oct 15;508(1):106-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.07.019. Epub 2012 Jul
21.

Genetic analysis of an enhancer of the NKX2-5 gene in ventricular septal defects.

Qin X(1), Xing Q, Ma L, Meng H, Liu Y, Pang S, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most common birth defects in humans.
Mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes, such as GATA4, NKX2-5 and TBX5
genes, have been associated to a small portion of familial and isolated CHD
cases. NKX2-5, a highly conserved homeobox gene, is expressed in the developing
heart. During embryonic development, NKX2-5 plays pivotal roles in specifying
cardiac progenitors, cardiac morphogenesis, cardiomyocyte differentiation and
conduction system development. Numerous mutations in NKX2-5 gene have been
reported in CHD patients, including atrial septal defect, ventricular septal
defect (VSD) and tetrology of Fallot. We have previously identified the sequence 
variants within the NKX2-5 gene promoter in VSD patients. As several studies have
revealed that the NKX2-5 gene is regulated by a complex module involving promoter
and multiple independent cardiac enhancers, one of which is located between -3500
bp and -2500 bp upstream to the transcription start site, we hypothesized that
the variants within the cardiac enhancer may contribute to CHD. In this study, we
genetically analyzed the enhancer of NKX2-5 gene in large cohorts of VSD patients
(n=322) and controls (n=336). The results showed that three novel variants,
g.1467G>A, g.1487 Ins with a 13 bp insertion and g.1515 Ins with a 6 bp
insertion, were identified within the enhancer element in both VSD patients and
controls with similar frequencies (P>0.05). Therefore, our data suggested that
the enhancer of NKX2-5 gene may not be a contributor to the VSD etiology. Other
regulatory elements of the NKX2-5 gene will be further analyzed in CHD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22824467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Pathophysiology. 2012 Jun;19(3):193-203. doi: 10.1016/j.pathophys.2012.06.001.
Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Expression of cardiac GATA4 and downstream genes after exercise training in the
db/db mouse.

Broderick TL(1), Parrott CR, Wang D, Jankowski M, Gutkowska J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Diabetes and Exercise Metabolism, Midwestern University,
Glendale, AZ, USA.

GATA4 is a transcriptional factor expressed in heart that regulates the synthesis
of structural and cardioprotective genes. We have demonstrated that low GATA4
expression in the db/db mouse heart is associated with reduced expression of key 
downstream genes, including oxytocin (OT) natriuretic peptide (A-, B-type),
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), and myosin heavy chain (a-MHC). In this study, the 
effect of exercise on GATA4 expression and related genes was determined in the
db/db mouse, a model that represents human type 2 diabetes. Vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) and hypoxia-induced factor-a expression were also measured
after 8 weeks of treadmill running. Compared with control littermates, db/db mice
exhibited hyperglycemia and obesity, and exercise failed to improve these
parameters. GATA4 expression was reduced in db/db hearts and this was associated 
with reduced expression of OT, OTR, ANP, BNP, eNOS, a-MHC, and ratio of a- to
ß-MHC, whereas mRNA expression of ß-MHC and VEGF remained unchanged compared with
control hearts. Exercise training increased GATA4 expression (mRNA and protein)
but most genes regulated by GATA4 were not observed to increase accordingly.
However, protein expression of eNOS, mRNA expression of a-MHC, ratio of a- to
ß-MHC, and protein expression of VEGF were increased in db/db hearts after
exercise. In conclusion, while GATA4 expression is increased following exercise, 
not all structural and cardioprotective genes are expressed, suggesting other
transcription factors may be involved in this regulation. Regardless of this
effect, the positive effect of exercise training on key protective genes is
evident in the db/db mouse heart.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22809789  [PubMed]


48. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Dec;113(12):3788-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24254.

Knockdown of nucleosome assembly protein 1-like 1 promotes dimethyl
sulfoxide-induced differentiation of P19CL6 cells into cardiomyocytes.

Li L(1), Gong H, Yu H, Liu X, Liu Q, Yan G, Zhang Y, Lu H, Zou Y, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Transplantation of cardiomyocytes derived from stem cells is a promising option
for cardiac repair. However, how to obtain efficient cardiomyocytes from stem
cells is still a great challenge. Understanding of the mechanism that regulates
the cardiac differentiation of stem cells is necessary for the effective
induction of cardiomyocytes. A clonal derivative named P19CL6 cells can easily
differentiate into cardiomyocytes with 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) treatment,
which offers a valuable model to study cardiomyocytes differentiation in vitro.
In this study, the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)
proteomics were performed to identify proteins associated with cardiomyocytes
differentiation of P19CL6 cells induced by DMSO. Out of 543 non-redundant
proteins identified, 207 proteins showed significant changes during
differentiation with =1.2-fold or =0.83-fold changes cut-offs. Nine proteins were
confirmed by the quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and
Western blot analysis respectively. Notably, broad consistency was well showed
between mRNA and protein expression for down-regulation of nucleosome assembly
protein 1-like 1 (Nap1l1). Further study revealed that knockdown of Nap1l1 by
stable transfection of shRNA vector significantly accelerated DMSO-induced
cardiomyocytes differentiation of P19CL6 cells characterized by increases in
expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, genes, and proteins (GATA4,
MEF-2C, ANP, BNP, cTNT, and ß-MHC). Therefore, Nap1l1 is a novel protein that
regulates cardiomyocytes differentiation of P19CL6 cells induced by DMSO.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22807403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e39919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039919. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Cardioprotection of controlled and cardiac-specific over-expression of
A(2A)-adenosine receptor in the pressure overload.

Hamad EA(1), Zhu W, Chan TO, Myers V, Gao E, Li X, Zhang J, Song J, Zhang XQ,
Cheung JY, Koch W, Feldman AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Cardiovascular Research Center, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Adenosine binds to three G protein-coupled receptors (R) located on the
cardiomyocyte (A(1)-R, A(2A)-R and A(3)-R) and provides cardiac protection during
both ischemic and load-induced stress. While the role of adenosine
receptor-subtypes has been well defined in the setting of ischemia-reperfusion,
far less is known regarding their roles in protecting the heart during other
forms of cardiac stress. Because of its ability to increase cardiac contractility
and heart rate, we hypothesized that enhanced signaling through A(2A)-R would
protect the heart during the stress of transverse aortic constriction (TAC).
Using a cardiac-specific and inducible promoter, we selectively over-expressed
A(2A)-R in FVB mice. Echocardiograms were obtained at baseline, 2, 4, 8, 12, 14
weeks and hearts were harvested at 14 weeks, when WT mice developed a significant
decrease in cardiac function, an increase in end systolic and diastolic
dimensions, a higher heart weight to body weight ratio (HW/BW), and marked
fibrosis when compared with sham-operated WT. More importantly, these changes
were significantly attenuated by over expression of the A(2A)-R. Furthermore, WT 
mice also demonstrated marked increases in the hypertrophic genes ß-myosin heavy 
chain (ß-MHC), and atrial natriuretic factor (ANF)--changes that are mediated by 
activation of the transcription factor GATA-4. Levels of the mRNAs encoding
ß-MHC, ANP, and GATA-4 were significantly lower in myocardium from A(2A)-R TG
mice after TAC when compared with WT and sham-operated controls. In addition,
three inflammatory factors genes encoding cysteine dioxygenase, complement
component 3, and serine peptidase inhibitor, member 3N, were enhanced in WT TAC
mice, but their expression was suppressed in A(2A)-R TG mice. A(2A)-R
over-expression is protective against pressure-induced heart failure secondary to
TAC. These cardioprotective effects are associated with attenuation of GATA-4
expression and inflammatory factors. The A(2A)-R may provide a novel new target
for pharmacologic therapy in patients with cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC3391213
PMID: 22792196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 2012 Aug;139(16):2866-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.078519. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Conversion from mouse embryonic to extra-embryonic endoderm stem cells reveals
distinct differentiation capacities of pluripotent stem cell states.

Cho LT(1), Wamaitha SE, Tsai IJ, Artus J, Sherwood RI, Pedersen RA, Hadjantonakis
AK, Niakan KK.

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK.

The inner cell mass of the mouse pre-implantation blastocyst comprises epiblast
progenitor and primitive endoderm cells of which cognate embryonic (mESCs) or
extra-embryonic (XEN) stem cell lines can be derived. Importantly, each stem cell
type retains the defining properties and lineage restriction of their in vivo
tissue of origin. Recently, we demonstrated that XEN-like cells arise within mESC
cultures. This raises the possibility that mESCs can generate self-renewing XEN
cells without the requirement for gene manipulation. We have developed a novel
approach to convert mESCs to XEN cells (cXEN) using growth factors. We confirm
that the downregulation of the pluripotency transcription factor Nanog and the
expression of primitive endoderm-associated genes Gata6, Gata4, Sox17 and Pdgfra 
are necessary for cXEN cell derivation. This approach highlights an important
function for Fgf4 in cXEN cell derivation. Paracrine FGF signalling compensates
for the loss of endogenous Fgf4, which is necessary to exit mESC self-renewal,
but not for XEN cell maintenance. Our cXEN protocol also reveals that distinct
pluripotent stem cells respond uniquely to differentiation promoting signals.
cXEN cells can be derived from mESCs cultured with Erk and Gsk3 inhibitors (2i), 
and LIF, similar to conventional mESCs. However, we find that epiblast stem cells
(EpiSCs) derived from the post-implantation embryo are refractory to cXEN cell
establishment, consistent with the hypothesis that EpiSCs represent a pluripotent
state distinct from mESCs. In all, these findings suggest that the potential of
mESCs includes the capacity to give rise to both extra-embryonic and embryonic
lineages.

PMCID: PMC3403099
PMID: 22791892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 3;424(3):593-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.158. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Inhibition of histone acetylation by curcumin reduces alcohol-induced expression 
of heart development-related transcription factors in cardiac progenitor cells.

Wang L(1), Sun H, Pan B, Zhu J, Huang G, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China.

Alcohol exposure during pregnancy may cause congenital heart disease (CHD). In
our previous studies, we found that alcohol selectively increased acetylation of 
histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) and enhanced the expression of heart
development-related genes in cardiac progenitor cells. The objective of this
study is to investigate the protective effects of histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) inhibitor, curcumin, on histone hyperacetylation and the over-expression
of heart development genes induced by alcohol. Western blot analysis was employed
to detect the acetylation levels of histone H3K9 and real-time PCR was applied to
measure the expressions of heart development-related transcription factors,
GATA4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (GMT). Our results showed that alcohol increased the
acetylation of H3K9 by 2.76-fold (P<0.05) and significantly enhanced the
expression of GATA4 and Mef2c (P<0.05). When cells were treated with alcohol plus
25 µM curcumin, the hyperacetylation of H3K9 and over-expression of GATA4 and
Mef2c by alcohol was reversed. These data indicate that curcumin can correct the 
over-expression of cardiac genes by reversing the alcohol induced
hyperacetylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 in cardiac progenitor cells,
suggesting that curcumin is protective against alcohol-induced cardiac gene
over-expression that may result in heart malformations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22776204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30157-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.376640. Epub
2012 Jul 7.

GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA-4) and T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) regulate
myogenic differentiation and erythropoietin response via cross-talk with Sirtuin1
(Sirt1).

Wang L(1), Jia Y, Rogers H, Wu YP, Huang S, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892-1822, USA.

Erythropoietin (EPO), the cytokine required for erythrocyte production,
contributes to muscle progenitor cell proliferation and delay myogenic
differentiation. However, the underlying mechanism is not yet fully understood.
Here, we report that EPO changes the skeletal myogenic regulatory factor
expression program and delays differentiation via induction of GATA-4 and the
basic helix-loop-helix TAL1 and that knockdown of both factors promotes
differentiation. EPO increases the Sirt1 level, a NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase,
and also induces the NAD(+)/NADH ratio that further increases Sirt1 activity.
Sirt1 knockdown reduced GATA-4 and TAL1 expression, impaired EPO effect on
delayed myogenic differentiation, and the Sirt1 knockdown effect was abrogated
when combined with overexpression of GATA-4 or TAL1. GATA-4 interacts with Sirt1 
and targets Sirt1 to the myogenin promoter and represses myogenin expression,
whereas TAL1 inhibits myogenin expression by decreasing MyoD binding to and
activation of the myogenin promoter. Sirt1 was found to bind to the GATA-4
promoter to directly regulate GATA-4 expression and GATA-4 binds to the TAL1
promoter to regulate TAL1 expression positively. These data suggest that GATA-4, 
TAL1, and Sirt1 cross-talk each other to regulate myogenic differentiation and
mediate EPO activity during myogenic differentiation with Sirt1 playing a role
upstream of GATA-4 and TAL1. Taken together, our findings reveal a novel role for
GATA-4 and TAL1 to affect skeletal myogenic differentiation and EPO response via 
cross-talk with Sirt1.

PMCID: PMC3436270
PMID: 22773876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Trends Mol Med. 2012 Oct;18(10):575-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2012.06.009. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Turning cardiac fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes in vivo.

Xu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. chunhui.xu@emory.edu

Murine fibroblasts have previously been reprogrammed to form cardiomyocytes in
vitro, but recent studies have demonstrated direct conversion of cardiac
fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes in vivo. This is accomplished by delivering
transcription factors or microRNAs to the mouse heart and may represent a new
avenue for regenerative cardiac therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22770847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):e150. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks643. Epub 2012 Jun
30.

Transposon-mediated BAC transgenesis in human ES cells.

Rostovskaya M(1), Fu J, Obst M, Baer I, Weidlich S, Wang H, Smith AJ,
Anastassiadis K, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Engineering, BioInnovationsZentrum, Technische Universitaet Dresden,
Dresden 01307, Germany.

Transgenesis is a cornerstone of molecular biology. The ability to integrate a
specifically engineered piece of DNA into the genome of a living system is
fundamental to our efforts to understand life and exploit its implications for
medicine, nanotechnology and bioprospecting. However, transgenesis has been
hampered by position effects and multi-copy integration problems, which are
mainly due to the use of small, plasmid-based transgenes. Large transgenes based 
on native genomic regions cloned into bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs)
circumvent these problems but are prone to fragmentation. Herein, we report that 
contrary to widely held notions, large BAC-sized constructs do not prohibit
transposition. We also report the first reliable method for BAC transgenesis in
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). The PiggyBac or Sleeping Beauty transposon
inverted repeats were integrated into BAC vectors by recombineering, followed by 
co-lipofection with the corresponding transposase in hESCs to generate robust
fluorescent protein reporter lines for OCT4, NANOG, GATA4 and PAX6. BAC
transposition delivers several advantages, including increased frequencies of
single-copy, full-length integration, which will be useful in all transgenic
systems but especially in difficult venues like hESCs.

PMCID: PMC3479164
PMID: 22753106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Ther. 2012 Jul;20(7):1294-6. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.121.

Converting scar to muscle in the injured heart.

Riley PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK. paul.riley@dpag.ox.ac.uk

PMCID: PMC3392984
PMID: 22751513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Hepatol. 2012 Nov;57(5):1061-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.06.028. Epub 2012 Jun 
28.

Intestinal GATA4 deficiency protects from diet-induced hepatic steatosis.

Patankar JV(1), Obrowsky S, Doddapattar P, Hoefler G, Battle M, Levak-Frank S,
Kratky D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical University of Graz,
Austria.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: GATA4, a zinc finger domain transcription factor, is critical 
for jejunal identity. Mice with an intestine-specific GATA4 deficiency (GATA4iKO)
are resistant to diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Although they have 
decreased intestinal lipid absorption, hepatic de novo lipogenesis is inhibited. 
Here, we investigated dietary lipid-dependent and independent effects on the
development of steatosis and fibrosis in GATA4iKO mice.
METHODS: GATA4iKO and control mice were fed a Western-type diet (WTD) or a
methionine and choline-deficient diet (MCDD) for 20 and 3 weeks, respectively.
Functional effects of GATA4iKO on diet-induced liver steatosis were investigated.
RESULTS: WTD-but not MCDD-fed GATA4iKO mice showed lower hepatic concentrations
of triglycerides, free fatty acids, and thiobarbituric acid reactive species and 
had reduced expression of lipogenic as well as fibrotic genes compared with
controls. Reduced nuclear sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c protein
levels were accompanied by lower lipogenic gene expression. Oil red O and Sirius 
Red staining of liver sections confirmed the observed reduction in hepatic lipid 
accumulation and fibrosis. Immunohistochemical staining revealed an increased
number of jejunal glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) positive cells in GATA4iKO
mice. Consequently, we found enhanced phosphorylation of hepatic AMP-activated
protein kinase and acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide strong indications for a protective effect of
intestinal GATA4 deficiency on the development of hepatic steatosis and fibrosis 
via GLP-1, thereby blocking hepatic de novo lipogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477492
PMID: 22750465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 15;369(2):199-210. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.019. Epub 2012
Jun 28.

Zebrafish Mef2ca and Mef2cb are essential for both first and second heart field
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Hinits Y(1), Pan L, Walker C, Dowd J, Moens CB, Hughes SM.

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, Guy's
Campus, King's College London, UK. yaniv.hinits@kcl.ac.uk

Mef2 transcription factors have been strongly linked with early heart
development. D-mef2 is required for heart formation in Drosophila, but whether
Mef2 is essential for vertebrate cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation is unclear.
In mice, although Mef2c is expressed in all CMs, targeted deletion of Mef2c
causes lethal loss of second heart field (SHF) derivatives and failure of cardiac
looping, but first heart field CMs can differentiate. Here we examine Mef2
function in early heart development in zebrafish. Two Mef2c genes exist in
zebrafish, mef2ca and mef2cb. Both are expressed similarly in the bilateral heart
fields but mef2cb is strongly expressed in the heart poles at the primitive heart
tube stage. By using fish mutants for mef2ca and mef2cb and antisense morpholinos
to knock down either or both Mef2cs, we show that Mef2ca and Mef2cb have
essential but redundant roles in myocardial differentiation. Loss of both Mef2ca 
and Mef2cb function does not interfere with early cardiogenic markers such as
nkx2.5, gata4 and hand2 but results in a dramatic loss of expression of
sarcomeric genes and myocardial markers such as bmp4, nppa, smyd1b and late
nkx2.5 mRNA. Rare residual CMs observed in mef2ca;mef2cb double mutants are
ablated by a morpholino capable of knocking down other Mef2s. Mef2cb
over-expression activates bmp4 within the cardiogenic region, but no ectopic CMs 
are formed. Surprisingly, anterior mesoderm and other tissues become skeletal
muscle. Mef2ca single mutants have delayed heart development, but form an
apparently normal heart. Mef2cb single mutants have a functional heart and are
viable adults. Our results show that the key role of Mef2c in myocardial
differentiation is conserved throughout the vertebrate heart.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3927553
PMID: 22750409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Card Fail. 2012 Jul;18(7):585-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2012.05.006.

Placement of an elastic biodegradable cardiac patch on a subacute infarcted heart
leads to cellularization with early developmental cardiomyocyte characteristics.

Fujimoto KL(1), Tobita K, Guan J, Hashizume R, Takanari K, Alfieri CM, Yutzey KE,
Wagner WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.

BACKGROUND: Placement of an elastic biodegradable patch onto a subacute
myocardial infarct (MI) provides temporary elastic support that may act to
effectively alter adverse left ventricular (LV) remodeling processes.
METHODS: Two weeks after permanent left coronary ligation in Lewis rats, the
infarcted anterior wall was covered with polyester urethane urea (MI + PEUU; n = 
15) or expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (MI + ePTFE; n = 15) patches, or had no
implantation (MI + sham; n = 12). Eight weeks after surgery, cardiac function and
histology were assessed.
RESULTS: The ventricular wall in the MI + ePTFE and MI + sham groups was composed
of fibrous tissue, whereas PEUU implantation induced a-smooth muscle
actin-positive muscle bundles coexpressing sarcomeric a-actinin and
cardiac-specific troponin-T. This pattern of colocalization was also found in
developing embryonic myocardium. Cardiac transcription factors Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4
were strongly expressed in the muscle bundles. In the MI + sham group,
end-diastolic LV cavity area (EDA) increased and the percentage of fractional
area change (%FAC) decreased. For ePTFE patched animals, both EDA and %FAC
decreased. In contrast, with MI + PEUU patching, %FAC increased and EDA was
maintained. With dobutamine-stress echocardiography, MI + PEUU patched LVs
possessed contractile reserve significantly larger than the MI + sham group.
CONCLUSIONS: MI + PEUU patch implantation onto subacute infarcted myocardium
induced muscle cellularization with characteristics of early developmental
cardiomyocytes as well as providing a functional reserve.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402172
PMID: 22748493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Cell Biol. 2012 Jun 25;197(7):907-19. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201109067.

Nuclear-localized focal adhesion kinase regulates inflammatory VCAM-1 expression.

Lim ST(1), Miller NL, Chen XL, Tancioni I, Walsh CT, Lawson C, Uryu S, Weis SM,
Cheresh DA, Schlaepfer DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California-San Diego,
Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. stlim@usouthal.edu

Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) plays important roles in development
and inflammation. Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
are key regulators of inflammatory and integrin-matrix signaling, respectively.
Integrin costimulatory signals modulate inflammatory gene expression, but the
important control points between these pathways remain unresolved. We report that
pharmacological FAK inhibition prevented TNF-a-induced VCAM-1 expression within
heart vessel-associated endothelial cells in vivo, and genetic or pharmacological
FAK inhibition blocked VCAM-1 expression during development. FAK signaling
facilitated TNF-a-induced, mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, and,
surprisingly, FAK inhibition resulted in the loss of the GATA4 transcription
factor required for TNF-a-induced VCAM-1 production. FAK inhibition also
triggered FAK nuclear localization. In the nucleus, the FAK-FERM (band 4.1,
ezrin, radixin, moesin homology) domain bound directly to GATA4 and enhanced its 
CHIP (C terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein) E3 ligase-dependent
polyubiquitination and degradation. These studies reveal new developmental and
anti-inflammatory roles for kinase-inhibited FAK in limiting VCAM-1 production
via nuclear localization and promotion of GATA4 turnover.

PMCID: PMC3384409
PMID: 22734001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Reproduction. 2012 Sep;144(3):373-83. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0079. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Conjugated linoleic acids attenuate FSH- and IGF1-stimulated cell proliferation; 
IGF1, GATA4, and aromatase expression; and estradiol-17ß production in buffalo
granulosa cells involving PPAR<U+03B3>, PTEN, and PI3K/Akt.

Sharma I(1), Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, National
Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 132001, Haryana, India.

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) has drawn much interest in last two decades in the
area ranging from anticancer activity to obesity. A number of research papers
have been published recently with regard to CLA's additional biological functions
as reproductive benefits. However, not much is known how this mixture of isomeric
compounds mediates its beneficial effects particularly on fertility. In this
study, we demonstrated the cross talk between downstream signaling of CLA and
important hormone regulators of endocrine system, i.e. FSH and IGF1, on buffalo
granulosa cell function (proliferation and steroidogenesis). Experiments were
performed in primary serum-free buffalo granulosa cell culture, where cells were 
incubated with CLA in combination with FSH (25 ng/ml) and IGF1 (50<U+200A> ng/ml).
Results showed that 10 µM CLA inhibits FSH- and IGF1-induced granulosa cell
proliferation; aromatase, GATA4, and IGF1 mRNA; and estradiol-17ß production.
Western blot analysis of total cell lysates revealed that CLA intervenes the IGF1
signaling by decreasing p-Akt. In addition, CLA was found to upregulate
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARG) and phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN) level in granulosa cells. Further study using PPARG- and
PTEN-specific inhibitors supports the potential role of CLA in granulosa cell
proliferation and steroidogenesis involving PPARG, PTEN, and PI3K/Akt pathway.

PMID: 22733801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Oct;51(10):949-60. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21978. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Comprehensive DNA methylation analysis of benign and malignant adrenocortical
tumors.

Fonseca AL(1), Kugelberg J, Starker LF, Scholl U, Choi M, Hellman P, Åkerström G,
Westin G, Lifton RP, Björklund P, Carling T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The molecular pathogenesis of benign and malignant adrenocortical tumors (ACT) is
incompletely clarified. The role of DNA methylation in adrenocortical
tumorigenesis has not been analyzed in an unbiased, systematic fashion. Using the
Infinium HumanMethylation27 BeadChip, the DNA methylation levels of 27,578 CpG
sites were investigated in bisulfite-modified DNA from 6 normal adrenocortical
tissue samples, 27 adrenocortical adenomas (ACA), and 15 adrenocortical
carcinomas (ACC). Genes involved in cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and
transcriptional regulation of known or putative importance in the development of 
adrenal tumors showed significant and frequent hypermethylation. Such genes
included CDKN2A, GATA4, BCL2, DLEC1, HDAC10, PYCARD, and SCGB3A1/HIN1. Comparing 
benign versus malignant ACT, a total of 212 CpG islands were identified as
significantly hypermethylated in ACC. Gene expression studies of selected
hypermethylated genes (CDKN2A, GATA4, DLEC1, HDAC10, PYCARD, SCGB3A1/HIN1) in 6
normal and 16 neoplastic adrenocortical tissues (10 ACA and 6 ACC), displayed
reduced gene expression in benign and malignant ACT versus normal adrenocortical 
tissue. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine of adrenocortical cancer H-295R
cells increased expression of the hypermethylated genes CDKN2A, GATA4, DLEC1,
HDAC10, PYCARD, and SCGB3A1/HIN1. In conclusion, the current study represents the
first unbiased, quantitative, genome-wide study of adrenocortical tumor DNA
methylation. Genes with altered DNA methylation patterns were identified of
putative importance to benign and malignant adrenocortical tumor development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22733721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Sep 15;21(18):4115-25. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds241. Epub 2012 Jun
20.

Mouse model reveals the role of SOX7 in the development of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia associated with recurrent deletions of 8p23.1.

Wat MJ(1), Beck TF, Hernández-García A, Yu Z, Veenma D, Garcia M, Holder AM, Wat 
JJ, Chen Y, Mohila CA, Lally KP, Dickinson M, Tibboel D, de Klein A, Lee B, Scott
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recurrent microdeletions of 8p23.1 that include GATA4 and SOX7 confer a high risk
of both congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and cardiac defects. Although
GATA4-deficient mice have both CDH and cardiac defects, no humans with cardiac
defects attributed to GATA4 mutations have been reported to have CDH. We were
also unable to identify deleterious GATA4 sequence changes in a CDH cohort. This 
suggested that haploinsufficiency of another 8p23.1 gene may contribute, along
with GATA4, to the development of CDH. To determine if haploinsufficiency of
SOX7-another transcription factor encoding gene-contributes to the development of
CDH, we generated mice with a deletion of the second exon of Sox7. A portion of
these Sox7(<U+0394>ex2/+) mice developed retrosternal diaphragmatic hernias located in
the anterior muscular portion of the diaphragm. Anterior CDH is also seen in
Gata4(+/-) mice and has been described in association with 8p23.1 deletions in
humans. Immunohistochemistry revealed that SOX7 is expressed in the vascular
endothelial cells of the developing diaphragm and may be weakly expressed in some
diaphragmatic muscle cells. Sox7(<U+0394>ex2/<U+0394>ex2) embryos die prior to diaphragm
development with dilated pericardial sacs and failure of yolk sac remodeling
suggestive of cardiovascular failure. Similar to our experience screening GATA4, 
no clearly deleterious SOX7 sequence changes were identified in our CDH cohort.
We conclude that haploinsufficiency of Sox7 or Gata4 is sufficient to produce
anterior CDH in mice and that haploinsufficiency of SOX7 and GATA4 may each
contribute to the development of CDH in individuals with 8p23.1 deletions.

PMCID: PMC3428158
PMID: 22723016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e37174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037174. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Caudal homeobox protein Cdx-2 cooperates with Wnt pathway to regulate claudin-1
expression in colon cancer cells.

Bhat AA(1), Sharma A, Pope J, Krishnan M, Washington MK, Singh AB, Dhawan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Dysregulation of tight junctions (TJs) is often associated with human diseases
including carcinogenesis and recent studies support role of TJ integral proteins 
in the regulation of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). In this regard, 
expression of claudin-1, a key constituent of TJs, is highly increased in colon
cancer and is causally associated with the tumor growth and progression. However,
mechanism/s underlying regulation of claudin-1 expression in intestinal
epithelial cells remains poorly understood. In our studies, we have identified
putative binding sites for intestinal transcription factors Cdx1, -2 and GATA4 in
the 5'-flanking region of the claudin-1 gene. Our further studies using full
length and/or deletion mutant constructs in two different human colon cancer cell
lines, SW480 and HCT116, showed key role of Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 in the
regulation of claudin-1 mRNA expression. However, overexpression of Cdx2 had the 
most potent effect upon claudin-1 mRNA expression and promoter activity. Also, in
colon cancer patient samples, we observed a significant and parallel correlation 
between claudin-1 and Cdx2 expressions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay confirmed the Cdx2 binding with claudin-1 promoter in vivo. Using Cdx2
deletion mutant constructs, we further mapped the Cdx2 C-terminus domain to be
important in the regulation of claudin-1 promoter activity. Interestingly,
co-expression of activated ß-catenin further induced the Cdx2-dependent
upregulation of claudin-1 promoter activity while expression of the dominant
negative (dn)-TCF-4 abrogated this activation. Taken together, we conclude that
homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 regulate claudin-1 gene
expression in human colon cancer cells. Moreover, a functional crosstalk between 
Wnt-signaling and transcriptional activation related to caudal-related homeobox
(Cdx) proteins and GATA-proteins is demonstrated in the regulation of claudin-1
promoter-activation.

PMCID: PMC3376107
PMID: 22719836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2011 Aug;19(7):2506-14. doi:
10.1007/s11356-012-1034-6. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Embryonic exposure to low concentration of bisphenol A affects the development of
Oryzias melastigma larvae.

Huang Q(1), Fang C, Chen Y, Wu X, Ye T, Lin Y, Dong S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, People's Republic of China.

The prevalence of bisphenol A (BPA) in the environment has attracted increasing
attention because of the toxicity of this manmade pollutant. However, the
toxicity related to cardiac development remains largely unknown. In the present
paper, we investigated the cardiac toxicity of BPA using marine medaka (Oryzias
melastigma) embryos. At 2 days postfertilization (dpf), the embryos were
continuously exposed to a low concentration of BPA (200 µg/L) for the whole
embryonic stage. Heart rate and sinus venosus (SV)-bulbus arteriosus (BA)
distance were measured under microscopy. The mRNA expression levels of genes were
quantified by SYBR real-time RT-PCR, and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was
used to examine the histology of fish larvae hearts. Neither the heart rate nor
the SV-BA distance of the embryos was affected by BPA exposure. However, the mRNA
expression levels of Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase, BMP4, COX-1, FGF8, GATA4, and NKX2.5 were
all downregulated at the critical developmental stages (6 and 10 dpf).
Interestingly, the mRNA expression levels of COX-2 and LERP were significantly
upregulated at 10 dpf. The mRNA expressions of inflammation-related genes (TNFa, 
IL1ß, SOD, and CCL11) were all significantly upregulated after exposure.
Moreover, we found that both the body length and the body width decreased in the 
larvae after embryonic exposure to BPA. The distributed foci of inflammation were
observed in the juveniles after 2 weeks' depuration. Exposure to BPA at embryonic
stages could alter the expression of heart development-related genes and
inflammation-related genes of O. melastigma. The larvae hatched from exposed
embryos showed the foci of inflammation in the heart ventricles and the decrease 
of the body length and width.

PMID: 22718145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 3;109(27):10921-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121236109. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Wnt/ß-catenin and Bmp signals control distinct sets of transcription factors in
cardiac progenitor cells.

Klaus A(1), Müller M, Schulz H, Saga Y, Martin JF, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine,
13125 Berlin, Germany.

Progenitor cells of the first and second heart fields depend on cardiac-specific 
transcription factors for their differentiation. Using conditional mutagenesis of
mouse embryos, we define the hierarchy of signaling events that controls the
expression of cardiac-specific transcription factors during differentiation of
cardiac progenitors at embryonic day 9.0. Wnt/ß-catenin and Bmp act downstream of
Notch/RBPJ at this developmental stage. Mutation of Axin2, the negative regulator
of canonical Wnt signaling, enhances Wnt and Bmp4 signals and suffices to rescue 
the arrest of cardiac differentiation caused by loss of RBPJ. Using FACS
enrichment of cardiac progenitors in RBPJ and RBPJ/Axin2 mutants, embryo cultures
in the presence of the Bmp inhibitor Noggin, and by crossing a Bmp4 mutation into
the RBPJ/Axin2 mutant background, we show that Wnt and Bmp4 signaling activate
specific and nonoverlapping cardiac-specific genes in the cardiac progenitors:
Nkx2-5, Isl1 and Baf60c are controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin, and Gata4, SRF, and
Mef2c are controlled by Bmp signaling. Our study contributes to the understanding
of the regulatory hierarchies of cardiac progenitor differentiation and outflow
tract development and has implications for understanding and modeling heart
development.

PMCID: PMC3390862
PMID: 22711842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Sep;53(3):382-91. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.06.003. Epub
2012 Jun 16.

Induction of cardiac myogenic lineage development differs between mesenchymal and
satellite cells and is accelerated by bone morphogenetic protein-4.

Grajales L(1), García J, Geenen DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Our aim was to further elucidate the cardiac lineage development of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and to identify cells which had the
potential for cardiac myogenic differentiation when compared to skeletal muscle
satellite (Sk-sat) myogenesis. Unlike Sk-sat, MSC expressed the early cardiac
markers Nkx2.5 and GATA4. Their expression was significantly increased by
culturing MSC with Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4 (BMP4). Enhanced cardiac myogenic
lineage differentiation and loss of stem cell characteristics induced by BMP4
were further confirmed by flow cytometry of cells stained for Nkx2.5 and Sca-1
expression. MSC also expressed skeletal genes (MyoG, ssTnI, Sk-Act) early in
culture but their expression was suppressed when BMP4 was added from day 0 to day
6 (p<0.05). BMP4 treated MSC also exhibited a 6-fold increase in cTnI expression 
by day 12 in culture. The average MSC action potential time duration at 90%
(APD90) was 32.3±4ms, with some cells exhibiting action potentials closer to
Sk-sat APD90 of 13.7±0.9ms. After treatment with BMP4, MSC significantly
increased their APD90 to 54.4±7.6ms, shifting from the shorter skeletal-like
signature, towards a longer action potential duration more characteristic of a
cardiomyocyte signature. Our results show that MSC and Sk-sat exhibit
similarities in myogenic lineage development early in culture but that BMP4
clearly enhances cardiac myogenic development, suppresses skeletal myogenesis,
and leads to loss of "stemness" in MSC. These findings provide novel information 
regarding the use of BMP4 to accelerate cardiac myogenic development in harvested
MSC and further support the use of MSC in cardiac regenerative therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3426454
PMID: 22709559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2519-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI62613. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Genetic variation in T-box binding element functionally affects SCN5A/SCN10A
enhancer.

van den Boogaard M(1), Wong LY, Tessadori F, Bakker ML, Dreizehnter LK, Wakker V,
Bezzina CR, 't Hoen PA, Bakkers J, Barnett P, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Heart Failure Research
Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The contraction pattern of the heart relies on the activation and conduction of
the electrical impulse. Perturbations of cardiac conduction have been associated 
with congenital and acquired arrhythmias as well as cardiac arrest. The pattern
of conduction depends on the regulation of heterogeneous gene expression by key
transcription factors and transcriptional enhancers. Here, we assessed the
genome-wide occupation of conduction system-regulating transcription factors
TBX3, NKX2-5, and GATA4 and of enhancer-associated coactivator p300 in the mouse 
heart, uncovering cardiac enhancers throughout the genome. Many of the enhancers 
colocalized with ion channel genes repressed by TBX3, including the clustered
sodium channel genes Scn5a, essential for cardiac function, and Scn10a. We
identified 2 enhancers in the Scn5a/Scn10a locus, which were regulated by TBX3
and its family member and activator, TBX5, and are functionally conserved in
humans. We also provided evidence that a SNP in the SCN10A enhancer associated
with alterations in cardiac conduction patterns in humans disrupts TBX3/TBX5
binding and reduces the cardiac activity of the enhancer in vivo. Thus, the
identification of key regulatory elements for cardiac conduction helps to explain
how genetic variants in noncoding regulatory DNA sequences influence the
regulation of cardiac conduction and the predisposition for cardiac arrhythmias.

PMCID: PMC3386824
PMID: 22706305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Sep;6(3):513-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.941. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

ShRNA-mediated gene silencing of AHR promotes the differentiation of P19 mouse
embryonic carcinoma cells into cardiomyocytes.

Zhu C(1), Chen YL, Wang XJ, Hu XS, Yu ZB, Han SP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor that is activated by environmental contaminants including
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The AHR affects a variety of processes that are
involved in cell growth and differentiation. In this study, we constructed a P19 
embryonic carcinoma cell line with AHR gene silencing using the vector-based
approach of short hairpin (sh)RNA interference that allows cells to differentiate
into cardiac myocytes when treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The expression
levels of the cardiac development-specific GATA4 and Nkx2.5 genes were measured
using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Our data showed
that the expression levels of the GATA4 and Nkx2.5 genes were increased in the
AHR-silenced P19 cells compared with the control groups. Four critical genes
(ARNT, CYP1A1, GSK3ß and ß-catenin) expressed in the AHR and in the Wnt signaling
pathway were also measured by qPCR. We found that the expression levels of ARNT, 
CYP1A1 and ß-catenin were suppressed, whereas GSK3ß expression was elevated in
the AHR-silenced P19 cells. Therefore, it is possible that the silencing of AHR
promotes the differentiation of P19 cells through the AHR and Wnt signal
transduction pathway.

PMID: 22684894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3455-65. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24222.

MicroRNA 26b encoded by the intron of small CTD phosphatase (SCP) 1 has an
antagonistic effect on its host gene.

Sowa N(1), Horie T, Kuwabara Y, Baba O, Watanabe S, Nishi H, Kinoshita M,
Takanabe-Mori R, Wada H, Shimatsu A, Hasegawa K, Kimura T, Ono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Tissue-specific patterns of gene expression play an important role in the
distinctive features of each organ. Small CTD phosphatases (SCPs) 1-3 are
recruited by repressor element 1 (RE-1)-silencing transcription
factor/neuron-restrictive silencer factor (REST/NRSF) to neuronal genes that
contain RE-1 elements, leading to neuronal gene silencing in non-neuronal cells. 
SCPs are highly expressed in the heart and contain microRNAs (miR)-26b, 26a-2,
and 26a-1 with the same seed sequence in their introns. Therefore, we tried to
investigate the roles of miR-26b and its host gene in neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes. Overexpression of miR-26b suppressed the mRNA expression levels
of ANF, ßMHC, and ACTA1 and reduced the cell surface area in cardiomyocytes. We
confirmed that miR-26b targets the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of GATA4 and
canonical transient receptor potential channel (TRPC) 3. Conversely, silencing of
the endogenous miR-26b family enhanced the expression levels of TRPC3 and GATA4. 
On the other hand, overexpression of SCP1 induced the mRNA expression of ANF and 
ßMHC and increased the cell surface area in cardiomyocytes. Next, we compared the
effect of overexpression of SCP1 with its introns and SCP1 cDNA to observe the
net function of SCP1 expression on cardiac hypertrophy. When the expression
levels of SCP1 were the same, the overexpression of SCP1 cDNA had a greater
effect at inducing cardiac hypertrophy than SCP1 cDNA with its intron. In
conclusion, SCP1 itself has the potential to induce cardiac hypertrophy; however,
the effect is suppressed by intronic miR-26b in cardiomyocytes. miR-26b has an
antagonistic effect on its host gene SCP1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22678827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Life Sci. 2012 Jun 27;90(25-26):1020-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.05.011. Epub 2012
Jun 4.

MicroRNA 16 enhances differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells 
in a cardiac niche toward myogenic phenotypes in vitro.

Liu JL(1), Jiang L, Lin QX, Deng CY, Mai LP, Zhu JN, Li XH, Yu XY, Lin SG, Shan
ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Provincial
Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou
510080, China.

AIM: Upregulation of microRNA 16 (miR-16) contributed to the differentiation of
human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) toward myogenic phenotypes in a 
cardiac niche, the present study aimed to determine the role of miR-16 in this
process.
MAIN METHODS: hMSCs and neonatal rat ventricular myocytes were co-cultured
indirectly in two chambers to set up a cardiac microenvironment (niche). miRNA
expression profile in cardiac-niche-induced hMSCs was detected by miRNA
microarray. Cardiac marker expression and cell cycle analysis were determined in 
different treatment hMSCs. Quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot were used 
to identify the expression of mRNA, mature miRNA and protein of interest.
KEY FINDINGS: miRNA dysregulation was shown in hMSCs after cardiac niche
induction. miR-16 was upregulated in cardiac-niche-induced hMSCs. Overexpression 
of miR-16 significantly increased G1-phase arrest of the cell cycle in hMSCs and 
enhanced the expression of cardiac marker genes, including GATA4, NK2-5, MEF2C
and TNNI3. Differentiation-inducing factor 3 (DIF-3), a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
compound, was used to induce G1 phase arrest in cardiac-niche-induced hMSCs, and 
the expression of cardiac marker genes was up-regulated in DIF-3-treated hMSCs.
The expression of CCND1, CCND2 and CDK6 was suppressed by miR-16 in hMSCs. CDK6, 
CCND1 or CCND2 knockdown resulted in G1 phase arrest in hMSCs and upregulation of
cardiac marker gene expression in hMSCs in a cardiac niche.
SIGNIFICANCE: miR-16 enhances G1 phase arrest in hMSCs, contributing to the
differentiation of hMSCs toward myogenic phenotypes when in a cardiac niche. This
mechanism provides a novel strategy for pre-modification of hMSCs before
hMSC-based transplantation therapy for severe heart diseases.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22677435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jan;228(1):190-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24121.

Erythropoietin-activated ERK/MAP kinase enhances GATA-4 acetylation via
phosphorylation of serine 261 of GATA-4.

Jun JH(1), Shim JK, Ryoo HM, Kwak YL.

Author information: 
(1)Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

GATA-4, a zinc finger transcription factor, plays a critical role in heart
development. Previous studies have shown that p300-targeted GATA-4 acetylation
increases GATA-4 stability and transcriptional activity, which then stimulates
hypertrophy of cardiomyocyte. Erythropoietin (EPO), an essential hypoxia-induced 
hormone for normal erythropoiesis, is known to exert cardioprotective effects
against heart disease of either ischemic or non-ischemic origins. Although,
various action mechanisms of EPO have been proposed in the diseased heart, its
action mechanism in normal condition has not been investigated. In this study, we
aimed to investigate the influence of EPO-induced ERK signaling on the regulation
of GATA-4 protein action. EPO treatment increased the protein level of endogenous
GATA-4 via ERK signaling pathway. Inhibition of ERK activity by U0126, suppressed
EPO-induced expression of GATA-4 protein in rat cardiac myocytes. In addition,
ERK activation by over-expression of constitutively active MEK1 strongly
increased GATA-4 phosphorylation and subsequently enhanced its acetylation in P19
cells. EPO-induced ERK activation further increased the association of GATA-4
with p300. On the other hand, knock-down of p300 using siRNA diminished
ERK-induced GATA-4 acetylation. As EPO-induced GATA-4 phosphorylation via ERK
signaling pathway directly correlated with GATA-4 acetylation, we investigated to
identify the ERK-dependent phosphorylation sites in GATA-4. Site-directed
mutagenesis implicated that Ser-261 in GATA-4 played an important role for
ERK-mediated GATA-4 acetylation. Taken together, these results indicated that
EPO-induced ERK signaling activation increased GATA-4 phosphorylation and
acetylation, partly via increase in the association between GATA-4 and p300, and 
these processes required the phosphorylation of GATA-4 at Ser-261 residue.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22674427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nature. 2012 May 13;485(7400):599-604. doi: 10.1038/nature11139.

Heart repair by reprogramming non-myocytes with cardiac transcription factors.

Song K(1), Nam YJ, Luo X, Qi X, Tan W, Huang GN, Acharya A, Smith CL, Tallquist
MD, Neilson EG, Hill JA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):585-6.
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 14;111(7):831-2.
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):481-2.

The adult mammalian heart possesses little regenerative potential following
injury. Fibrosis due to activation of cardiac fibroblasts impedes cardiac
regeneration and contributes to loss of contractile function, pathological
remodelling and susceptibility to arrhythmias. Cardiac fibroblasts account for a 
majority of cells in the heart and represent a potential cellular source for
restoration of cardiac function following injury through phenotypic reprogramming
to a myocardial cell fate. Here we show that four transcription factors, GATA4,
HAND2, MEF2C and TBX5, can cooperatively reprogram adult mouse tail-tip and
cardiac fibroblasts into beating cardiac-like myocytes in vitro. Forced
expression of these factors in dividing non-cardiomyocytes in mice reprograms
these cells into functional cardiac-like myocytes, improves cardiac function and 
reduces adverse ventricular remodelling following myocardial infarction. Our
results suggest a strategy for cardiac repair through reprogramming fibroblasts
resident in the heart with cardiogenic transcription factors or other molecules.

PMCID: PMC3367390
PMID: 22660318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2012 Jun 1;4:1413-23.

Cardiomyocyte generation using stem cells and directly reprogrammed cells.

Ieda M(1), Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. mieda@z8.keio.jp

Cardiomyocytes are terminally differentiated cells with limited regenerative
capacity in the adult heart, making cell replacement therapy an attractive option
to repair injured hearts. Embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem 
(iPS) cells are pluripotent and capable of infinite expansion in vitro,
implicating them as ideal cell types for cell replacement therapy. During the
past several years, significant advances in iPS cell generation technology,
cardiac differentiation, and cell purification protocols were achieved for the
development of stem cell-based heart therapies. The discovery of iPS cells has
also sparked the novel idea of direct conversion of mature cell types into
another cell type without passing through a pluripotent stem cell state.
Functional cardiomyocytes could therefore be directly reprogrammed from
differentiated somatic cells by transduction of the three cardiac transcription
factors, Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5. Herein, we review the recent research
achievements and discuss future challenges in stem cell-based cardiac generation 
and direct cardiac reprogramming technology for heart regeneration.

PMID: 22652883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Med Sci Monit. 2012 Jun;18(6):CR344-50.

Novel GATA4 mutations in patients with congenital ventricular septal defects.

Yang YQ(1), Wang J, Liu XY, Chen XZ, Zhang W, Wang XZ, Liu X, Fang WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, P.R. China.
yang99yang66@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most prevalent type of
congenital heart disease and is a major cause of substantial morbidity and
mortality in infants. Accumulating evidence implicates genetic defects,
especially in cardiac transcription factors, in the pathogenesis of VSD. However,
VSD is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic determinants for VSD in most
patients remain to be identified.
MATERIAL/METHODS: A cohort of 230 unrelated patients with congenital VSD was
included in the investigation. A total of 200 unrelated ethnically matched
healthy individuals were recruited as controls. The entire coding region of
GATA4, a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor essential for normal
cardiac morphogenesis, was sequenced initially in 230 unrelated VSD patients. The
available relatives of the mutation carriers and 200 control subjects were
subsequently genotyped for the presence of identified mutations.
RESULTS: Four heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations of p.Q55R, p.G96R, p.N197S,
and p.K404R were identified in 4 unrelated patients with VSD. These mutations
were not detected in 200 control individuals nor described in the human SNP
database. Genetic analysis of the relatives of the mutation carriers showed that 
in each family the mutation co-segregated with VSD.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings expand the mutation spectrum of GATA4 linked to VSD
and provide new insight into the molecular etiology responsible for VSD,
suggesting potential implications for the genetic diagnosis and gene-specific
therapy for VSD.

PMCID: PMC3560722
PMID: 22648249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biosci Bioeng. 2012 Sep;114(3):342-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.04.012. Epub
2012 May 16.

Preferential emergence of cell types expressing markers for primitive endoderm
lineages in mouse embryonic stem cells expressing exogenous EGAM1 homeoprotein.

Soma M(1), Iha M, Kihara Y, Sato S, Sato Y, Sato S, Mori Y, Sugawara S, Kasuga K,
Kojima I, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have been considered as a valuable renewable source of 
materials in regenerative medicine. Recently, we identified the homeoprotein
EGAM1 both in preimplantation mouse embryos and mouse ES cells. Expression of the
Egam1 transcript and its encoded protein was detectable in differentiating mouse 
ES cells, while it was almost undetectable in undifferentiated cells. In the
present study, in order to clarify the effect of forced expression of EGAM1 on
the differentiation of mouse ES cells in vitro, transfectants expressing
exogenous EGAM1 were generated. Egam1 transfectants promoted differentiation into
cell types expressing Gata6, Gata4, Afp, or Plat, genes associated with emergence
of the extra-embryonic endoderm lineages. On the other hand, Egam1 transfectants 
inhibited the expression of specific genes for the embryonic lineages, including 
Fgf5 (epiblast) and T (mesoderm), in addition to Cdx2, a specific gene for the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages. Changes in the percentage of cells
recognizing by antibodies against specific marker proteins closely correlated
with the expression patterns of their transcripts. Taken together, the results
obtained in this study suggested that mouse ES cells expressing exogenous EGAM1
preferentially differentiate into extra-embryonic primitive endoderm lineages,
rather than embryonic lineages or extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Growth Factors. 2012 Jun;30(3):192-206. doi: 10.3109/08977194.2012.678844.

Luteinizing hormone regulates inhibin-a subunit expression through multiple
signaling pathways involving steroidogenic factor-1 and beta-catenin in the
macaque corpus luteum.

Suresh PS(1), Medhamurthy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

We employed different experimental model systems to define the role of GATA4,
beta-catenin, and steroidogenic factor (SF-1) transcriptional factors in the
regulation of monkey luteal inhibin secretion. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reactions and western blotting analyses show high expression of inhibin-a, 
GATA4, and beta-catenin in corpus luteum (CL) of the mid-luteal phase.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor antagonist-induced luteolysis model
suggested the significance of luteinizing hormone (LH) in regulating these
transcriptional factors. Inducible cyclic AMP early repressor mRNA expression was
detected in the CL and no change was observed in different stages of CL.
Following amino acid sequence analysis, interaction between SF-1 and beta-catenin
in mid-stage CL was verified by reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation experiments
coupled to immunoblot analysis. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis support
the role of SF-1 in regulating luteal inhibin-a expression. Our results suggest a
possible multiple crosstalk of Wnt, cAMP, and SF-1 in the regulation of luteal
inhibin secretion.

PMID: 22607396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002690. Epub 2012 May 
10.

Congenital heart disease-causing Gata4 mutation displays functional deficits in
vivo.

Misra C(1), Sachan N, McNally CR, Koenig SN, Nichols HA, Guggilam A, Lucchesi PA,
Pu WT, Srivastava D, Garg V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research and the Heart Center,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United
States of America.

Defects of atrial and ventricular septation are the most frequent form of
congenital heart disease, accounting for almost 50% of all cases. We previously
reported that a heterozygous G296S missense mutation of GATA4 caused atrial and
ventricular septal defects and pulmonary valve stenosis in humans. GATA4 encodes 
a cardiac transcription factor, and when deleted in mice it results in cardiac
bifida and lethality by embryonic day (E)9.5. In vitro, the mutant GATA4 protein 
has a reduced DNA binding affinity and transcriptional activity and abolishes a
physical interaction with TBX5, a transcription factor critical for normal heart 
formation. To characterize the mutation in vivo, we generated mice harboring the 
same mutation, Gata4 G295S. Mice homozygous for the Gata4 G295S mutant allele
have normal ventral body patterning and heart looping, but have a thin
ventricular myocardium, single ventricular chamber, and lethality by E11.5. While
heterozygous Gata4 G295S mutant mice are viable, a subset of these mice have
semilunar valve stenosis and small defects of the atrial septum. Gene expression 
studies of homozygous mutant mice suggest the G295S protein can sufficiently
activate downstream targets of Gata4 in the endoderm but not in the developing
heart. Cardiomyocyte proliferation deficits and decreased cardiac expression of
CCND2, a member of the cyclin family and a direct target of Gata4, were found in 
embryos both homozygous and heterozygous for the Gata4 G295S allele. To further
define functions of the Gata4 G295S mutation in vivo, compound mutant mice were
generated in which specific cell lineages harbored both the Gata4 G295S mutant
and Gata4 null alleles. Examination of these mice demonstrated that the Gata4
G295S protein has functional deficits in early myocardial development. In
summary, the Gata4 G295S mutation functions as a hypomorph in vivo and leads to
defects in cardiomyocyte proliferation during embryogenesis, which may contribute
to the development of congenital heart defects in humans.

PMCID: PMC3349729
PMID: 22589735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036754. Epub 2012 May 7.

Repression of cardiac hypertrophy by KLF15: underlying mechanisms and therapeutic
implications.

Leenders JJ(1), Wijnen WJ, van der Made I, Hiller M, Swinnen M, Vandendriessche
T, Chuah M, Pinto YM, Creemers EE.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The Kruppel-like factor (KLF) family of transcription factors regulates diverse
cell biological processes including proliferation, differentiation, survival and 
growth. Previous studies have shown that KLF15 inhibits cardiac hypertrophy by
repressing the activity of pivotal cardiac transcription factors such as GATA4,
MEF2 and myocardin. We set out this study to characterize the interaction of
KLF15 with putative other transcription factors. We first show that KLF15
interacts with myocardin-related transcription factors (MRTFs) and strongly
represses the transcriptional activity of MRTF-A and MRTF-B. Second, we
identified a region within the C-terminal zinc fingers of KLF15 that contains the
nuclear localization signal. Third, we investigated whether overexpression of
KLF15 in the heart would have therapeutic potential. Using recombinant
adeno-associated viruses (rAAV) we have overexpressed KLF15 specifically in the
mouse heart and provide the first evidence that elevation of cardiac KLF15 levels
prevents the development of cardiac hypertrophy in a model of Angiotensin II
induced hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3346753
PMID: 22586493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cell Reprogram. 2012 Jun;14(3):267-79. doi: 10.1089/cell.2011.0090. Epub 2012 May
14.

Equivalency of buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) embryonic stem cells derived from
fertilized, parthenogenetic, and hand-made cloned embryos.

Muzaffar M(1), Selokar NL, Singh KP, Zandi M, Singh MK, Shah RA, Chauhan MS,
Singla SK, Palta P, Manik R.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal-132001, India.

This study was aimed at establishing buffalo embryonic stem cells (ESCs) from in 
vitro fertilized (IVF), parthenogenetic, and hand-made cloned (HMC) embryos and
to check their equivalency in terms of stem cell marker expression, longevity,
proliferation, and differentiation pattern. ESCs derived from all three sources
were found by immunofluorescence to express the pluripotency markers SSEA-4,
TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, OCT4, and SOX2 and were able to form embryoid bodies
containing cells expressing genes specific to endoderm (AFP, HNF4, and GATA4),
mesoderm (MSX1, BMP4, and ASA), and ectoderm (cytokeratin 8 and NF68). Reverse
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) showed cells from all sources to be positive for
pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, STAT3, REX1, FOXD3, NUCLEOSTEMIN, and
TELOMERASE. Pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and c-MYC were also analyzed 
by real-time PCR. No significant differences were observed among ESCs from all
three sources for all these genes except NANOG, whose expression was higher
(p<0.05) in HMC-derived ESCs (6.897±2.3) compared to that in parthenogenesis- and
IVF-derived cells (1.603±0.315 and 1±0, respectively). Pluripotent, stable
buffalo ESC lines derived from IVF, parthenogenesis, and HMC embryos may be
genetically manipulated to provide a powerful tool for studies involving
embryonic development, genomic imprinting, gene targeting, cloning, chimera
formation, and transgenic animal production.

PMCID: PMC3369701
PMID: 22582863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):50-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.270264. Epub 2012 
May 10.

Inefficient reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes using Gata4, Mef2c, 
and Tbx5.

Chen JX(1), Krane M, Deutsch MA, Wang L, Rav-Acha M, Gregoire S, Engels MC,
Rajarajan K, Karra R, Abel ED, Wu JC, Milan D, Wu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):5-8.
    Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):3-4.

RATIONALE: Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes is a novel
strategy for cardiac regeneration. However, the key determinants involved in this
process are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficiency of direct fibroblast reprogramming via viral 
overexpression of GATA4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GMT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We induced GMT overexpression in murine tail tip fibroblasts
(TTFs) and cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) from multiple lines of transgenic mice
carrying different cardiomyocyte lineage reporters. We found that the induction
of GMT overexpression in TTFs and CFs is inefficient at inducing molecular and
electrophysiological phenotypes of mature cardiomyocytes. In addition,
transplantation of GMT infected CFs into injured mouse hearts resulted in
decreased cell survival with minimal induction of cardiomyocyte genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant challenges remain in our ability to convert fibroblasts 
into cardiomyocyte-like cells and a greater understanding of cardiovascular
epigenetics is needed to increase the translational potential of this strategy.

PMCID: PMC3390172
PMID: 22581928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Neuromolecular Med. 2012 Dec;14(4):221-43. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8183-0. Epub
2012 May 13.

Mechanism(s) of alteration of micro RNA expressions in Huntington's disease and
their possible contributions to the observed cellular and molecular dysfunctions 
in the disease.

Sinha M(1), Mukhopadhyay S, Bhattacharyya NP.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhan
Nagar, Kolkata, 700 064, India.

To identify the mechanism of deregulation of micro RNAs (miRNAs) altered in
Huntington's disease (HD) and their possible contributions to the altered
cellular and molecular functions observed in the disease, we analyzed the altered
miRNAs in the postmortem brains of HD patients. There are 54 miRNAs
differentially expressed in HD brains of which 30 are upregulated and 24
downregulated. Some of these miRNAs were also altered in various models of the
disease. Regulation of these miRNAs was attributed to transcription factors and
the host genes to which these miRNAs reside. We observed that transcription
regulators TP53, E2F1, REST, and GATA4 together could regulate expressions of 26 
miRNAs in HD. Altered expressions of 13 intronic miRNAs were correlated with the 
expressions of their host genes. From literature, we further collected 287
experimentally validated targets of miRNAs upregulated in HD, while 304 validated
targets of downregulated miRNAs in HD. Analysis of these validated target genes
of altered miRNAs by gene ontology (GO) revealed that these genes are
significantly enriched in GO terms belonging to (1) apoptosis, (2)
differentiation and development, (3) fatty acid, cholesterol, lipid, glucose, and
carbohydrate metabolism, (4) cell cycle and growth, and (5) transcription
regulation. Experimental evidences that these processes are altered in HD are
provided from published reports. In conclusion, altered miRNAs in HD might target
many genes and may contribute to the altered cellular and molecular functions
observed in HD.

PMID: 22581158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Sep;53(3):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.04.010. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

A new approach to transcription factor screening for reprogramming of fibroblasts
to cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Protze S(1), Khattak S, Poulet C, Lindemann D, Tanaka EM, Ravens U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Faculty, Dresden University
of Technology, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Sep;53(3):311-3.

The simultaneous overexpression of several transcription factors has emerged as a
successful strategy to convert fibroblasts into other cell types including
pluripotent cells, neurons, and cardiomyocytes. The selection and screening of
factors are critical, and have often involved testing a large pool of
transcription factors, followed by successive removal of single factors. Here, to
identify a cardiac transcription factor combination facilitating mouse fibroblast
reprogramming into cardiomyocytes, we directly screened all triplet combinations 
of 10 candidate factors combined with a Q-PCR assay reporting induction of
multiple cardiac-specific genes. Through this screening method the combination of
Tbx5, Mef2c, and Myocd was identified to upregulate a broader spectrum of cardiac
genes compared to the combination of Tbx5, Mef2c, and Gata4 that was recently
shown to induce reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes. Cells
cotransduced with Tbx5, Mef2c, Myocd expressed cardiac contractile proteins, had 
cardiac-like potassium and sodium currents and action potentials could be
elicited. In summary the alternative screening approach that is presented here
avoided the elimination of transcription factors whose potency is masked in
complex transcription factor mixes. Furthermore, our results point to the
importance of verifying multiple lineage specific genes when assessing
reprogramming.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Hypertension. 2012 Jun;59(6):1232-40. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.183608.
Epub 2012 May 7.

Pulsatile atheroprone shear stress affects the expression of transient receptor
potential channels in human endothelial cells.

Thilo F(1), Vorderwülbecke BJ, Marki A, Krueger K, Liu Y, Baumunk D, Zakrzewicz
A, Tepel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
Florian.Thilo@charite.de

The goal of the study was to assess whether pulsatile atheroprone shear stress
modulates the expression of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, TRPC3,
TRPC6, TRPM7, and TRPV1 mRNA, in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells.
Exposure of cultured vascular endothelial cells to defined shear stress,
producing a constant laminar flow (generating a shear stress of 6 dyne/cm(2)),
laminar pulsatile atheroprotective flow (with a mean shear stress of 20
dyne/cm(2)), or laminar atheroprone bidirectional flow (with a mean shear stress 
of 0 dyne/cm(2)) differentially induced TRPC6 and TRPV1 mRNA as measured by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH expression. Thereby, TRPC6 
and TRPV1 mRNA expressions were significantly increased after 24 hours of
exposure to an atheroprone flow profile compared with an atheroprotective flow
profile. Furthermore, the expression of transcription factors GATA1 and GATA4 was
significantly correlated with the expression of TRPC6 mRNA. In contrast, after 24
hours of constant laminar flow, the expression of TRPC6 and TRPV1 mRNA was
unchanged, whereas the expression of TRPC3 and TRPM7 was significantly higher in 
endothelial cells exposed to shear stress in comparison with endothelial cells
grown under static conditions. There was a significant association between the
expression of TRPC6 and tumor necrosis factor-a mRNA in human vascular tissue.
No-flow and atheroprone flow conditions are equally characterized by an increase 
in the expression of tumor necrosis factor-a; however, inflammation-associated
endothelial cell reactions may be further aggravated at atheroprone flow
conditions by the increase of TRPV1 and TRPC6, as observed in our study.

PMID: 22566504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Aug 20;167(4):1476-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.04.039.
Epub 2012 May 3.

The G protein Ga11 is essential for hypertrophic signalling in diabetic
myocardium.

Reuter H(1), Seuthe K, Korkmaz Y, Grönke S, Hoyer DP, Rottlaender D, Zobel C,
Addicks K, Hoyer J, Grimminger P, Brabender J, Wilkie TM, Erdmann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Cologne, Kerpener Str 62,
50937 Cologne, Germany. Hannes.Reuter@uk-koeln.de

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pathological cardiac hypertrophy is an early phenotype in both
types 1 and 2 diabetes. The primary stimulus for hypertrophic growth in diabetes 
is yet unknown and may involve neurohumoral stimulation of Gq-coupled receptors
as well as direct glucose-dependent mechanisms. To discriminate between these
hypertrophic stimuli we analyzed hypertrophic signalling pathways in wildtype and
Ga11-knockout mice.
METHODS: Experimental diabetes was induced in wildtype and knockout mice by
intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin. 8 weeks after induction of diabetes 
myocardial function and structure was assessed by echocardiography before
sacrifice. To identify prohypertrophic signalling pathways expression and
translocation of protein kinase C isoforms a, ßII, d, e and <U+03B6> were analyzed by
immunohistochemical staining and immunoblot analysis after tissue fractionation. 
Changes in calcineurin signalling were identified by immunoblot analysis and
functional assays. Expression levels of transcription factors GATA4 and NF-<U+03BA>B
were quantified by real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Diabetic wildtype mice developed myocardial hypertrophy with preserved
cardiac function. Calcineurin signalling was not different between the two
groups. However, diabetic wildtype mice showed increased protein levels of PKC-a 
and PKC-<U+03B6>, translocation of PKC-a, -d and -e to cellular membranes and higher
levels of NF-<U+03BA>B expression. In contrast, diabetic Ga11-knockout mice showed no
altered phenotype and no changes in NF-<U+03BA>B or PKC expression, although
translocation of PKC-e occurred as in wildtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Ga11 is essential for the development of cardiac hypertrophy in type
1-diabetes. Stimulation of hypertrophic signalling through PKC-a, PKC-d, PKC-<U+03B6>,
and NF-<U+03BA>B appears to be receptor-dependent, whereas PKC-e is activated by
hyperglycemia, independent of Ga11.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22560942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35632. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035632. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein activates GATA4 transcription and
mediates cardiac hypertrophic signaling from angiotensin II receptor 2.

Wang N(1), Frank GD, Ding R, Tan Z, Rachakonda A, Pandolfi PP, Senbonmatsu T,
Landon EJ, Inagami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Pressure overload and prolonged angiotensin II (Ang II) infusion
elicit cardiac hypertrophy in Ang II receptor 1 (AT(1)) null mouse, whereas Ang
II receptor 2 (AT(2)) gene deletion abolishes the hypertrophic response. The
roles and signals of the cardiac AT(2) receptor still remain unsettled.
Promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF) was shown to bind to the AT(2) 
receptor and transmit the hypertrophic signal. Using PLZF knockout mice we
directed our studies on the function of PLZF concerning the cardiac specific
transcription factor GATA4, and GATA4 targets.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: PLZF knockout and age-matched wild-type (WT) 
mice were treated with Ang II, infused at a rate of 4.2 ng·kg(-1)·min(-1) for 3
weeks. Ang II elevated systolic blood pressure to comparable levels in PLZF
knockout and WT mice (140 mmHg). WT mice developed prominent cardiac hypertrophy 
and fibrosis after Ang II infusion. In contrast, there was no obvious cardiac
hypertrophy or fibrosis in PLZF knockout mice. An AT(2) receptor blocker given to
Ang II-infused wild type mice prevented hypertrophy, verifying the role of AT(2) 
receptor for cardiac hypertrophy. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that PLZF bound to the GATA4 gene
regulatory region. A Luciferase assay verified that PLZF up-regulated GATA4 gene 
expression and the absence of PLZF expression in vivo produced a corresponding
repression of GATA4 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: PLZF is an important AT(2) receptor binding protein in mediating Ang
II induced cardiac hypertrophy through an AT(2) receptor-dependent signal
pathway. The angiotensin II-AT(2)-PLZF-GATA4 signal may further augment Ang II
induced pathological effects on cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3338737
PMID: 22558183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Sci. 2012 Aug 15;125(Pt 16):3893-903. doi: 10.1242/jcs.106435. Epub 2012
May 2.

Dual function of the UNC-45b chaperone with myosin and GATA4 in cardiac
development.

Chen D(1), Li S, Singh R, Spinette S, Sedlmeier R, Epstein HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, TX 77555-0641, USA.

Cardiac development requires interplay between the regulation of gene expression 
and the assembly of functional sarcomeric proteins. We report that UNC-45b
recessive loss-of-function mutations in C3H and C57BL/6 inbred mouse strains
cause arrest of cardiac morphogenesis at the formation of right heart structures 
and failure of contractile function. Wild-type C3H and C57BL/6 embryos at the
same stage, E9.5, form actively contracting right and left atria and ventricles. 
The known interactions of UNC-45b as a molecular chaperone are consistent with
diminished accumulation of the sarcomeric myosins, but not their mRNAs, and the
resulting decreased contraction of homozygous mutant embryonic hearts. The novel 
finding that GATA4 accumulation is similarly decreased at the protein but not
mRNA levels is also consistent with the function of UNC-45b as a chaperone. The
mRNAs of known downstream targets of GATA4 during secondary cardiac field
development, the cardiogenic factors Hand1, Hand2 and Nkx-2.5, are also
decreased, consistent with the reduced GATA4 protein accumulation. Direct binding
studies show that the UNC-45b chaperone forms physical complexes with both the
alpha and beta cardiac myosins and the cardiogenic transcription factor GATA4.
Co-expression of UNC-45b with GATA4 led to enhanced transcription from GATA
promoters in naïve cells. These novel results suggest that the heart-specific
UNC-45b isoform functions as a molecular chaperone mediating contractile function
of the sarcomere and gene expression in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC3462083
PMID: 22553207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Aug;39(8):8127-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1660-6. Epub 2012
May 3.

Mutation spectrum of the GATA4 gene in patients with idiopathic atrial
fibrillation.

Wang J(1), Sun YM, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Jing-An District Central Hospital, Shanghai, China. 
wang99wang66@hotmail.com

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia
associated with substantially increased morbidity and mortality. Growing evidence
strongly implicates hereditary determinants in the pathogenesis of AF. However,
AF is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic defects responsible for AF in the
majority of cases remain to be identified. In this study, all the coding exons
and splice junctions of GATA4, a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor
critical for normal cardiac morphogenesis, were sequenced in a cohort of 150
unrelated patients with idiopathic AF. The available relatives of the mutation
carriers and a total of 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy individuals used
as controls were genotyped for the presence of mutations identified in index
patients. The functional effect of the mutant GATA4 was characterized using a
luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, two novel heterozygous GATA4
mutations (p.Y38D and p.P103A) were identified in 2 unrelated families with AF,
respectively. In each family the mutation co-segregated with AF and was absent in
the 400 control chromosomes. Functional analysis showed that the mutations of
GATA4 were associated with a significantly decreased transcriptional activity.
The findings expand the mutation spectrum of GATA4 linked to AF, and further
support the notion that compromised GATA4 confers genetic susceptibility to AF.

PMID: 22552926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036121. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

miR-125b promotes early germ layer specification through Lin28/let-7d and
preferential differentiation of mesoderm in human embryonic stem cells.

Wong SS(1), Ritner C, Ramachandran S, Aurigui J, Pitt C, Chandra P, Ling VB,
Yabut O, Bernstein HS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America.

Unlike other essential organs, the heart does not undergo tissue repair following
injury. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) grow indefinitely in culture while
maintaining the ability to differentiate into many tissues of the body. As such, 
they provide a unique opportunity to explore the mechanisms that control human
tissue development, as well as treat diseases characterized by tissue loss,
including heart failure. MicroRNAs are small, non-coding RNAs that are known to
play critical roles in the regulation of gene expression. We profiled the
expression of microRNAs during hESC differentiation into myocardial precursors
and cardiomyocytes (CMs), and determined clusters of human microRNAs that are
specifically regulated during this process. We determined that miR-125b
overexpression results in upregulation of the early cardiac transcription
factors, GATA4 and Nkx2-5, and accelerated progression of hESC-derived myocardial
precursors to an embryonic CM phenotype. We used an in silico approach to
identify Lin28 as a target of miR-125b, and validated this interaction using
miR-125b knockdown. Anti-miR-125b inhibitor experiments also showed that miR-125b
controls the expression of miRNA let-7d, likely through the negative regulatory
effects of Lin28 on let-7. We then determined that miR-125b overexpression
inhibits the expression of Nanog and Oct4 and promotes the onset of Brachyury
expression, suggesting that miR-125b controls the early events of human CM
differentiation by inhibiting hESC pluripotency and promoting mesodermal
differentiation. These studies identified miR-125b as an important regulator of
hESC differentiation in general, and the development of hESC-derived mesoderm and
cardiac muscle in particular. Manipulation of miR-125b-mediated pathways may
provide a novel approach to directing the differentiation of hESC-derived CMs for
cell therapy applications.

PMCID: PMC3335794
PMID: 22545159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035717. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

PIAS1 is a GATA4 SUMO ligase that regulates GATA4-dependent intestinal promoters 
independent of SUMO ligase activity and GATA4 sumoylation.

Belaguli NS(1), Zhang M, Garcia AH, Berger DH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Michael 
E DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
elaguli@bcm.edu

GATA4 confers cell type-specific gene expression on genes expressed in
cardiovascular, gastro-intestinal, endocrine and neuronal tissues by interacting 
with various ubiquitous and cell-type-restricted transcriptional regulators. By
using yeast two-hybrid screening approach, we have identified PIAS1 as an
intestine-expressed GATA4 interacting protein. The physical interaction between
GATA4 and PIAS1 was confirmed in mammalian cells by coimmunoprecipitation and
two-hybrid analysis. The interacting domains were mapped to the second zinc
finger and the adjacent C-terminal basic region of GATA4 and the RING finger and 
the adjoining C-terminal 60 amino acids of PIAS1. PIAS1 and GATA4 synergistically
activated IFABP and SI promoters but not LPH promoters suggesting that PIAS1
differentially activates GATA4 targeted promoters. In primary murine enterocytes 
PIAS1 was recruited to the GATA4-regulated IFABP promoter. PIAS1 promoted SUMO-1 
modification of GATA4 on lysine 366. However, sumoylation was not required for
the nuclear localization and stability of GATA4. Further, neither GATA4
sumoylation nor the SUMO ligase activity of PIAS1 was required for coactivation
of IFABP promoter by GATA4 and PIAS1. Together, our results demonstrate that
PIAS1 is a SUMO ligase for GATA4 that differentially regulates GATA4
transcriptional activity independent of SUMO ligase activity and GATA4
sumoylation.

PMCID: PMC3334497
PMID: 22539995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Dyn. 2012 Jul;241(7):1192-204. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23798. Epub 2012 May 18.

Transgenic mouse analysis of Sry expression during the pre- and peri-implantation
stage.

Silversides DW(1), Raiwet DL, Souchkova O, Viger RS, Pilon N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Centre de Recherche en Reproduction
Animale, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Montreal, St-Hyacinthe,
QC, Canada. david.w.silversides@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: The SRY/Sry gene is expressed in pre-Sertoli cells of the male
genital ridge and functions as the mammalian testis determining factor (TDF). In 
addition, expression of SRY/Sry outside the genital ridge has been reported,
including preimplantation embryos, although the functional significance of this
is not well understood.
RESULTS: Using Cre-mediated lineage studies and transgenic reporter mouse models,
we now show that promoter sequences of human, pig and mouse SRY drive robust
reporter gene expression in epiblast cells of peri-implantation embryos between
embryonic day (E) 4.5 and E6.5. Analysis of endogenous Sry expression revealed
that linear transcripts are produced by means of multiple polyadenylation sites
in E4.5 embryos. Within the epiblast, SRY reporter expression mimics the
expression seen using a Gata4 reporter model, but is dissimilar to that seen
using an Oct4 reporter model. In addition, we report that overexpression of mouse
Sry in embryonic stem cells leads to down-regulation of the core pluripotency
markers Sox2 and Nanog.
CONCLUSION: We propose that SRY/Sry may function as a male-specific maturation
factor in the peri-implantation mammalian embryo, providing a genetic mechanism
to help explain the observation that male embryos are developmentally more
advanced compared with female embryos, and suggesting a role for SRY beyond that 
of TDF.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22539273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35743. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035743. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Disruption of a GATA4/Ankrd1 signaling axis in cardiomyocytes leads to sarcomere 
disarray: implications for anthracycline cardiomyopathy.

Chen B(1), Zhong L, Roush SF, Pentassuglia L, Peng X, Samaras S, Davidson JM,
Sawyer DB, Lim CC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Department of Medicine, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) is an effective anti-cancer drug, but its clinical usage
is limited by a dose-dependent cardiotoxicity characterized by widespread
sarcomere disarray and loss of myofilaments. Cardiac ankyrin repeat protein
(CARP, ANKRD1) is a transcriptional regulatory protein that is extremely
susceptible to doxorubicin; however, the mechanism(s) of doxorubicin-induced CARP
depletion and its specific role in cardiomyocytes have not been completely
defined. We report that doxorubicin treatment in cardiomyocytes resulted in
inhibition of CARP transcription, depletion of CARP protein levels, inhibition of
myofilament gene transcription, and marked sarcomere disarray. Knockdown of CARP 
with small interfering RNA (siRNA) similarly inhibited myofilament gene
transcription and disrupted cardiomyocyte sarcomere structure. Adenoviral
overexpression of CARP, however, was unable to rescue the doxorubicin-induced
sarcomere disarray phenotype. Doxorubicin also induced depletion of the cardiac
transcription factor GATA4 in cardiomyocytes. CARP expression is regulated in
part by GATA4, prompting us to examine the relationship between GATA4 and CARP in
cardiomyocytes. We show in co-transfection experiments that GATA4 operates
upstream of CARP by activating the proximal CARP promoter. GATA4-siRNA knockdown 
in cardiomyocytes inhibited CARP expression and myofilament gene transcription,
and induced extensive sarcomere disarray. Adenoviral overexpression of GATA4
(AdV-GATA4) in cardiomyocytes prior to doxorubicin exposure maintained GATA4
levels, modestly restored CARP levels, and attenuated sarcomere disarray.
Interestingly, siRNA-mediated depletion of CARP completely abolished the
Adv-GATA4 rescue of the doxorubicin-induced sarcomere phenotype. These data
demonstrate co-dependent roles for GATA4 and CARP in regulating sarcomere gene
expression and maintaining sarcomeric organization in cardiomyocytes in culture. 
The data further suggests that concurrent depletion of GATA4 and CARP in
cardiomyocytes by doxorubicin contributes in large part to myofibrillar disarray 
and the overall pathophysiology of anthracycline cardiomyopathy.

PMCID: PMC3332030
PMID: 22532871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 11;421(3):591-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.051. Epub 2012 Apr 14.

Feed-back regulation of disabled-2 (Dab2) p96 isoform for GATA-4 during
differentiation of F9 cells.

Kim JA(1), Bae SH, Choi YJ, Kim KH, Park SS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701,
Republic of Korea.

F9 embryonic carcinoma (EC) cells undergo extra-embryonic endodermal (ExE)
differentiation in response to retinoic acid (RA) treatment, which induces the
expression of two isoforms (p96 and p67) of the adaptor protein, Disabled-2
(Dab2). In the current study, constitutive and ectopic expression of the p96
isoform induced ExE differentiation in F9 EC cells in the absence of RA treatment
via the activation of GATA-4 by p96. During the RA-induced differentiation
process, Dab2 expression is induced by the GATA factors in a coherent
feed-forward loop; on the other hand, we showed that p96 regulates GATA-4 in a
positive feed-back manner in this study. Our results indicate that p96 Dab2 plays
a key role in the ExE differentiation process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22525672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):593-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11044.

In vivo reprogramming of murine cardiac fibroblasts into induced cardiomyocytes.

Qian L(1), Huang Y, Spencer CI, Foley A, Vedantham V, Liu L, Conway SJ, Fu JD,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)1Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 14;111(7):831-2.
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):481-2.
    Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):585-6.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jul 6;11(1):3-4.

The reprogramming of adult cells into pluripotent cells or directly into
alternative adult cell types holds great promise for regenerative medicine. We
reported previously that cardiac fibroblasts,which represent 50%of the cells in
the mammalian heart, can be directly reprogrammed to adult cardiomyocyte-like
cells in vitro by the addition of Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (GMT). Here we use
genetic lineage tracing to show that resident non-myocytes in the murine heart
can be reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vivo by local delivery of
GMT after coronary ligation. Induced cardiomyocytes became binucleate, assembled 
sarcomeres and had cardiomyocyte-like gene expression. Analysis of single cells
revealed ventricular cardiomyocyte-like action potentials, beating upon
electrical stimulation, and evidence of electrical coupling. In vivo delivery of 
GMT decreased infarct size and modestly attenuated cardiac dysfunction up to 3
months after coronary ligation. Delivery of the pro-angiogenic and
fibroblast-activating peptide, thymosin b4, along with GMT, resulted in further
improvements in scar area and cardiac function. These findings demonstrate that
cardiac fibroblasts can be reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells in their
native environment for potential regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC3369107
PMID: 22522929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Transl Res. 2012 May;159(5):376-82. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2011.10.012. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

Genetic analysis of the promoter region of the GATA4 gene in patients with
ventricular septal defects.

Wu G(1), Shan J, Pang S, Wei X, Zhang H, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical College Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical College, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China.

Comment in
    Transl Res. 2013 Jan;161(1):59-61.

Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are the most common type of congenital heart
diseases (CHDs). To date, the genetic causes for sporadic VSDs remain largely
unknown. GATA transcription factor 4 (GATA4) is a zinc-finger transcription
factor that is expressed in developing heart and adult cardiomyocytes. Mutations 
in the coding region of the GATA4 gene have been identified in CHD patients,
including VSD. As the GATA4 factor is a dosage-sensitive regulator, we
hypothesized that the promoter region variants of the GATA4 gene may be genetic
causes of VSD. In this study, we analyzed the promoter region of the GATA4 gene
by bidirectional sequencing in 172 VSD patients and 171 healthy controls. The
results showed that 5 heterozygous sequence variants (NG_008177:g.4071T>C,
NG_008177:g.4148C>A, NG_008177:g.4566C>T, NG_008177:g.4653G>T, and
NG_008177:g.4690G>deletion) within the promoter region of the GATA gene were
identified in 5 VSD patients, but in none of controls. One heterozygous sequence 
variant (g.4762C>A) was found only in one control, which may have no functional
significance. A functional analysis revealed that the transcriptional activity of
variant NG_008177:g.4566C>T was reduced significantly, whereas the
transcriptional activities of the variants (NG_008177:g.4071T>C,
NG_008177:g.4148C>A, NG_008177:g.4653G>T, and NG_008177:g.4690G>deletion) were
increased significantly compared with the wild-type GATA4 gene promoter. As GATA4
is a dosage-sensitive regulator during development, our data suggest that these
sequence variants within the promoter region of the GATA4 gene may contribute to 
the VSD etiology by altering its gene expression. Additional studies in
experimental animals will deepen our understanding of the genetic basis of VSD
and shed light on designing novel molecular therapies for adult VSD patients
carrying these variants.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22500510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genes Dev. 2012 May 1;26(9):920-32. doi: 10.1101/gad.188094.112. Epub 2012 Apr
12.

Polycomb function during oogenesis is required for mouse embryonic development.

Posfai E(1), Kunzmann R, Brochard V, Salvaing J, Cabuy E, Roloff TC, Liu Z,
Tardat M, van Lohuizen M, Vidal M, Beaujean N, Peters AH.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, CH-4058 Basel,
Switzerland.

In mammals, totipotent embryos are formed by fusion of highly differentiated
gametes. Acquisition of totipotency concurs with chromatin remodeling of parental
genomes, changes in the maternal transcriptome and proteome, and zygotic genome
activation (ZGA). The inefficiency of reprogramming somatic nuclei in
reproductive cloning suggests that intergenerational inheritance of germline
chromatin contributes to developmental proficiency after natural conception. Here
we show that Ring1 and Rnf2, components of Polycomb-repressive complex 1 (PRC1), 
serve redundant transcriptional functions during oogenesis that are essential for
proper ZGA, replication and cell cycle progression in early embryos, and
development beyond the two-cell stage. Exchange of chromosomes between control
and Ring1/Rnf2-deficient metaphase II oocytes reveal cytoplasmic and
chromosome-based contributions by PRC1 to embryonic development. Our results
strongly support a model in which Polycomb acts in the female germline to
establish developmental competence for the following generation by silencing
differentiation-inducing genes and defining appropriate chromatin states.

PMCID: PMC3347790
PMID: 22499591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Circ J. 2012;76(7):1703-11. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Genetic analysis of essential cardiac transcription factors in 256 patients with 
non-syndromic congenital heart defects.

Kodo K(1), Nishizawa T, Furutani M, Arai S, Ishihara K, Oda M, Makino S, Fukuda
K, Takahashi T, Matsuoka R, Nakanishi T, Yamagishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The genetic basis of most congenital heart defects (CHDs), especially
non-syndromic and non-familial conditions, remains largely unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: DNA samples were collected from immortalized cell lines and 
original genomes of 256 non-syndromic, non-familial patients with cardiac outflow
tract (OFT) defects. Genes encoding NKX2.5, GATA4, GATA6, MEF2C, and ISL1,
essential for heart development, were analyzed using PCR-based bidirectional
sequencing. The transcriptional activity of proteins with identified sequence
variations was analyzed using a luciferase assay. A novel sequence variant (A103V
in MEF2C) was identified, in addition to 4 unreported non-synonymous sequence
variants in 3 known causative genes (A6V in NKX2.5, T330R and S339R in GATA4, and
E142K in GATA6) in 5 individuals. None of these was found in 500 controls without
CHDs. In vitro functional assay showed that all proteins with identified sequence
variations exhibited significant changes in transcriptional activity and/or
synergistic activity with other transcription factors. Furthermore,
overexpression of the A103V MEF2C variant in a fish system disturbed early
cardiac development.
CONCLUSIONS: New mutations in the transcription factors NKX2.5, GATA4, GATA6, and
MEF2C that affect their protein function were identified in 2.3% (6/256) of
patients with OFT defects. Our results provide the first demonstration of MEF2C
mutation and suggest that disturbances in the regulatory circuits involving these
cardiac transcription factors may cause a subset of non-syndromic and
non-familial CHDs.

PMID: 22498567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neoplasma. 2012;59(4):416-23. doi: 10.4149/neo_2012_054.

<U+0394>Np63a mediates proliferation and apoptosis in human gastric cancer cells by the 
regulation of GATA-6.

Wang H(1), Liu Z, Li J, Zhao X, Wang Z, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.

The oncogenic isoform of the p63 protein, <U+0394>Np63a, has been found to be
overexpressed in numerous human squamous cell carcinomas. However, the role of
<U+0394>Np63a in human gastric cancer remains unknown. To evaluate this role, we
screened a panel of gastric cancer cell lines for <U+0394>Np63a expression and found
that they are correlated with the differentiation status of the cell lines. Using
the MKN28 gastric cancer cell line for loss-of-function or gain-of-function of
<U+0394>Np63a in our experiments, we observed that forced expression of <U+0394>Np63a promoted 
cell proliferation as assessed by the MTT and colony formation assays, and
increased the GATA-6 expression. In contrast, down-regulation of <U+0394>Np63a via small
interfering RNA suppressed cell proliferation, induced cell apoptosis, and
reduced the expression of GATA-6. In conclusion, our data suggest that <U+0394>Np63a
plays an important role in cell growth and proliferation of gastric cancer cells,
which may be associated with the regulation of GATA-6 expression. This is the
first study exploring the biological functions and the underlying mechanism of
<U+0394>Np63a during gastric cancer development. It also identifies potential targets
for anti-tumor treatment.

PMID: 22489697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. ISRN Endocrinol. 2012;2012:736860. doi: 10.5402/2012/736860. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Downregulation in GATA4 and Downstream Structural and Contractile Genes in the
db/db Mouse Heart.

Broderick TL(1), Jankowski M, Wang D, Danalache BA, Parrott CR, Gutkowska J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Diabetes and Exercise Metabolism, Department of Physiology,
Midwestern University, 19555 North 59th Avenue, Glendale, AZ, 85308, USA.

Reduced expression of GATA4, a transcriptional factor for structural and
cardioprotective genes, has been proposed as a factor contributing to the
development of cardiomyopathy. We investigated whether the reduction of cardiac
GATA4 expression reported in diabetes alters the expression of downstream genes, 
namely, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), B-type natriuretic, peptide (BNP), and 
a- and ß-myosin heavy chain (MHC). db/db mice, a model of type 2 diabetes, with
lean littermates serving as controls, were studied. db/db mice exhibited obesity,
hyperglycemia, and reduced protein expression of cardiac GLUT4 and IRAP
(insulin-regulated aminopeptidase), the structural protein cosecreted with GLUT4.
Hearts from db/db mice had reduced protein expression of GATA4 (~35%) with
accompanying reductions in mRNA expression of ANP (~40%), BNP (~85%), and a-MHC
mRNA (~50%) whereas expression of ß-MHC mRNA was increased by ~60%. Low GATA4 was
not explained by an increased ligase or atrogin1 expression. CHIP protein content
was modestly downregulated (27%) in db/db mice whereas mRNA and protein
expression of the CHIP cochaperone HSP70 was significantly decreased in db/db
hearts. Our results indicate that low GATA4 in db/db mouse heart is accompanied
by reduced expression of GATA4-regulated cardioprotective and structural genes,
which may explain the development of cardiomyopathy in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3313578
PMID: 22474596  [PubMed]


99. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;32(12):2214-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00218-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
2.

Dissociation of cardiogenic and postnatal myocardial activities of GATA4.

Gallagher JM(1), Komati H, Roy E, Nemer M, Latinkic BV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Transcription factor GATA4 is a critical regulator of the embryonic and postnatal
heart, but the mechanisms and cofactors required for its diverse functions are
not fully understood. Here, we show that whereas the N-terminal domain of GATA4
is required for inducing cardiogenesis and for promoting postnatal cardiomyocyte 
survival, distinct residues and domains therein are necessary to mediate these
effects. Cardiogenic activity of GATA4 requires a 24-amino-acid (aa) region (aa
129 to 152) which is needed for transcriptional synergy and physical interaction 
with BAF60c. The same region is not essential for induction of endoderm or blood 
cell markers by GATA4, suggesting that it acts as a cell-type-specific
transcriptional activation domain. On the other hand, a serine residue at
position 105, which is a known target for mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
phosphorylation, is necessary for GATA4-dependent cardiac myocyte survival and
hypertrophy but is entirely dispensable for GATA4-induced cardiogenesis. We find 
that S105 is differentially required for transcriptional synergy between GATA4
and serum response factor (SRF) but not other cardiac cofactors such as TBX5 and 
NKX2.5. The findings provide new insight into GATA4 mechanisms of action and
suggest that distinct regulatory pathways regulate activities of GATA4 in
embryonic development and postnatal hearts.

PMCID: PMC3372269
PMID: 22473995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Aug;93(1):35-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.03.012. Epub 2012 
Mar 24.

Epigenetic regulation of GATA4 expression by histone modification in
AFP-producing gastric adenocarcinoma.

Yamamura N(1), Kishimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2012 Aug;4(4):367.

AFP-producing adenocarcinoma is a variant of adenocarcinoma with high malignancy.
Production of AFP suggests enteroblastic or hepatoid differentiation of cancer
cells. GATA4 is a key molecule involved in the prenatal development of the
stomach and liver. GATA4 is epigenetically silenced by hypermethylation of primer
region in many types of cancers including gastric cancer. The aim of this study
is to investigate the expression and epigenetic regulation of GATA4 in
AFP-producing adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that GATA4
was positive in 3/8 cases of AFP-producing gastric adenocarcinomas and in 28/30
cases of common type adenocarcinomas. Epigenetic modification of GATA4 promoter
region was investigated with 3 AFP-producing and 4 common-type gastric cancer
cell lines. GATA4 mRNA was detected in 1/3 of AFP-producing and 2/4 of
common-type gastric cancer cell lines by RT-PCR. Methylation-specific PCR
revealed no GATA4 methylation in any of the AFP-producing gastric cancers,
whereas methylation was consistent with GATA4 expression in the common-type
gastric cancers. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay for AFP-producing gastric
cancers revealed that histones H3 and H4 were hypoacetylated in the
GATA4-negative cells, while they were hyperacetylated in the GATA4-positive
cells. Treatment with trichostain A, an inhibitor for histone deacetylase,
induced acetylation of histones H3 and H4, and tri-methylation of lysine 4 of
histone H3, which was associated with the active transcription of GATA4 in
GATA4-negative AFP-producing cells. These results indicated that histone
deacetylation is a silencing mechanism for GATA4 expression in AFP-producing
gastric cancer cells. Differences between AFP-producing gastric cancer and
common-type gastric cancer in terms of the mechanism of GATA4 regulation may be
reflected in the phenotypic deviation of AFP-producing gastric cancer from
common-type gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22472323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3343-56. doi: 10.1242/jcs.096537. Epub 2012
Mar 30.

Dental pulp of the third molar: a new source of pluripotent-like stem cells.

Atari M(1), Gil-Recio C, Fabregat M, García-Fernández D, Barajas M, Carrasco MA, 
Jung HS, Alfaro FH, Casals N, Prosper F, Ferrés-Padró E, Giner L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, College of Dentistry, Universitat
Internacional de Catalunya, Barcelona 08009, Spain. drmaher1972@csc.uic.es

Dental pulp is particularly interesting in regenerative medicine because of the
accessibility and differentiation potential of the tissue. Dental pulp has an
early developmental origin with multi-lineage differentiation potential as a
result of its development during childhood and adolescence. However, no study has
previously identified the presence of stem cell populations with embryonic-like
phenotypes in human dental pulp from the third molar. In the present work, we
describe a new population of dental pulp pluripotent-like stem cells (DPPSCs)
that were isolated by culture in medium containing LIF, EGF and PDGF. These cells
are SSEA4(+), OCT3/4(+), NANOG(+), SOX2(+), LIN28(+), CD13(+), CD105(+), CD34(-),
CD45(-), CD90(+), CD29(+), CD73(+), STRO1(+) and CD146(-), and they show genetic 
stability in vitro based on genomic analysis with a newly described CGH
technique. Interestingly, DPPSCs were able to form both embryoid-body-like
structures (EBs) in vitro and teratoma-like structures that contained tissues
derived from all three embryonic germ layers when injected in nude mice. We
examined the capacity of DPPSCs to differentiate in vitro into tissues that have 
similar characteristics to mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm layers in both 2D and 
3D cultures. We performed a comparative RT-PCR analysis of GATA4, GATA6, MIXL1,
NANOG, OCT3/4, SOX1 and SOX2 to determine the degree of similarity between
DPPSCs, EBs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs). Our analysis
revealed that DPPSCs, hIPSC and EBs have the same gene expression profile.
Because DPPSCs can be derived from healthy human molars from patients of
different sexes and ages, they represent an easily accessible source of stem
cells, which opens a range of new possibilities for regenerative medicine.

PMID: 22467856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 20;420(4):875-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.092. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

MiR-499 induces cardiac differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells through
wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Zhang LL(1), Liu JJ, Liu F, Liu WH, Wang YS, Zhu B, Yu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia Mechanism and Treatment (Harbin
Medical University), Ministry of Education, Baojian Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang
Province 150081, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that over-expressing miR-499 in rat bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) induces them to differentiate
into cardiomyocyte-like cells through the wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.
METHODS: Rat BM-MSCs were infected with lentiviral vectors bearing miR-499. The
expression of cardiac-specific markers, NKx2.5, GATA4, MEF2C, and cTnI in these
cells were examined by rtPCR or Western blot analysis and the activity of the
wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway was evaluated by measuring the phosphorylation
status of ß-catenin.
RESULTS: Over-expression of miR-499 in rat BM-MSCs increased the expression of
cardiac-specific genes, such as NKx2.5, GATA4, MEF2C, and cTnI and decreased the 
ratio of phosphorylated/dephosphorylated ß-catenin in the wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway, thus activating the pathway. Knocking down the expression of Dvl, an
adaptor molecule in the wnt/ß-catenin signaling, partially blocked the role of
the miR-499 and decreased those cardiac-specific genes.
CONCLUSION: Over-expression of miR-499 in rat BM-MSCs induces them toward cardiac
differentiation through the activating the wnt/ß-catenin signal pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Endocrinology. 2012 Jun;153(6):2599-611. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-2135. Epub 2012 Mar
28.

GATA4 is a critical regulator of gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical tumorigenesis
in mice.

Krachulec J(1), Vetter M, Schrade A, Löbs AK, Bielinska M, Cochran R, Kyrönlahti 
A, Pihlajoki M, Parviainen H, Jay PY, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

In response to gonadectomy certain inbred mouse strains develop sex steroidogenic
adrenocortical neoplasms. One of the hallmarks of neoplastic transformation is
expression of GATA4, a transcription factor normally present in gonadal but not
adrenal steroidogenic cells of the adult mouse. To show that GATA4 directly
modulates adrenocortical tumorigenesis and is not merely a marker of gonadal-like
differentiation in the neoplasms, we studied mice with germline or conditional
loss-of-function mutations in the Gata4 gene. Germline Gata4 haploinsufficiency
was associated with attenuated tumor growth and reduced expression of sex
steroidogenic genes in the adrenal glands of ovariectomized B6D2F1 and B6AF1
mice. At 12 months after ovariectomy, wild-type B6D2F1 mice had biochemical and
histological evidence of adrenocortical estrogen production, whereas Gata4(+/-)
B6D2F1 mice did not. Germline Gata4 haploinsufficiency exacerbated the secondary 
phenotype of postovariectomy obesity in B6D2F1 mice, presumably by limiting
ectopic estrogen production in the adrenal glands. Amhr2-cre-mediated deletion of
floxed Gata4 (Gata4(F)) in nascent adrenocortical neoplasms of ovariectomized
B6.129 mice reduced tumor growth and the expression of gonadal-like markers in a 
Gata4(F) dose-dependent manner. We conclude that GATA4 is a key modifier of
gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical neoplasia, postovariectomy obesity, and sex
steroidogenic cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3359595
PMID: 22461617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Acta Med Indones. 2012 Jan;44(1):23-7.

Reversin increase the plasticity of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell for
generation of cardiomyocyte in vitro.

Pikir BS(1), Susilowati H, Hendrianto E, Abdulrantam F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine, Airlangga University,
Surabaya, Indonesia. bsp49@fk.unair.ac.id

AIM: to speed up transdifferentiation of bone marrow-derived stem cells into
cardiomyocyte in vitro by inducing dedifferentiation of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cell, before induction by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine into
cardiomyocyte.
METHODS: two-three months old 2.5 kg weight adult male New Zealanad Rabbits were 
anesthezied with ether, thigh bones were excised, and bone marrow cells were
obtained by aspiration.
RESULTS: in our experiments after 1 week of mesenchymal stem cell cultures, 20 nM
reversin was given to induce dediferentiation and after 24 hours exposure with
9µM 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, early phase of cardiomyocyte differentiation appeared 
as cultured cell were strongly positive for GATA-4 and weakly positive for
MLC-2<U+03AC>, although beating cardiomyocyte has not yet appeared at the end of
experiment. These experiments also showed a marked CD34+ and c-kit+ gene
expression on RT-PCR examination.
CONCLUSION: reversine increase plasticity of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cell to generate cardiomyocyte after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine induction. CD34+ and 
c-kit+ may be a marker for cardiomyocyte progenitor cells.

PMID: 22451181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2012;100:253-77. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387786-4.00008-7.

Transcription factor pathways and congenital heart disease.

McCulley DJ(1), Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.

Congenital heart disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality throughout
life. Mutations in numerous transcription factors have been identified in
patients and families with some of the most common forms of cardiac malformations
and arrhythmias. This review discusses transcription factor pathways known to be 
important for normal heart development and how abnormalities in these pathways
have been linked to morphological and functional forms of congenital heart
defects. A comprehensive, current list of known transcription factor mutations
associated with congenital heart disease is provided, but the review focuses
primarily on three key transcription factors, Nkx2-5, GATA4, and Tbx5, and their 
known biochemical and genetic partners. By understanding the interaction
partners, transcriptional targets, and upstream activators of these core cardiac 
transcription factors, additional information about normal heart formation and
further insight into genes and pathways affected in congenital heart disease
should result.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684448
PMID: 22449847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2012;100:143-69. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387786-4.00005-1.

Regulation of GATA4 transcriptional activity in cardiovascular development and
disease.

Zhou P(1), He A, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Transcription factors regulate formation and function of the heart, and
perturbation of transcription factor expression and regulation disrupts normal
heart structure and function. Multiple mechanisms regulate the level and
locus-specific activity of transcription factors, including transcription,
translation, subcellular localization, posttranslational modifications, and
context-dependent interactions with other transcription factors, chromatin
remodeling enzymes, and epigenetic regulators. The zinc finger transcription
factor GATA4 is among the best-studied cardiac transcriptional factors. This
review focuses on molecular mechanisms that regulate GATA4 transcriptional
activity in the cardiovascular system, providing a framework to investigate and
understand the molecular regulation of cardiac gene transcription by other
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22449843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;4(2):97-107. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjs002. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Cardiac-specific knockout of ET(A) receptor mitigates low ambient
temperature-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction.

Zhang Y(1), Li L, Hua Y, Nunn JM, Dong F, Yanagisawa M, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710032, China.

Cold exposure is associated with oxidative stress and cardiac dysfunction. The
endothelin (ET) system, which plays a key role in myocardial homeostasis, may
participate in cold exposure-induced cardiovascular dysfunction. This study was
designed to examine the role of ET-1 in cold stress-induced cardiac geometric and
contractile responses. Wild-type (WT) and ET(A) receptor knockout (ETAKO) mice
were assigned to normal or cold exposure (4°C) environment for 2 and 5 weeks
prior to evaluation of cardiac geometry, contractile, and intracellular Ca(2+)
properties. Levels of the temperature sensor transient receptor potential
vanilloid (TRPV1), mitochondrial proteins for biogenesis and oxidative
phosphorylation, including UCP2, HSP90, and PGC1a were evaluated. Cold stress
triggered cardiac hypertrophy, depressed myocardial contractile capacity,
including fractional shortening, peak shortening, and maximal velocity of
shortening/relengthening, reduced intracellular Ca(2+) release, prolonged
intracellular Ca(2+) decay and relengthening duration, generation of ROS and
superoxide, as well as apoptosis, the effects of which were blunted by ETAKO.
Western blotting revealed downregulated TRPV1 and PGC1a as well as upregulated
UCP2 and activation of GSK3ß, GATA4, and CREB in cold-stressed WT mouse hearts,
which were obliterated by ETAKO. Levels of HSP90, an essential regulator for
thermotolerance, were unchanged. The TRPV1 agonist SA13353 attenuated whereas
TRPV1 antagonist capsazepine mimicked cold stress- or ET-1-induced cardiac
anomalies. The GSK3ß inhibitor SB216763 ablated cold stress-induced cardiac
contractile (but not remodeling) changes and ET-1-induced TRPV1 downregulation.
These data suggest that ETAKO protects against cold exposure-induced cardiac
remodeling and dysfunction mediated through TRPV1 and mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC3612005
PMID: 22442497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Endocrinology. 2012 May;153(5):2474-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1969. Epub 2012 Mar 
20.

Loss of GATA-6 and GATA-4 in granulosa cells blocks folliculogenesis, ovulation, 
and follicle stimulating hormone receptor expression leading to female
infertility.

Bennett J(1), Wu YG, Gossen J, Zhou P, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Single GATA-6 (G6(gcko)), GATA-4 (G4(gcko)), and double GATA-4/6 (G4/6(gcko))
granulosa cell-specific knockout mice were generated to further investigate the
role of GATA transcription factors in ovarian function in vivo. No reproductive
defects were found in G6(gcko) animals. G4(gcko) animals were subfertile as
indicated by the reduced number of pups per litter and the release of
significantly fewer oocytes at ovulation. In marked contrast, G4/6(gcko) females 
fail to ovulate and are infertile. Furthermore, G4/6(gcko) females had irregular 
estrous cycles, which correlate with the abnormal ovarian histology found in
unstimulated adult G4/6(gcko) females showing lack of follicular development and 
increased follicular atresia. Moreover, treatment with exogenous gonadotropins
did not rescue folliculogenesis or ovulation in double-knockout G4/6(gcko) mice. 
In addition, ovary weight and estradiol levels were significantly reduced in
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko) animals when compared with control and G6(gcko) mice.
Aromatase, P450scc, and LH receptor expression was significantly lower in
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko) mice when compared with control animals. Most
prominently, FSH receptor (FSHR) protein was undetectable in granulosa cells of
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko). Accordingly, gel shift and reporter assays revealed that
GATA-4 binds and stimulates the activity of the FSHR promoter. These results
demonstrate that GATA-4 and GATA-6 are needed for normal ovarian function. Our
data are consistent with a role for GATA-4 in the regulation of the FSHR gene and
provide a possible molecular mechanism to explain the fertility defects observed 
in animals with deficient GATA expression in the ovary.

PMCID: PMC3339651
PMID: 22434075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(10):1830-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06374-11. Epub 2012 Mar 
19.

Cardiac expression of ms1/STARS, a novel gene involved in cardiac development and
disease, is regulated by GATA4.

Ounzain S(1), Kobayashi S, Peterson RE, He A, Motterle A, Samani NJ, Menick DR,
Pu WT, Liang Q, Chong NW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Group, Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Glenfield Hospital,
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. nc69@le.ac.uk

Ms1/STARS is a novel muscle-specific actin-binding protein that specifically
modulates the myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF)-serum response factor
(SRF) regulatory axis within striated muscle. This ms1/STARS-dependent regulatory
axis is of central importance within the cardiac gene regulatory network and has 
been implicated in cardiac development and postnatal cardiac
function/homeostasis. The dysregulation of ms1/STARS is associated with and
causative of pathological cardiac phenotypes, including cardiac hypertrophy and
cardiomyopathy. In order to gain an understanding of the mechanisms governing
ms1/STARS expression in the heart, we have coupled a comparative genomic in
silico analysis with reporter, gain-of-function, and loss-of-function approaches.
Through this integrated analysis, we have identified three evolutionarily
conserved regions (ECRs), a, SINA, and DINA, that act as cis-regulatory modules
and confer differential cardiac cell-specific activity. Two of these ECRs, a and 
DINA, displayed distinct regulatory sensitivity to the core cardiac transcription
factor GATA4. Overall, our results demonstrate that within embryonic, neonatal,
and adult hearts, GATA4 represses ms1/STARS expression with the pathologically
associated depletion of GATA4 (type 1/type 2 diabetic models), resulting in
ms1/STARS upregulation. This GATA4-dependent repression of ms1/STARS expression
has major implications for MRTF-SRF signaling in the context of cardiac
development and disease.

PMCID: PMC3347400
PMID: 22431517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Retrovirology. 2012 Mar 15;9:21. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-21.

The endogenous retrovirus ENS-1 provides active binding sites for transcription
factors in embryonic stem cells that specify extra embryonic tissue.

Mey A(1), Acloque H, Lerat E, Gounel S, Tribollet V, Blanc S, Curton D, Birot AM,
Nieto MA, Samarut J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, CNRS, INRA,
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France. anne.mey@lyon.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Long terminal repeats (LTR) from endogenous retroviruses (ERV) are
source of binding sites for transcription factors which affect the host
regulatory networks in different cell types, including pluripotent cells. The
embryonic epiblast is made of pluripotent cells that are subjected to opposite
transcriptional regulatory networks to give rise to distinct embryonic and
extraembryonic lineages. To assess the transcriptional contribution of ERV to
early developmental processes, we have characterized in vitro and in vivo the
regulation of ENS-1, a host adopted and developmentally regulated ERV that is
expressed in chick embryonic stem cells.
RESULTS: We show that Ens-1 LTR activity is controlled by two transcriptional
pathways that drive pluripotent cells to alternative developmental fates. Indeed,
both Nanog that maintains pluripotency and Gata4 that induces differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm independently activate the LTR. Ets coactivators
are required to support Gata factors' activity thus preventing inappropriate
activation before epigenetic silencing occurs during differentiation. Consistent 
with their expression patterns during chick embryonic development, Gata4, Nanog
and Ets1 are recruited on the LTR in embryonic stem cells; in the epiblast the
complementary expression of Nanog and Gata/Ets correlates with the Ens-1 gene
expression pattern; and Ens-1 transcripts are also detected in the hypoblast, an 
extraembryonic tissue expressing Gata4 and Ets2, but not Nanog. Accordingly, over
expression of Gata4 in embryos induces an ectopic expression of Ens-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that Ens-1 LTR have co-opted conditions required for
the emergence of extraembryonic tissues from pluripotent epiblasts cells. By
providing pluripotent cells with intact binding sites for Gata, Nanog, or both,
Ens-1 LTR may promote distinct transcriptional networks in embryonic stem cells
subpopulations and prime the separation between embryonic and extraembryonic
fates.

PMCID: PMC3362752
PMID: 22420414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Reproduction. 2012 May;143(5):663-72. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0365. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

NR5A1 is required for functional maturation of Sertoli cells during postnatal
development.

Kato T(1), Esaki M, Matsuzawa A, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, Yokohama City University School of
Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

The orphan nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1 (NR5A1 (SF-1)) is expressed in
both Sertoli and Leydig cells in the testes. This study investigates the
postnatal development of the testes of a gonad-specific Nr5a1 knockout (KO)
mouse, in which Nr5a1 was specifically inactivated. The KO testes appeared
histologically normal from postnatal day 0 (P0) until P7. However, disorganized
germ cells, vacuoles, and giant cells appeared by P14 in the seminiferous tubules
of KO but not control mice. Expression of NR5A1 and various factors was examined 
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The number of NR5A1-positive Sertoli cells in the 
KO testes was lower compared with controls at all the developmental stages and
decreased to nearly undetectable levels by P21. IHC for anti-Müllerian hormone
and p27, immature and mature Sertoli cell markers, respectively, indicated a
delay in Sertoli cell maturation in the KO testes. The number of Sertoli
cell-expressing factors involved in Sertoli cell differentiation including WT1,
SOX9, GATA4, and androgen receptor were lower in the KO testes compared with
controls. Furthermore, fewer proliferating cell nuclear antigen-positive
proliferative germ cells were observed, and the number of TUNEL-labeled cells was
significantly higher in the KO testes compared with controls at P14 and P21,
indicating impaired spermatogenesis. IHC for CYP11A1 (SCC) indicated the presence
of steroidogenic Leydig cells in the interstitium of the KO testes at all stages 
examined. These results suggest that NR5A1 is essential for Sertoli cell
maturation and therefore spermatogenesis, during postnatal testis development.

PMID: 22419830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):400-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.19463. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Genome-wide DNA methylation studies suggest distinct DNA methylation patterns in 
pediatric embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas.

Mahoney SE(1), Yao Z, Keyes CC, Tapscott SJ, Diede SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children. While
cytogenetic abnormalities have been well characterized in this disease, aberrant 
epigenetic events such as DNA hypermethylation have not been described in
genome-wide studies. We have analyzed the methylation status of 25,500 promoters 
in normal skeletal muscle, and in cell lines and tumor samples of embryonal and
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma from pediatric patients. We identified over 1,900 CpG
islands that are hypermethylated in rhabdomyosarcomas relative to skeletal
muscle. Genes involved in tissue development, differentiation, and oncogenesis
such as DNAJA4, HES5, IRX1, BMP8A, GATA4, GATA6, ALX3, and P4HTM were
hypermethylated in both RMS cell lines and primary samples, implicating aberrant 
DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, cluster
analysis revealed embryonal and alveolar subtypes had distinct DNA methylation
patterns, with the alveolar subtype being enriched in DNA hypermethylation of
polycomb target genes. These results suggest that DNA methylation signatures may 
aid in the diagnosis and risk stratification of pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma and
help identify new targets for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3368822
PMID: 22419069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032701. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Cell lineage specific distribution of H3K27 trimethylation accumulation in an in 
vitro model for human implantation.

Teklenburg G(1), Weimar CH, Fauser BC, Macklon N, Geijsen N, Heijnen CJ, Chuva de
Sousa Lopes SM, Kuijk EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynaecology, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Female mammals inactivate one of their two X-chromosomes to compensate for the
difference in gene-dosage with males that have just one X-chromosome.
X-chromosome inactivation is initiated by the expression of the non-coding RNA
Xist, which coats the X-chromosome in cis and triggers gene silencing. In early
mouse development the paternal X-chromosome is initially inactivated in all cells
of cleavage stage embryos (imprinted X-inactivation) followed by reactivation of 
the inactivated paternal X-chromosome exclusively in the epiblast precursors of
blastocysts, resulting temporarily in the presence of two active X-chromosomes in
this specific lineage. Shortly thereafter, epiblast cells randomly inactivate
either the maternal or the paternal X-chromosome. XCI is accompanied by the
accumulation of histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) marks on the
condensed X-chromosome. It is still poorly understood how XCI is regulated during
early human development. Here we have investigated lineage development and the
distribution of H3K27me3 foci in human embryos derived from an in-vitro model for
human implantation. In this system, embryos are co-cultured on decidualized
endometrial stromal cells up to day 8, which allows the culture period to be
extended for an additional two days. We demonstrate that after the co-culture
period, the inner cell masses have relatively high cell numbers and that the
GATA4-positive hypoblast lineage and OCT4-positive epiblast cell lineage in these
embryos have segregated. H3K27me3 foci were observed in ~25% of the trophectoderm
cells and in ~7.5% of the hypoblast cells, but not in epiblast cells. In contrast
with day 8 embryos derived from the co-cultures, foci of H3K27me3 were not
observed in embryos at day 5 of development derived from regular IVF-cultures.
These findings indicate that the dynamics of H3K27me3 accumulation on the
X-chromosome in human development is regulated in a lineage specific fashion.

PMCID: PMC3296731
PMID: 22412909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 2012 Apr;139(8):1476-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.079608. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Xenopus Nanos1 is required to prevent endoderm gene expression and apoptosis in
primordial germ cells.

Lai F(1), Singh A, King ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami School of Medicine, 1011 NW
15th St, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Nanos is expressed in multipotent cells, stem cells and primordial germ cells
(PGCs) of organisms as diverse as jellyfish and humans. It functions together
with Pumilio to translationally repress targeted mRNAs. Here we show by
loss-of-function experiments that Xenopus Nanos1 is required to preserve PGC
fate. Morpholino knockdown of maternal Nanos1 resulted in a striking decrease in 
PGCs and a loss of germ cells from the gonads. Lineage tracing and TUNEL staining
reveal that Nanos1-deficient PGCs fail to migrate out of the endoderm. They
appear to undergo apoptosis rather than convert to normal endoderm. Whereas
normal PGCs do not become transcriptionally active until neurula, Nanos1-depleted
PGCs prematurely exhibit a hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain at the midblastula transition. Furthermore, they inappropriately express
somatic genes characteristic of endoderm regulated by maternal VegT, including
Xsox17a, Bix4, Mixer, GATA4 and Edd. We further demonstrate that Pumilio
specifically binds VegT RNA in vitro and represses, along with Nanos1, VegT
translation within PGCs. Repressed VegT RNA in wild-type PGCs is significantly
less stable than VegT in Nanos1-depleted PGCs. Our data indicate that maternal
VegT RNA is an authentic target of Nanos1/Pumilio translational repression. We
propose that Nanos1 functions to translationally repress RNAs that normally
specify endoderm and promote apoptosis, thus preserving the germline.

PMCID: PMC3308181
PMID: 22399685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur Cell Mater. 2012 Feb 23;23:135-46.

Changes in embryonic stem cell colony morphology and early differentiation
markers driven by colloidal crystal topographical cues.

Ji L(1), LaPointe VL, Evans ND, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Prince Consort Road, Imperial College London, London,
SW7 2AZ, UK.

The use of materials properties to guide cell behaviour is an attractive option
for regenerative medicine, where controlling stem cell behaviour is important for
the establishment of a functioning cell population. A wide range of materials
properties have been shown to influence many types of cells but little is known
about the effects of topography on embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In order to
advance this knowledge, we synthesised and characterised substrates formed of
silica colloidal crystal (SCC) microspheres to present highly ordered and
reproducible topographical features from 120-600 nm in diameter. We found that,
compared to cells cultured on flat glass, cells cultured on the SCC substrates
retained transcription of stem cell (Dppa5a, Nanog, and Pou5f1) and endoderm
(Afp, Gata4, Sox17, and Foxa2) markers more similar to undifferentiated ESCs,
suggesting the substrates are restricting differentiation, particularly towards
the endoderm lineage. Additionally, five days after seeding, we observed
strikingly different colony morphology, with cells on the SCC substrates growing 
in spherical colonies approximately ten cells thick, while cells on glass were
growing in flat monolayers. Colonies on the SCC substrates developed a central
pit, which was never observed in cells cultured on glass, and expressed proteins 
related to epithelialisation. Together, these data demonstrate the potential of
using topographical cues to control stem cell behaviour in vitro.

PMID: 22370796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 1;21(11):2485-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds063. Epub 2012 Feb 
24.

Tbx1 is a negative modulator of Mef2c.

Pane LS(1), Zhang Z, Ferrentino R, Huynh T, Cutillo L, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council, 80131 Naples,
Italy.

The developmental role of the T-box transcription factor Tbx1 is exquisitely
dosage-sensitive. In this study, we performed a microarray-based transcriptome
analysis of E9.5 embryo tissues across a previously generated Tbx1 mouse allelic 
series. This analysis identified several genes whose expression was affected by
Tbx1 dosage. Interestingly, we found that the expression of the gene encoding the
cardiogenic transcription factor Mef2c was negatively correlated to Tbx1 dosage. 
In vivo data revealed Mef2c up-regulation in the second heart field (SHF) of Tbx1
null mutant embryos compared with wild-type littermates at E9.5. Conversely,
Mef2c expression was decreased in the SHF and in somites of Tbx1 gain-of-function
mutants. These results are consistent with the described role of Tbx1 in
suppressing cardiac progenitor cell differentiation and indicate also a negative 
effect of Tbx1 on Mef2c during skeletal muscle differentiation. We show that Tbx1
occupies conserved regulatory regions of the Mef2c locus, suggesting a direct
effect on Mef2c transcription. However, we also show that Tbx1 interferes with
the Gata4<U+2192> Mef2c regulatory pathway. Overall, our study uncovered a target of
Tbx1 with critical developmental roles, so highlighting the power of the dosage
gradient approach that we used.

PMCID: PMC3349424
PMID: 22367967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030915. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Differences in MEF2 and NFAT transcriptional pathways according to human heart
failure aetiology.

Cortés R(1), Rivera M, Roselló-Lletí E, Martínez-Dolz L, Almenar L, Azorín I,
Lago F, González-Juanatey JR, Portolés M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Research Center, Hospital Universitario La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Ca(2+) handling machinery modulates the activation of cardiac
transcription pathways involved in heart failure (HF). The present study
investigated the effect of HF aetiology on Ca(+2) handling proteins and NFAT1,
MEF2C and GATA4 (transcription factors) in the same cardiac tissue.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 83 hearts from ischemic (ICM,
n<U+200A>=<U+200A>43) and dilated (DCM, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>31) patients undergoing heart transplantation and
controls (CNT, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9) were analyzed by western blotting. Subcellular distribution
was analyzed by fluorescence and electron microscopy. When we compared Ca(+2)
handling proteins according to HF aetiology, ICM showed higher levels of
calmodulin (24%, p<0.01), calcineurin (26%, p<0.01) and
Ca(2+)/Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKIId(b) nuclear isoform 62%, p<0.001)
than the CNT group. However, these proteins in DCM did not significantly
increase. Furthermore, ICM showed a significant elevation in MEF2C (33%, p<0.01),
and GATA4 (49%, p<0.05); also NFAT1 (66%, p<0.001) was increased, producing the
resultant translocation of this transcriptional factor into the nuclei. These
results were supported by fluorescence and electron microscopy analysis. Whereas,
DCM only had a significant increase in GATA4 (52%, p<0.05). Correlations between 
NFAT1 and MEF2C in both groups (ICM r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.38 and DCM r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.59, p<0.05 and p<0.01,
respectively) were found; only ICM showed a correlation between GATA4 and NFAT1
(r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.37, p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study shows an increase of Ca(2+) handling
machinery synthesis and their cardiac transcription pathways in HF, being more
markedly increased in ICM. Furthermore, there is a significant association
between MEF2, NFAT1 and GATA4. These proteins could be therapeutic targets to
improve myocardial function.

PMCID: PMC3281902
PMID: 22363514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030865. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Retinoic acid signaling plays a restrictive role in zebrafish primitive
myelopoiesis.

Liang D(1), Jia W, Li J, Li K, Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center, MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease
Study, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Retinoic acid (RA) is known to regulate definitive myelopoiesis but its role in
vertebrate primitive myelopoiesis remains unclear. Here we report that zebrafish 
primitive myelopoiesis is restricted by RA in a dose dependent manner mainly
before 11 hpf (hours post fertilization) when anterior hemangioblasts are
initiated to form. RA treatment significantly reduces expressions of anterior
hemangioblast markers scl, lmo2, gata2 and etsrp in the rostral end of ALPM
(anterior lateral plate mesoderm) of the embryos. The result indicates that RA
restricts primitive myelopoiesis by suppressing formation of anterior
hemangioblasts. Analyses of ALPM formation suggest that the defective primitive
myelopoiesis resulting from RA treatment before late gastrulation may be
secondary to global loss of cells for ALPM fate whereas the developmental defect 
resulting from RA treatment during 10-11 hpf should be due to ALPM patterning
shift. Overexpressions of scl and lmo2 partially rescue the block of primitive
myelopoiesis in the embryos treated with 250 nM RA during 10-11 hpf, suggesting
RA acts upstream of scl to control primitive myelopoiesis. However, the RA
treatment blocks the increased primitive myelopoiesis caused by overexpressing
gata4/6 whereas the abolished primitive myelopoiesis in gata4/5/6 depleted
embryos is well rescued by 4-diethylamino-benzaldehyde, a retinal dehydrogenase
inhibitor, or partially rescued by knocking down aldh1a2, the major retinal
dehydrogenase gene that is responsible for RA synthesis during early development.
Consistently, overexpressing gata4/6 inhibits aldh1a2 expression whereas
depleting gata4/5/6 increases aldh1a2 expression. The results reveal that RA
signaling acts downstream of gata4/5/6 to control primitive myelopoiesis. But,
4-diethylamino-benzaldehyde fails to rescue the defective primitive myelopoiesis 
in either cloche embryos or lycat morphants. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that RA signaling restricts zebrafish primitive myelopoiesis through 
acting downstream of gata4/5/6, upstream of, or parallel to, cloche, and upstream
of scl.

PMCID: PMC3281886
PMID: 22363502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Pathol. 2012 May;227(1):29-41. doi: 10.1002/path.4003. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

A whole-genome massively parallel sequencing analysis of BRCA1 mutant oestrogen
receptor-negative and -positive breast cancers.

Natrajan R(1), Mackay A, Lambros MB, Weigelt B, Wilkerson PM, Manie E,
Grigoriadis A, A'hern R, van der Groep P, Kozarewa I, Popova T, Mariani O,
Turajlic S, Furney SJ, Marais R, Rodruigues DN, Flora AC, Wai P, Pawar V, McDade 
S, Carroll J, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Green AR, Ellis IO, Swanton C, van Diest P,
Delattre O, Lord CJ, Foulkes WD, Vincent-Salomon A, Ashworth A, Henri Stern M,
Reis-Filho JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, SW3 6JB, UK.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2012 Jul;227(3):267-9.

BRCA1 encodes a tumour suppressor protein that plays pivotal roles in homologous 
recombination (HR) DNA repair, cell-cycle checkpoints, and transcriptional
regulation. BRCA1 germline mutations confer a high risk of early-onset breast and
ovarian cancer. In more than 80% of cases, tumours arising in BRCA1 germline
mutation carriers are oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative; however, up to 15% are
ER-positive. It has been suggested that BRCA1 ER-positive breast cancers
constitute sporadic cancers arising in the context of a BRCA1 germline mutation
rather than being causally related to BRCA1 loss-of-function. Whole-genome
massively parallel sequencing of ER-positive and ER-negative BRCA1 breast
cancers, and their respective germline DNAs, was used to characterize the genetic
landscape of BRCA1 cancers at base-pair resolution. Only BRCA1 germline
mutations, somatic loss of the wild-type allele, and TP53 somatic mutations were 
recurrently found in the index cases. BRCA1 breast cancers displayed a mutational
signature consistent with that caused by lack of HR DNA repair in both
ER-positive and ER-negative cases. Sequencing analysis of independent cohorts of 
hereditary BRCA1 and sporadic non-BRCA1 breast cancers for the presence of
recurrent pathogenic mutations and/or homozygous deletions found in the index
cases revealed that DAPK3, TMEM135, KIAA1797, PDE4D, and GATA4 are potential
additional drivers of breast cancers. This study demonstrates that BRCA1
pathogenic germline mutations coupled with somatic loss of the wild-type allele
are not sufficient for hereditary breast cancers to display an ER-negative
phenotype, and has led to the identification of three potential novel breast
cancer genes (ie DAPK3, TMEM135, and GATA4).

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22362584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):814-20. doi: 10.1172/JCI60224. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

MCM4 mutation causes adrenal failure, short stature, and natural killer cell
deficiency in humans.

Hughes CR(1), Guasti L, Meimaridou E, Chuang CH, Schimenti JC, King PJ, Costigan 
C, Clark AJ, Metherell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey
Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
London,, UK.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):798-801.

An interesting variant of familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD), an autosomal 
recessive form of adrenal failure, exists in a genetically isolated Irish
population. In addition to hypocortisolemia, affected children show signs of
growth failure, increased chromosomal breakage, and NK cell deficiency. Targeted 
exome sequencing in 8 patients identified a variant (c.71-1insG) in
minichromosome maintenance-deficient 4 (MCM4) that was predicted to result in a
severely truncated protein (p.Pro24ArgfsX4). Western blotting of patient samples 
revealed that the major 96-kDa isoform present in unaffected human controls was
absent, while the presence of the minor 85-kDa isoform was preserved.
Interestingly, histological studies with Mcm4-depleted mice showed grossly
abnormal adrenal morphology that was characterized by non-steroidogenic GATA4-
and Gli1-positive cells within the steroidogenic cortex, which reduced the number
of steroidogenic cells in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex. Since MCM4 
is one part of a MCM2-7 complex recently confirmed as the replicative helicase
essential for normal DNA replication and genome stability in all eukaryotes, it
is possible that our patients may have an increased risk of neoplastic change. In
summary, we have identified what we believe to be the first human mutation in
MCM4 and have shown that it is associated with adrenal insufficiency, short
stature, and NK cell deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3287227
PMID: 22354170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Physiol Genomics. 2012 May 1;44(9):518-41. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00013.2012. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Human gene copy number spectra analysis in congenital heart malformations.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Mahnke DK, Struble CA, Tuffnell ME, Stamm KD, Hidestrand M,
Harris SE, Goetsch MA, Simpson PM, Bick DP, Broeckel U, Pelech AN, Tweddell JS,
Mitchell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. amitchell@mcw.edu

The clinical significance of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital heart
disease (CHD) continues to be a challenge. Although CNVs including genes can
confer disease risk, relationships between gene dosage and phenotype are still
being defined. Our goal was to perform a quantitative analysis of CNVs involving 
100 well-defined CHD risk genes identified through previously published human
association studies in subjects with anatomically defined cardiac malformations. 
A novel analytical approach permitting CNV gene frequency "spectra" to be
computed over prespecified regions to determine phenotype-gene dosage
relationships was employed. CNVs in subjects with CHD (n = 945), subphenotyped
into 40 groups and verified in accordance with the European Paediatric Cardiac
Code, were compared with two control groups, a disease-free cohort (n = 2,026)
and a population with coronary artery disease (n = 880). Gains (=200 kb) and
losses (=100 kb) were determined over 100 CHD risk genes and compared using a
Barnard exact test. Six subphenotypes showed significant enrichment (P = 0.05),
including aortic stenosis (valvar), atrioventricular canal (partial),
atrioventricular septal defect with tetralogy of Fallot, subaortic stenosis,
tetralogy of Fallot, and truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, CNV gene frequency
spectra were enriched (P = 0.05) for losses at: FKBP6, ELN, GTF2IRD1, GATA4,
CRKL, TBX1, ATRX, GPC3, BCOR, ZIC3, FLNA and MID1; and gains at: PRKAB2, FMO5,
CHD1L, BCL9, ACP6, GJA5, HRAS, GATA6 and RUNX1. Of CHD subjects, 14% had causal
chromosomal abnormalities, and 4.3% had likely causal (significantly enriched),
large, rare CNVs. CNV frequency spectra combined with precision phenotyping may
lead to increased molecular understanding of etiologic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3426426
PMID: 22318994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030677. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

ISL1 directly regulates FGF10 transcription during human cardiac outflow
formation.

Golzio C(1), Havis E, Daubas P, Nuel G, Babarit C, Munnich A, Vekemans M, Zaffran
S, Lyonnet S, Etchevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America.

The LIM homeodomain gene Islet-1 (ISL1) encodes a transcription factor that has
been associated with the multipotency of human cardiac progenitors, and in mice
enables the correct deployment of second heart field (SHF) cells to become the
myocardium of atria, right ventricle and outflow tract. Other markers have been
identified that characterize subdomains of the SHF, such as the fibroblast growth
factor Fgf10 in its anterior region. While functional evidence of its essential
contribution has been demonstrated in many vertebrate species, SHF expression of 
Isl1 has been shown in only some models. We examined the relationship between
human ISL1 and FGF10 within the embryonic time window during which the linear
heart tube remodels into four chambers. ISL1 transcription demarcated an
anatomical region supporting the conserved existence of a SHF in humans, and
transcription factors of the GATA family were co-expressed therein. In
conjunction, we identified a novel enhancer containing a highly conserved ISL1
consensus binding site within the FGF10 first intron. ChIP and EMSA demonstrated 
its direct occupation by ISL1. Transcription mediated by ISL1 from this FGF10
intronic element was enhanced by the presence of GATA4 and TBX20 cardiac
transcription factors. Finally, transgenic mice confirmed that endogenous factors
bound the human FGF10 intronic enhancer to drive reporter expression in the
developing cardiac outflow tract. These findings highlight the interest of
examining developmental regulatory networks directly in human tissues, when
possible, to assess candidate non-coding regions that may be responsible for
congenital malformations.

PMCID: PMC3267757
PMID: 22303449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):10853-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.337030. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Undersulfation of heparan sulfate restricts differentiation potential of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Forsberg M(1), Holmborn K, Kundu S, Dagälv A, Kjellén L, Forsberg-Nilsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 582, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans, present on cell surfaces and in the extracellular 
matrix, interact with growth factors and morphogens to influence growth and
differentiation of cells. The sulfation pattern of the heparan sulfate chains
formed during biosynthesis in the Golgi compartment will determine the
interaction potential of the proteoglycan. The glucosaminyl
N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (NDST) enzymes have a key role during
biosynthesis, greatly influencing total sulfation of the heparan sulfate chains. 
The differentiation potential of mouse embryonic stem cells lacking both NDST1
and NDST2 was studied using in vitro differentiation protocols, expression of
differentiation markers, and assessment of the ability of the cells to respond to
growth factors. The results show that NDST1 and NDST2 are dispensable for
mesodermal differentiation into osteoblasts but necessary for induction of
adipocytes and neural cells. Gene expression analysis suggested a differentiation
block at the primitive ectoderm stage. Also, GATA4, a primitive endoderm marker, 
was expressed by these cells. The addition of FGF4 or FGF2 together with heparin 
rescued the differentiation potential to neural progenitors and further to mature
neurons and glia. Our results suggest that the embryonic stem cells lacking both 
NDST1 and NDST2, expressing a very low sulfated heparan sulfate, can take the
initial step toward differentiation into all three germ layers. Except for their 
potential for mesodermal differentiation into osteoblasts, the cells are then
arrested in a primitive ectoderm and/or endoderm stage.

PMCID: PMC3322844
PMID: 22298785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Jul 31;167(2):436-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.01.015. Epub
2012 Jan 30.

Increase in cardiac M2-muscarinic receptor expression is regulated by GATA
binding protein 4 (GATA-4) in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Mar GY(1), Ku PM, Chen LJ, Cheng KC, Li YX, Cheng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung City 
81301, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: An increase in cardiac M2-muscarinic receptor (M2-mAChR) expression
in diabetic rats has been observed, but the molecular mechanism of this increase 
remains unclear. The transcriptional activity of GATA binding protein 4 (GATA-4) 
has been documented to regulate the expression of M2-mAChR genes. In this study, 
we were interested in identifying the role of GATA-4 in the increase in M2-mAChR 
in diabetic rats and a primary culture of cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: Streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats (STZ-rats) and high-glucose
(D-glucose 30 mM, 24h)-treated primary cultures of cardiomyocytes from neonatal
rats were used to investigate the role of GATA-4 in the change in M2-mAChR. The
protein expression was determined by Western blot analysis. Phlorizin
(Na(+)-glucose co-transport inhibitor), insulin, tiron (radical scavenger),
PD98059 (ERK inhibitor) and SB203580 (p38 inhibitor) were used. We also silenced 
GATA-4 by RNAi to investigate the changes in M2-mAChR expression.
RESULTS: The cardiac output was reduced in STZ-rats with a higher expression of
M2-mAChR or phosphorylated GATA-4 in the heart. These changes were reversed after
correction of the blood sugar level. In cardiomyocytes, high glucose treatment
also increased M2-mAChR expression and GATA-4 phosphorylation. These changes were
reversed by tiron (ROS scavenger) or PD98059 (MEK/ERK inhibitor). However, an
increase in M2-mAChR expression was not observed when GATA-4 was silenced by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) in cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that hyperglycemia can cause a higher expression of
M2-mAChR in cardiomyocytes mainly through ROS to enhance MEK/ERK for
phosphorylation of GATA-4.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22293779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Liver Int. 2012 May;32(5):732-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2011.02743.x. Epub
2012 Jan 31.

Novel developmental biology-based protocol of embryonic stem cell differentiation
to morphologically sound and functional yet immature hepatocytes.

Bukong TN(1), Lo T, Szabo G, Dolganiuc A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver diseases are common in the United States and often require
liver transplantation; however, donated organs are limited and thus alternative
sources for liver cells are in high demand. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) can
provide a continuous and readily available source of liver cells. ESC
differentiation to liver cells is yet to be fully understood and comprehensive
differentiation protocols are yet to be defined. Here, we aimed to achieve human 
(h)ESC differentiation into mature hepatocytes using defined recombinant
differentiation factors and metabolites.
METHODS: Embryonic stem cell H1 line was sub-cultured on feeder layer. We induced
hESCs into endodermal differentiation succeeded by early/late hepatic
specification and finally into hepatocyte maturation using step combinations of
Activin A and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 for 7 days; followed by FGF-4 and 
bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) for 7 days, succeeded by FGF-10 + hepatocyte
growth factor 4 + epidermal growth factor for 14 days. Specific
inhibitors/stimulators were added sequentially throughout differentiation. Cells 
were analysed by PCR, flow cytometry, microscopy or functional assays.
RESULTS: Our hESC differentiation protocol resulted in viable cells with
hepatocyte shape and morphology. We observed gradual changes in cell
transcriptome, including up-regulation of differentiation-promoting GATA4, GATA6,
POU5F1 and HNF4 transcription factors, steady levels of stemness-promoting SOX-2 
and low levels of Nanog, as defined by PCR. The hESC-derived hepatocytes
expressed alpha-antitrypsin, CD81, cytokeratin 8 and low density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor. The levels of alpha-fetoprotein and proliferation marker Ki-67 in
hESC-derived hepatocytes remained elevated. Unlike stem cells, the hESC-derived
hepatocytes performed LDL uptake, produced albumin and alanine aminotransferase
and had functional alcohol dehydrogenase.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel protocol for hESC differentiation into
morphological and functional yet immature hepatocytes as an alternative method
for hepatocyte generation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22292891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Chromosome Res. 2012 Jan;20(1):215-38. doi: 10.1007/s10577-012-9274-3.

Mammalian sex determinationinsights from humans and mice.

Eggers S(1), Sinclair A.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital and
Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.

Disorders of sex development (DSD) are congenital conditions in which the
development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomical sex is atypical. Many of the
genes required for gonad development have been identified by analysis of DSD
patients. However, the use of knockout and transgenic mouse strains have
contributed enormously to the study of gonad gene function and interactions
within the development network. Although the genetic basis of mammalian sex
determination and differentiation has advanced considerably in recent years, a
majority of 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis patients still cannot be provided with an
accurate diagnosis. Some of these unexplained DSD cases may be due to mutations
in novel DSD genes or genomic rearrangements affecting regulatory regions that
lead to atypical gene expression. Here, we review our current knowledge of
mammalian sex determination drawing on insights from human DSD patients and mouse
models.

PMCID: PMC3279640
PMID: 22290220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2012 Mar;139(5):871-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.071688. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

The roles of FGF and MAP kinase signaling in the segregation of the epiblast and 
hypoblast cell lineages in bovine and human embryos.

Kuijk EW(1), van Tol LT, Van de Velde H, Wubbolts R, Welling M, Geijsen N, Roelen
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

At the blastocyst stage of mammalian pre-implantation development, three distinct
cell lineages have formed: trophectoderm, hypoblast (primitive endoderm) and
epiblast. The inability to derive embryonic stem (ES) cell lines in a variety of 
species suggests divergence between species in the cell signaling pathways
involved in early lineage specification. In mouse, segregation of the primitive
endoderm lineage from the pluripotent epiblast lineage depends on FGF/MAP kinase 
signaling, but it is unknown whether this is conserved between species. Here we
examined segregation of the hypoblast and epiblast lineages in bovine and human
embryos through modulation of FGF/MAP kinase signaling pathways in cultured
embryos. Bovine embryos stimulated with FGF4 and heparin form inner cell masses
(ICMs) composed entirely of hypoblast cells and no epiblast cells. Inhibition of 
MEK in bovine embryos results in ICMs with increased epiblast precursors and
decreased hypoblast precursors. The hypoblast precursor population was not fully 
ablated upon MEK inhibition, indicating that other factors are involved in
hypoblast differentiation. Surprisingly, inhibition of FGF signaling upstream of 
MEK had no effects on epiblast and hypoblast precursor numbers in bovine
development, suggesting that GATA6 expression is not dependent on FGF signaling. 
By contrast, in human embryos, inhibition of MEK did not significantly alter
epiblast or hypoblast precursor numbers despite the ability of the MEK inhibitor 
to potently inhibit ERK phosphorylation in human ES cells. These findings
demonstrate intrinsic differences in early mammalian development in the role of
the FGF/MAP kinase signaling pathways in governing hypoblast versus epiblast
lineage choices.

PMCID: PMC3274353
PMID: 22278923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 May;130(1-2):45-56. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.12.010. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Involvement of transcription factor GATA-4 in regulation of CYP19 gene during
folliculogenesis and luteinization in buffalo ovary.

Monga R(1), Ghai S, Datta TK, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Animal Biochemistry Division, National
Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal, Haryana, India.

CYP19 gene encode aromatase, the key enzyme of estrogen biosynthesis, is
regulated in species- and tissue-specific manner by alternate use of different
promoters. Previously, we have reported the cloning and characterization of
tissue-specific promoter and transcripts in buffalo ovary and placenta. In human 
and rat ovary, FSH induces the phosphorylation of transcription factor CREB (cAMP
response element binding protein) through PKA pathway which binds to cAMP
response element like sequence (CLS) in CYP19 gene ovarian promoter. However, in 
buffalo as well as in bovine, in silico analysis of ovary specific promoter
sequence identified a single base pair deletion in CLS site and is designated as 
CLS-like sequence. To understand if CLS with a point mutation is still a
functional cis-element and is involved in FSH stimulated transactivation of CYP19
gene in buffalo ovary, the present study was thus aimed to functionally
characterize the role of buffalo CLS in CYP19 gene transactivation. We also
studied the involvement of GATA-4, having consensus binding sites in CYP19 gene
ovarian promoter in the vicinity of CLS during different stages of the buffalo
estrus cycle. Reporter construct analyses and EMSA results showed that CLS is
playing no significant role in CYP19 gene regulation in buffalo ovary. Real time 
absolute quantification of GATA-4 showed the differential expression of GATA-4
mRNA during folliculogenesis and luteinization with significantly higher
transcript abundance in large follicle in comparison to other tissues. Western
blot analysis of granulosa cells nuclear protein isolated from different stage of
follicular development (small and large follicles) and differentiation (corpus
luteum) showed that abundance of phosphorylated GATA-4 (Ser261) was significantly
higher in granulosa cell nuclear protein of large follicles as compared to small 
follicles and corpora lutea. Interestingly, binding studies using ChIP showed
significantly enhanced binding to the CYP19 gene promoter in large follicle which
was seen to be declined in the luteal tissue. Similar results were obtained in
the in vitro experiments as well. Finally, RNAi experiments were performed to
validate the involvement of GATA-4 in CYP19 gene regulation. Results of RNAi
showed that knockdown of GATA-4 mRNA significantly declined CYP19 gene mRNA as
well as 17ß-estradiol contents. In conclusion, result of the present study
indicated that that in the absence of consensus CRE (cAMP response element);
GATA-4 could be a downstream effector of cAMP/PKA pathway in regulation of CYP19 
gene during folliculogenesis and luteinization.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):9827-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.338749. Epub 2012
Jan 6.

Transcription factor GATA4 is activated but not required for insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF1)-induced cardiac hypertrophy.

Bisping E(1), Ikeda S, Sedej M, Wakula P, McMullen JR, Tarnavski O, Sedej S,
Izumo S, Pu WT, Pieske B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036
Graz, Austria.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) promotes a physiological type of cardiac
hypertrophy and has therapeutic effects in heart disease. Here, we report the
relationship of IGF1 to GATA4, an essential transcription factor in cardiac
hypertrophy and cell survival. In cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, we 
compared the responses to IGF1 (10 nmol/liter) and phenylephrine (PE, 20
µmol/liter), a known GATA4 activator, in concentrations promoting a similar
extent of hypertrophy. IGF1 and PE both increased nuclear accumulation of GATA4
and phosphorylation at Ser(105) (PE, 2.4-fold; IGF1, 1.8-fold; both, p < 0.05)
and increased GATA4 DNA binding activity as indicated by ELISA and by chromatin
IP of selected promoters. Although IGF1 and PE each activated GATA4 to the same
degree, GATA4 knockdown by RNA interference only blocked hypertrophy by PE but
not by IGF1. PE induction of a panel of GATA4 target genes (Nppa, Nppb, Tnni3,
Myl1, and Acta1) was inhibited by GATA4 knockdown. In contrast, IGF1 regulated
only Acta1 in a GATA4-dependent fashion. Consistent with the in vitro findings,
Gata4 haploinsufficiency in mice did not alter cardiac structure, hyperdynamic
function, or antifibrotic effects induced by myocardial overexpression of the
IGF1 receptor. Our data indicate that GATA4 is activated by the IGF1 pathway, but
although it is required for responses to pathological stimuli, it is not
necessary for the effects of IGF1 on cardiac structure and function.

PMCID: PMC3323002
PMID: 22228770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1823(2):582-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.12.009.
Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Involvement of ERK-RSK cascade in phenylephrine-induced phosphorylation of GATA4.

Li T(1), Liu Z, Hu X, Ma K, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal
University, 688 Yingbin Road, Jinhua, Zhejiang, 321004, China. litao@zjnu.cn

GATA4 has been characterized as a crucial regulator of cardiac development and
hypertrophy. Multiple signaling pathways involving MAPK contribute to GATA4
activation via direct phosphorylation. MSK and RSK are two kinase families
mediating signal transduction downstream of the MAPK cascade. In this study, we
investigated the effects of MSK and RSK on GATA4 activation. Overexpression of
RSK2 greatly increased phosphorylation of GATA4 at Ser261. This phosphorylation
enhanced its transcriptional and DNA binding activity. RSK-dependent
phosphorylation of GATA4 also led to enhanced interaction with NKX2.5 and p300.
Sequential phosphorylation of the ERK-RSK-GATA4 cascade and nuclear accumulation 
of RSK in cardiomyocytes were observed after phenylephrine treatment. Inhibition 
of RSK using the small molecule SL0101 abrogated GATA4 phosphorylation at Ser261,
ultimately leading to a repression of fetal cardiac genes. Adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of MSK1 had no direct effect on GATA4 phosphorylation but
increased GATA4 expression. Together with GATA4 phosphorylation at Ser105 by
ERK1/2, our findings show dual phosphorylation of GATA4 by the ERK-RSK cascade
and suggest that MSK and RSK have distinct effects in PE-induced cardiac
hypertrophic response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22227582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Negat Results Biomed. 2012 Jan 6;11:3. doi: 10.1186/1477-5751-11-3.

5-Azacytidine is insufficient for cardiogenesis in human adipose-derived stem
cells.

Wan Safwani WK(1), Makpol S, Sathapan S, Chua KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Adipose tissue is a source of multipotent adult stem cells and it has
the ability to differentiate into several types of cell lineages such as neuron
cells, osteogenic cells and adipogenic cells. Several reports have shown
adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) have the ability to undergo cardiomyogenesis.
Studies have shown 5-azacytidine can successfully drive stem cells such as bone
marrow derived stem cells to differentiate into cardiomyogenic cells. Therefore, 
in this study, we investigated the effect 5-azacytidine on the cardiogenic
ability of ASCs.
METHODS: The cardiogenic potential of ASCs was analysed by studying the
morphological changes after induction, the changes in the cardiogenic genes
expression i.e. GATA4, MLC-2v, MLC-2a, NKX2.5, ß-MHC, a-MHC, Atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP), Connexin 43, Cardiac Troponin C, Cardiac Troponin I and myocyte
enhancer factor (MEF2C) and the changes of embryonic stem cells genes expression 
at P5 and P10 using quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Our results showed that the induced ASCs did not show significant
morphological difference compared to the non-induced ASCs. While quantitative PCR
data indicated that most cardiogenic genes and stemness genes expression level
decreased after induction at P5 and P10.
CONCLUSION: 5-azacytidine is insufficient for the cardiogenic induction of the
ASCs.

PMCID: PMC3274438
PMID: 22221649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Mar 15;93(4):645-54. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs001. Epub 2012 Jan 
4.

GATA4 expression is primarily regulated via a miR-26b-dependent
post-transcriptional mechanism during cardiac hypertrophy.

Han M(1), Yang Z, Sayed D, He M, Gao S, Lin L, Yoon S, Abdellatif M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, 
USA.

AIMS: GATA4 is a transcription factor that is up-regulated during cardiac
hypertrophy and plays a fundamental role in myocyte growth and survival. In this 
study, we investigate the transcriptional vs. post-transcriptional mechanisms
that are involved in regulating GATA4 in the heart during neonatal and pressure
overload-induced hypertrophic growth.
METHODS AND RESULTS: GATA4 protein is significantly higher during pressure
overload-induced (2.9 ± 0.4-fold) and neonatal (6.8 ± 1-fold) hypertrophic growth
vs. the normal adult mouse heart. Using RNA polymerase II immunoprecipitation
combined with deep sequencing, we confirmed that active transcription of the
Gata4 gene remained unchanged during hypertrophy, whereas it was two-fold higher 
in the neonatal vs. adult heart, commensurate with the mRNA levels. These results
suggested a post-transcriptional mode of regulation of its expression, which
prompted the identification of a conserved sequence in its 3'-untranslated region
that was responsible for reduced translation via miR-26b. Overexpression of
miR-26b reduced GATA4-dependent transcription, endothelin-induced hypertrophy,
and sensitized the cells to apoptotic insults. Additionally, miR-26b targeted
phospholipase C-ß1, which, in turn, inhibited miR-26b expression, creating a
double-negative feedback loop. Accordingly, overexpression of miR-26b in the
heart inhibited up-regulation of its targets and the development of hypertrophy. 
However, knockdown of miR-26b is not sufficient for inducing hypertrophy.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of miR-26b in the heart is required for the
up-regulation of GATA4 and the induction of pressure-induced cardiac hypertrophy.
The results also underscore the functional relevance of miRNAs in regulating gene
expression during cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3291090
PMID: 22219180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genes Dev. 2012 Jan 1;26(1):37-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.173930.111.

PRC2 directly methylates GATA4 and represses its transcriptional activity.

He A(1), Shen X, Ma Q, Cao J, von Gise A, Zhou P, Wang G, Marquez VE, Orkin SH,
Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) promotes tissue-specific differentiation by 
depositing trimethylated histone H3 Lys 27 (H3K27me3) epigenetic marks to silence
ectopic gene expression programs. Here, we show that EZH2, the catalytic subunit 
of PRC2, is required for cardiac morphogenesis. Both in vitro and in fetal
hearts, EZH2 interacted with cardiac transcription factor GATA4 and directly
methylated it at Lys 299. PRC2 methylation of GATA4 attenuated its
transcriptional activity by reducing its interaction with and acetylation by
p300. Our results reveal a new mechanism of PRC2-mediated transcriptional
repression in which PRC2 methylates a transcription factor to inhibit its
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3258964
PMID: 22215809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Pathol. 2012 Mar;180(3):929-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.11.007. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

The NF-<U+03BA>B subunit c-Rel stimulates cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis.

Gaspar-Pereira S(1), Fullard N, Townsend PA, Banks PS, Ellis EL, Fox C, Maxwell
AG, Murphy LB, Kirk A, Bauer R, Caamaño JH, Figg N, Foo RS, Mann J, Mann DA,
Oakley F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom.

Cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy are the pathological consequences of
cardiovascular disease and are correlated with its associated mortality. Activity
of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B is increased in the diseased heart; however,
our present understanding of how the individual subunits contribute to
cardiovascular disease is limited. We assign a new role for the c-Rel subunit as 
a stimulator of cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. We discovered that
c-Rel-deficient mice have smaller hearts at birth, as well as during adulthood,
and are protected from developing cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis after chronic 
angiotensin infusion. Results of both gene expression and cross-linked chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assay analyses identified transcriptional activators of
hypertrophy, myocyte enhancer family, Gata4, and Tbx proteins as Rel gene
targets. We suggest that the p50 subunit could limit the prohypertrophic actions 
of c-Rel in the normal heart, because p50 overexpression in H9c2 cells repressed 
c-Rel levels and the absence of cardiac p50 was associated with increases in both
c-Rel levels and cardiac hypertrophy. We report for the first time that c-Rel is 
highly expressed and confined to the nuclei of diseased adult human hearts but is
restricted to the cytoplasm of normal cardiac tissues. We conclude that
c-Rel-dependent signaling is critical for both cardiac remodeling and
hypertrophy. Targeting its activities could offer a novel therapeutic strategy to
limit the effects of cardiac disease.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314915
PMID: 22210479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2012 Jan;13(1):20-8. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1100117.

Effects of insulin-like growth factor-1 on the properties of mesenchymal stem
cells in vitro.

Huang YL(1), Qiu RF, Mai WY, Kuang J, Cai XY, Dong YG, Hu YZ, Song YB, Cai AP,
Jiang ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) on
migration, proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
METHODS: MSCs were obtained from Sprague-Dawley rats by a combination of gradient
centrifugation and cell culture techniques and treated with IGF-1 at
concentrations of 5-20 ng/ml. Proliferation of MSCs was determined as the mean
doubling time. Expression of CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and migration
property were determined by flow cytometry and transwell migration essay,
respectively. mRNA expression of GATA-4 and collagen II was determined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The mean doubling time of MSC proliferation was decreased, and the
expression of CXCR4 on MSCs and migration of MSCs were increased by IGF-1, all in
a dose-dependent manner, while the optimal concentration of IGF-1 on
proliferation and migration was different. IGF-1 did not affect the expression of
GATA-4 or collagen II mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: IGF-1 dose-dependently stimulated the proliferation of MSCs,
upregulated the expression of CXCR4, and accelerated migration. There was no
apparent differentiation of MSCs to cardiomyocytes or chondrocytes after
culturing with IGF-1 alone.

PMCID: PMC3251748
PMID: 22205616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2012 Feb 1;518(1):71-8. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.11.024.
Epub 2011 Dec 16.

PPARa activation inhibits endothelin-1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by
prevention of NFATc4 binding to GATA-4.

Le K(1), Li R, Xu S, Wu X, Huang H, Bao Y, Cai Y, Lan T, Moss J, Li C, Zou J,
Shen X, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa) has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy, although its mechanism of action remains
largely unknown. To determine the effect of PPARa activation on endothelin-1
(ET-1)-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and explore its molecular mechanisms, we
evaluated the interaction of PPARa with nuclear factor of activated T-cells c4
(NFATc4) in nuclei of cardiomyocytes from neonatal rats in primary culture. In
ET-1-stimulated cardiomyocytes, data from electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
(EMSA) and co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) revealed that fenofibrate (Fen), a
PPARa activator, in a concentration-dependent manner, enhanced the association of
NFATc4 with PPARa and decreased its interaction with GATA-4, in promoter
complexes involved in activation of the rat brain natriuretic peptide (rBNP)
gene. Effects of PPARa overexpression were similar to those of its activation by 
Fen. PPARa depletion by small interfering RNA abolished inhibitory effects of Fen
on NFATc4 binding to GATA-4 and the rBNP DNA. Quantitative RT-PCR and confocal
microscopy confirmed inhibitory effects of PPARa activation on elevation of rBNP 
mRNA levels and ET-1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Our results suggest that 
activated PPARa can compete with GATA-4 binding to NFATc4, thereby decreasing
transactivation of NFATc4, and interfering with ET-1 induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3506254
PMID: 22198280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Reprod Dev. 2012;58(2):237-42. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

GATA4 is involved in the gonadal development and maturation of the teleost fish
tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus.

Li J(1), Chen W, Wang D, Zhou L, Sakai F, Guan G, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of the Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081,
China. ljzhong@hunnu.edu.cn

GATA4, a member of the GATA family, is a well-known transcription factor
implicated in the regulation of sex determination and sexual differentiation in
mammals. However, little is known about the possible role of GATA4 in fish
reproduction. In the present study, a full-length GATA4 cDNA from the tilapia was
cloned and characterized. The tilapia GATA4 gene contained an open reading frame 
(ORF) of 1179 nucleotides encoding a protein of 392 amino acids. Sequence
alignment revealed that the tilapia GATA4 protein shared higher homology (ranging
from 63.1 to 74.6%) with other vertebrates. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the
GATA4 gene is expressed in the ovary, testis, liver, intestine and heart in adult
tilapia. In situ hybridization was performed to examine the temporal and spatial 
expression patterns of GATA4 during tilapia gonadal differentiation and
development. In the undifferentiated gonad, GATA4 was expressed in the somatic
cells of both sexes. Subsequently, GATA4 expression persisted in the
differentiated, juvenile and adult ovary and testis in tilapia. Our data indicate
for the first time that GATA4 is not only necessary for the onset of gonadal
differentiation, but also important for gonadal development and maturation.

PMID: 22186677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Endocrinology. 2012 Feb;153(2):913-24. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1055. Epub 2011 Dec
20.

Cbx2, a polycomb group gene, is required for Sry gene expression in mice.

Katoh-Fukui Y(1), Miyabayashi K, Komatsu T, Owaki A, Baba T, Shima Y, Kidokoro T,
Kanai Y, Schedl A, Wilhelm D, Koopman P, Okuno Y, Morohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging Intervention, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
Obu 474-8511, Japan. yfukui@ncgg.go.jp

Mice lacking the function of the polycomb group protein CBX2 (chromobox homolog
2; also known as M33) show defects in gonadal, adrenal, and splenic development. 
In particular, XY knockout (KO) mice develop ovaries but not testes, and the
gonads are hypoplastic in both sexes. However, how CBX2 regulates development of 
these tissues remains largely unknown. In the present study, we used microarray, 
RT-PCR, and immunohistochemical analyses to show that the expression of Sry,
Sox9, Lhx9, Ad4BP/SF-1, Dax-1, Gata4, Arx, and Dmrt1, genes encoding
transcription factors essential for gonadal development, is affected in Cbx2 KO
gonads. Male-to-female sex reversal in Cbx2 KO mice was rescued by crossing them 
with transgenic mice displaying forced expression of Sry or Sox9. However, testes
remained hypoplastic in these mice, indicating that the size and the sex of the
gonad are determined by different sets of genes. Our study implicates Cbx2 in
testis differentiation through regulating Sry gene expression.

PMID: 22186409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029038. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

An Ebox element in the proximal Gata4 promoter is required for Gata4 expression
in vivo.

Boulende Sab A(1), Bouchard MF, Béland M, Prud'homme B, Souchkova O, Viger RS,
Pilon N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of
Sciences, University of Quebec at Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

GATA4 is an essential transcription factor required for the development and
function of multiple tissues, including a major role in gonadogenesis. Despite
its crucial role, the molecular mechanisms that regulate Gata4 expression in vivo
remain poorly understood. We recently found that the Gata4 gene is expressed as
multiple transcripts with distinct 5' origins. These co-expressed alternative
transcripts are generated by different non-coding first exons with transcripts
E1a and E1b being the most prominent. Moreover, we previously showed that an Ebox
element, located in Gata4 5' flanking sequences upstream of exon 1a, is important
for the promoter activity of these sequences in cell lines. To confirm the
importance of this element in vivo, we generated and characterized Gata4 Ebox
knockout mice. Quantitative PCR analyses realized on gonads, heart and liver at
three developmental stages (embryonic, pre-pubertal and adult) revealed that the 
Ebox mutation leads to a robust and specific decrease (up to 89%) of Gata4 E1a
transcript expression in all tissues and stages examined. However, a detailed
characterization of the gonads revealed normal morphology and GATA4 protein
levels in these mutants. Our qPCR data further indicate that this outcome is most
likely due to the presence of Gata4 E1b mRNA, whose expression levels were not
decreased by the Ebox mutation. In conclusion, our work clearly confirms the
importance of the proximal Ebox element and suggests that adequate GATA4 protein 
expression is likely protected by a compensation mechanism between Gata4 E1a and 
E1b transcripts operating at the translational level.

PMCID: PMC3236771
PMID: 22174950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):1051-61. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.005.

Specific GATA factors act as conserved inducers of an endodermal-EMT.

Campbell K(1), Whissell G, Franch-Marro X, Batlle E, Casanova J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona-CSIC, Parc Cientific de Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):983-4.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) converts cells from static
epithelial to migratory mesenchymal states (Hay, 1995). Here, we demonstrate that
EMT in the Drosophila endoderm is dependent on the GATA-factor Serpent (Srp), and
that Srp acts as a potent trigger for this transition when activated ectopically.
We show that Srp affects endodermal-EMT through a downregulation of junctional
dE-Cadherin (dE-Cad) protein, without a block in its transcription. Moreover, the
relocalization of dE-Cad is achieved through the direct repression of crumbs
(crb) by Srp. Finally, we show that hGATA-6, an ortholog of Srp, induces a
similar transition in mammalian cells. Similar to Srp, hGATA-6 acts through the
downregulation of junctional E-Cad, without blocking its transcription, and
induces the repression of a Crumbs ortholog, crb2. Together, these results
identify a set of GATA factors as a conserved alternative trigger to repress
epithelial characteristics and confer migratory capabilities on epithelial cells 
in development and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):1005-13. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.019.

Primitive endoderm differentiates via a three-step mechanism involving Nanog and 
RTK signaling.

Frankenberg S(1), Gerbe F, Bessonnard S, Belville C, Pouchin P, Bardot O, Chazaud
C.

Author information: 
(1)GReD; INSERM U931; CNRS UMR6247; Clermont University, 28 Place Dunant, 63001
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

During preimplantation mouse development, the inner cell mass (ICM)
differentiates into two cell lineages--the epiblast and the primitive endoderm
(PrE)--whose precursors are identifiable by reciprocal expression of Nanog and
Gata6, respectively. PrE formation depends on Nanog by a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism. To decipher early cell- and non-cell-autonomous effects, we performed 
a mosaic knockdown of Nanog and found that this is sufficient to induce a PrE
fate cell autonomously. Strikingly, in Nanog null embryos, Gata6 expression is
maintained, showing that initiation of the PrE program is Nanog independent.
Treatment of Nanog null embryos with pharmacological inhibitors revealed that RTK
dependency of Gata6 expression is initially direct but later indirect via Nanog
repression. Moreover, we found that subsequent expression of Sox17 and
Gata4--later markers of the PrE--depends on the presence of Fgf4 produced by
Nanog-expressing cells. Thus, our results reveal three distinct phases in the PrE
differentiation program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar;97(3):933-42. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2037. Epub
2011 Dec 14.

Tight glycemic control may increase regenerative potential of myocardium during
acute infarction.

Marfella R(1), Sasso FC, Cacciapuoti F, Portoghese M, Rizzo MR, Siniscalchi M,
Carbonara O, Ferraraccio F, Torella M, Petrella A, Balestrieri ML, Stiuso P,
Nappi G, Paolisso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics and Metabolic Diseases, Second University of Naples, 
Piazza Miraglia, 2, 80138 Naples, Italy. raffaele.marfella@unina2.it

AIMS: We analyzed the effects of tight glycemic control on regenerative potential
of myocardium during acute myocardial infarction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seventy-five patients with their first acute myocardial
infarction undergoing coronary bypass surgery were studied: 25 patients with
glycemia below 140 mg/dl served as the control group; hyperglycemic patients
(glucose>140 mg/dl) were randomized to intensive glycemic control (IGC; n=20;
glucose goal, 80-140 mg/dl), conventional glycemic control (CGC; n=20; glucose
goal, 180-200 mg/dl), or glucose-insulin-potassium (GIK; n=10; glucose goal,
180-200 mg/dl) for almost 3 d before surgery, using insulin infusion followed by 
sc insulin treatment. During surgery, myocyte precursor cells (MPC)
(c-kit/MEFC2/GATA4-positive cells), oxidation of MPC DNA
(c-kit/8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine-positive cells), senescent MPC
(c-kit/p16INK4a-positive cells), and cycling cardiomyocytes (Ki-67-positive
cells) were analyzed in biopsy specimens taken from the peri-infarcted area.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Before surgery, plasma glucose reduction was greater in
the IGC group than in the CGC and GIK groups (P<0.001 for both). IGC patients had
higher MPC (P<0.01) and cycling myocytes (P<0.01), as well as less oxidized
(P<0.01) and senescent MPC (P<0.01) in peri-infarcted specimens compared with
both CGC and GIK patients. Tight glycemic control, by reducing senescent MPC, may
increase regenerative potential of the ischemic myocardium.

PMID: 22170713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Theriogenology. 2012 Mar 15;77(5):829-39. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.05.029. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Cardiomyocytes rhythmically beating generated from goat embryonic stem cell.

Garg S(1), Dutta R, Malakar D, Jena MK, Kumar D, Sahu S, Prakash B.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Center, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal-132001,
India.

The aim of present investigation was isolation, characterization and
differentiation into cardiomyocytes of putative goat embryonic stem cells
produced from in vitro fertilized goat embryos. Goat blastocysts were produced in
vitro by standard methods of in vitro maturation (IVM), in vitro fertilization
(IVF) and in vitro culture (IVC) techniques. The ICMs isolated from IVF
blastocysts were cultured on 10 µl/ml mitomycin-C inactivated fetal fibroblast
feeder layer with LIF. The putative ES colonies were characterized for
extracellular markers like alkaline phosphatase, TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, SSEA-1,
SSEA-4 by immunocytochemistry and intracellular markers like Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog
with reverse-transcription-PCR. The ES cells were successfully subcultured up to 
22nd passage with feeder layer and LIF and up to 12th passage without feeder
layer with LIF only. They exhibited normal karyotyping (20th passage) and
maintained the expression of specific surface markers like alkaline phosphatase, 
SSEA-4, TRA-1-61, TRA-1-81 and intracellular markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog. The
embryoid bodies (EBs) were generated from goat ES cells of 20th passage and were 
analyzed with markers like Gata4, BMP4 and Nestin. Differentiation was induced by
medium containing 100 ng/ml Activin-A, 10 ng/ml FGF-2 and 100 ng/ml BMP-4. The
embryoid bodies were analyzed with markers like Gata4, BMP4 and Nestin. The
rhythmic beating of cardiomyocytes was observed after 30 d and the beating was
still continuing even after 160 d of culturing. Similarly, 2nd and 3rd batches of
EBs were also beating and the beating continues after 75 d and on. The beating
cells were observed positive for cardiac specific markers like a Actinin,
C-Troponin and a-Myosin heavy chain. Histological studies also revealed
morphology similar to cardiomyocytes. Prominent contractions typical of cardiac
tissue have been maintained in the differentiated cells up to 160 d and still
continuing beating at the rate of 30 beats/min. It could be concluded that ES
cells generated from goat embryos were maintained undifferentiated up to 22nd
passage on feeder layer and to 12th passage without feed layer using LIF and that
the differentiation protocol induced rhythmic beating cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22169594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Mar 5;350(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.11.014. Epub 
2011 Dec 2.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) regulates production of androstenedione and progesterone
via control of histone acetylation of StAR and CYP17 promoters in ovarian theca
cells.

Murayama C(1), Miyazaki H, Miyamoto A, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Animal and Food Hygiene, Obihiro University of Agriculture 
and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-machi, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555, Japan.

Although luteinizing hormone (LH) affects androstenedione (A4) and progesterone
(P4) production in theca cells, it is still unknown how LH influences molecular
mechanism of A4 and P4 production. To examine the relationship between LH and
transcription factors involved in A4 and P4 production, ovarian theca cells were 
cultured in the presence or absence of high concentrations of LH for 24 h
(pre-treatment with high concentration of LH) and then cultured in the presence
or absence of low concentration of LH for 48 h. Low LH enhanced production of A4 
and P4, and expressions of CYP17 and StAR mRNA in theca cells without
pre-treatment with high LH. In addition, low LH stimulated the expression of SF-1
protein in nuclear fractions from theca cells with or without pre-treatment with 
high LH. The binding of SF-1 to the CYP17 and StAR promoter regions increased in 
theca cells treated with low LH. Although GATA-4 and GATA-6 are both found in the
nuclear fraction but not in the cytosol of theca cells, low LH enhanced the
binding of GATA-6, but not of GATA-4, to the CYP17 promoter region without
pre-treatment with high LH. Acetylation histone H3 in StAR and CYP17 promoter
regions were changed by different LH-dosage. Overall, we showed that LH regulates
the production of A4 and P4 by affecting the nuclear localization and switching
of transcription factors in theca cells and that target transcription factors
involved in steroid production in theca cells are changed by different LH
concentration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2011 Apr-Jun;25(2 Suppl):S43-51.

Thrombin and thrombin-derived peptides promote proliferation of cardiac
progenitor cells in the form of cardiospheres without affecting their
differentiation potential.

Fabrizi C(1), Angelini F, Chimenti I, Pompili E, Somma F, Gaetani R, Messina E,
Fumagalli L, Giacomello A, Frati G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic Medicine and Orthopedics, Sapienza
University, Rome, Italy.

Many studies demonstrated that human adult cardiac progenitor cells in the form
of cardiospheres (CSps) could represent a powerful candidate for cardiac cell
therapy. To achieve the clinical translation of this biotechnological product,
the development of well-defined culture conditions is required to optimize their 
proliferation and differentiation. Thrombin, a serine protease acting through the
protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) signalling to modulate many cellular
functions such as proliferation and differentiation in several cell types, is one
of the factors included in the CSps medium. Therefore, the assessment of the
effective dependence of the thrombin related cellular effects from PAR-signalling
is strategic both for understanding the biological potential of these cells and
for the GMP translation of the medium formulation, using synthesised analogs. In 
this study the effects of thrombin on human CSps and their potential relationship
with the specific proteolytic activation of PAR-1 have been investigated in
different culture conditions, including thrombin inhibitor hirudin and PAR-1
agonist/ antagonist peptides TFLLR and MUMB2. In this study we show that, in the 
presence of thrombin and TFLLR, CSps, in which PAR-1 expression was evidenced by 
immunofluorescence and western blot analysis, increase their proliferation
activity (BrdU assay). Such increased proliferative rate was consistently
associated with a higher phosphorylation level of the cell cycle inhibitor GSK3. 
Concerning the assessment of the potential effects of thrombin and its agonist on
differentiation, both western blot and real-time PCR analysis for stemness,
cardiac and vascular markers (such as cKit, cx43 and KDR) showed that CSps
commitment was substantially unaffected, except for GATA4 mRNA, whose
transcription was down-regulated in the presence of the natural protease, but not
after treatment with TFLLR. In conclusion, activation of PAR-1-dependent
signalling is important to support CSps proliferative potential, keeping
unaltered or at best stable their differentiation properties. The availability of
thrombin agonists, such as TFLLR, able to guarantee the required growth effect
without affecting CSps lineage commitment, could represent a technological
improvement for cost-effective, easy-to-handle and GMPtranslatable synthetic
media.

PMID: 22051170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Mar;5(3):464-72. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0315. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

DNA methylation of phosphatase and actin regulator 3 detects colorectal cancer in
stool and complements FIT.

Bosch LJ(1), Oort FA, Neerincx M, Khalid-de Bakker CA, Terhaar sive Droste JS,
Melotte V, Jonkers DM, Masclee AA, Mongera S, Grooteclaes M, Louwagie J, van
Criekinge W, Coupé VM, Mulder CJ, van Engeland M, Carvalho B, Meijer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, 1007 MB, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Using a bioinformatics-based strategy, we set out to identify hypermethylated
genes that could serve as biomarkers for early detection of colorectal cancer
(CRC) in stool. In addition, the complementary value to a Fecal Immunochemical
Test (FIT) was evaluated. Candidate genes were selected by applying cluster
alignment and computational analysis of promoter regions to microarray-expression
data of colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. DNA methylation was measured by
quantitative methylation-specific PCR on 34 normal colon mucosa, 71 advanced
adenoma, and 64 CRC tissues. The performance as biomarker was tested in whole
stool samples from in total 193 subjects, including 19 with advanced adenoma and 
66 with CRC. For a large proportion of these series, methylation data for GATA4
and OSMR were available for comparison. The complementary value to FIT was
measured in stool subsamples from 92 subjects including 44 with advanced adenoma 
or CRC. Phosphatase and Actin Regulator 3 (PHACTR3) was identified as a novel
hypermethylated gene showing more than 70-fold increased DNA methylation levels
in advanced neoplasia compared with normal colon mucosa. In a stool training set,
PHACTR3 methylation showed a sensitivity of 55% (95% CI: 33-75) for CRC and a
specificity of 95% (95% CI: 87-98). In a stool validation set, sensitivity
reached 66% (95% CI: 50-79) for CRC and 32% (95% CI: 14-57) for advanced adenomas
at a specificity of 100% (95% CI: 86-100). Adding PHACTR3 methylation to FIT
increased sensitivity for CRC up to 15%. PHACTR3 is a new hypermethylated gene in
CRC with a good performance in stool DNA testing and has complementary value to
FIT.

PMID: 22135045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Mar;124(3):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.11.026. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Prognostic and diagnostic significance of DNA methylation patterns in high grade 
serous ovarian cancer.

Montavon C(1), Gloss BS, Warton K, Barton CA, Statham AL, Scurry JP, Tabor B,
Nguyen TV, Qu W, Samimi G, Hacker NF, Sutherland RL, Clark SJ, O'Brien PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney NSW
2010, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Altered DNA methylation patterns hold promise as cancer biomarkers. In
this study we selected a panel of genes which are commonly methylated in a
variety of cancers to evaluate their potential application as biomarkers for
prognosis and diagnosis in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC); the most 
common and lethal subtype of ovarian cancer.
METHODS: The methylation patterns of 10 genes (BRCA1, EN1, DLEC1, HOXA9, RASSF1A,
GATA4, GATA5, HSULF1, CDH1, SFN) were examined and compared in a cohort of 80
primary HGSOC and 12 benign ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) samples using
methylation-specific headloop suppression PCR.
RESULTS: The genes were variably methylated in primary HGSOC, with HOXA9
methylation observed in 95% of cases. Most genes were rarely methylated in benign
OSE, with the exception of SFN which was methylated in all HGSOC and benign OSE
samples examined. Methylation of DLEC1 was associated with disease recurrence,
independent of tumor stage and suboptimal surgical debulking (HR 3.5 (95%
CI:1.10-11.07), p=0.033). A combination of the methylation status of HOXA9 and
EN1 could discriminate HGSOC from benign OSE with a sensitivity of 98.8% and a
specificity of 91.7%, which increased to 100% sensitivity with no loss of
specificity when pre-operative CA125 levels were also incorporated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence to support the feasibility of
detecting altered DNA methylation patterns as a potential diagnostic and
prognostic approach for HGSOC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nat Med. 2011 Nov 20;17(12):1585-93. doi: 10.1038/nm.2505.

Crosstalk between B lymphocytes, microbiota and the intestinal epithelium governs
immunity versus metabolism in the gut.

Shulzhenko N(1), Morgun A, Hsiao W, Battle M, Yao M, Gavrilova O, Orandle M,
Mayer L, Macpherson AJ, McCoy KD, Fraser-Liggett C, Matzinger P.

Author information: 
(1)'Ghost Lab', T Cell Tolerance and Memory Section, Laboratory of Cellular and
Molecular Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID), US National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
natalia.shulzhenko@oregonstate.edu

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Dec;17(12):1549-50.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Jan;12(1):2.

Using a systems biology approach, we discovered and dissected a three-way
interaction between the immune system, the intestinal epithelium and the
microbiota. We found that, in the absence of B cells, or of IgA, and in the
presence of the microbiota, the intestinal epithelium launches its own protective
mechanisms, upregulating interferon-inducible immune response pathways and
simultaneously repressing Gata4-related metabolic functions. This shift in
intestinal function leads to lipid malabsorption and decreased deposition of body
fat. Network analysis revealed the presence of two interconnected epithelial-cell
gene networks, one governing lipid metabolism and another regulating immunity,
that were inversely expressed. Gene expression patterns in gut biopsies from
individuals with common variable immunodeficiency or with HIV infection and
intestinal malabsorption were very similar to those of the B cell-deficient mice,
providing a possible explanation for a longstanding enigmatic association between
immunodeficiency and defective lipid absorption in humans.

PMCID: PMC3902046
PMID: 22101768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Apr;33(4):539-46. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-0146-y. Epub 2011
Nov 20.

A novel GATA4 loss-of-function mutation associated with congenital ventricular
septal defect.

Yang YQ(1), Li L, Wang J, Liu XY, Chen XZ, Zhang W, Wang XZ, Jiang JQ, Liu X,
Fang WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, 
China. yang99yang66@hotmail.com

Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most prevalent type of congenital heart
disease and a major cause for the significantly increased morbidity and mortality
among infants. Aggregating evidence indicates that genetic defects are involved
in the pathogenesis of congenital VSD. Nevertheless, VSD is genetically
heterogeneous, and the genetic determinants for VSD in the majority of patients
remain to be identified. In this study, the entire coding region of GATA4, a gene
encoding a zinc finger transcription factor essential for normal cardiac
morphogenesis, was sequenced in 160 unrelated patients with VSD. The available
relatives of the index patient harboring the identified mutation and 200
unrelated control individuals were subsequently genotyped. The disease-causing
potential of a sequence alteration was evaluated by MutationTaster, and the
functional effect of the mutation was characterized using a luciferase reporter
assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA4 variation, p.R43W, was
identified in a proband with VSD, that was absent in control subjects. Genetic
analysis of the family members of the variation carrier showed that the
substitution co-segregated with VSD. The p.R43W variant was predicted to be a
pathogenic mutation, and the functional analysis demonstrated that the GATA4 R43W
mutant protein resulted in significantly decreased transcriptional activity
compared with its wild-type counterpart. The findings expand the mutational
spectrum of GATA4 linked to VSD and provide more insight into the molecular
mechanism of VSD.

PMID: 22101736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Adv Genet. 2011;76:93-134. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386481-9.00004-3.

GATA transcription factors in the developing reproductive system.

Zaytouni T(1), Efimenko EE, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA.

Previous work has firmly established the role for both GATA4 and FOG2 in the
initial global commitment to sexual fate, but their (joint or individual)
function in subsequent steps remained unknown. Hence, gonad-specific deletions of
these genes in mice were required to reveal their roles in sexual development and
gene regulation. The development of tissue-specific Cre lines allowed for
substantial advances in the understanding of the function of GATA proteins in sex
determination, gonadal differentiation and reproductive development in mice. Here
we summarize the recent work that examined the requirement of GATA4 and FOG2
proteins at several critical stages in testis and ovarian differentiation. We
also discuss the molecular mechanisms involved in this regulation through the
control of Dmrt1 gene expression in the testis and the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway in the ovary.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22099693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;27(8):1206-14.

[Differentiation of porcine amniotic fluid stem cells into the beating
cardiomyocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen J(1), Wei Y, Peng S, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Center for Stem Cell Engineering and Technology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, China.

The aim of this research is to find an effective cardiomyocyte-induced method
derived from porcine amniotic fluid stem cells (pAFS). For cardiac
differentiation, the cells were formed embryoid bodies (EBs) firstly, then
cultured in induced-medium including 5-azacytidine (5-aza) and vitamin C (Vc). We
detected the specific markers of cardiomyocyte by immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and
transmission electron microscope. The results showed that some embryoid bodies
beat rhythmically after 10 days of induction. Furthermore, analysis of t test
revealed that the percentage of beating cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters was
highest (33%) when induction using 0.1 mmol/L Vc and 5 micromol/L 5-aza.
Immunocytochemistry analysis demonstrated that cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters
expressed alpha-actin, Tnni3. RT-PCR analysis also illustrated that TbX5, Gata4, 
alpha-MHC and Tnni3 were expressed positive in cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters. 
Especially, we observed basic structures of myocardium, such as myofilament,
glycogen granule and so on by transmission electron microscope. In conclusion,
5-azacytidine and vitamin C could promote differentiation of pAFS into
myocardium.

PMID: 22097810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Mar;40(5):2210-23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr848. Epub 2011 Nov
12.

West Nile virus encodes a microRNA-like small RNA in the 3' untranslated region
which up-regulates GATA4 mRNA and facilitates virus replication in mosquito
cells.

Hussain M(1), Torres S, Schnettler E, Funk A, Grundhoff A, Pijlman GP, Khromykh
AA, Asgari S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD
4072, Australia.

West Nile virus (WNV) belongs to a group of medically important single-stranded, 
positive-sense RNA viruses causing deadly disease outbreaks around the world. The
3' untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the flavivirus genome, in particular the
terminal 3' stem-loop (3'SL) fulfils multiple functions in virus replication and 
virus-host interactions. Using the Kunjin strain of WNV (WNV(KUN)), we detected a
virally encoded small RNA, named KUN-miR-1, derived from 3'SL. Transcription of
WNV(KUN) pre-miRNA (3'SL) in mosquito cells either from plasmid or Semliki Forest
virus (SFV) RNA replicon resulted in the production of mature KUN-miR-1.
Silencing of Dicer-1 but not Dicer-2 led to a reduction in the miRNA levels.
Further, when a synthetic inhibitor of KUN-miR-1 was transfected into mosquito
cells, replication of viral RNA was significantly reduced. Using cloning and
bioinformatics approaches, we identified the cellular GATA4 mRNA as a target for 
KUN-miR-1. KUN-miR-1 produced in mosquito cells during virus infection or from
plasmid DNA, SFV RNA replicon or mature miRNA duplex increased accumulation of
GATA4 mRNA. Depletion of GATA4 mRNA by RNA silencing led to a significant
reduction in virus RNA replication while a KUN-miR-1 RNA mimic enhanced
replication of a mutant WNV(KUN) virus producing reduced amounts of KUN-miR-1,
suggesting that GATA4-induction via KUN-miR-1 plays an important role in virus
replication.

PMCID: PMC3300009
PMID: 22080551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.030. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

Human hypoblast formation is not dependent on FGF signalling.

Roode M(1), Blair K, Snell P, Elder K, Marchant S, Smith A, Nichols J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Mouse embryos segregate three different lineages during preimplantation
development: trophoblast, epiblast and hypoblast. These differentiation processes
are associated with restricted expression of key transcription factors (Cdx2,
Oct4, Nanog and Gata6). The mechanisms of segregation have been extensively
studied in the mouse, but are not as well characterised in other species. In the 
human embryo, hypoblast differentiation has not previously been characterised.
Here we demonstrate co-exclusive immunolocalisation of Nanog and Gata4 in human
blastocysts, implying segregation of epiblast and hypoblast, as in rodent
embryos. However, the formation of hypoblast in the human is apparently not
dependent upon FGF signalling, in contrast to rodent embryos. Nonetheless, the
persistence of Nanog-positive cells in embryos following treatment with FGF
inhibitors is suggestive of a transient naïve pluripotent population in the human
blastocyst, which may be similar to rodent epiblast and ES cells but is not
sustained during conventional human ES cell derivation protocols.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368271
PMID: 22079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. BMC Genomics. 2011 Nov 12;12:555. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-555.

Sex-dimorphism in cardiac nutrigenomics: effect of trans fat and/or monosodium
glutamate consumption.

Collison KS(1), Zaidi MZ, Maqbool Z, Saleh SM, Inglis A, Makhoul NJ, Bakheet R,
Shoukri M, Al-Mohanna FA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology & Diabetes Research Unit, Department of Biological & Medical
Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, PO BOX 3354, Riyadh 
11211, Saudi Arabia. kate@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: A paucity of information on biological sex-specific differences in
cardiac gene expression in response to diet has prompted this present
nutrigenomics investigation. Sexual dimorphism exists in the physiological and
transcriptional response to diet, particularly in response to high-fat feeding.
Consumption of Trans-fatty acids (TFA) has been linked to substantially increased
risk of heart disease, in which sexual dimorphism is apparent, with males
suffering a higher disease rate. Impairment of the cardiovascular system has been
noted in animals exposed to Monosodium Glutamate (MSG) during the neonatal
period, and sexual dimorphism in the growth axis of MSG-treated animals has
previously been noted. Processed foods may contain both TFA and MSG.
METHODS: We examined physiological differences and changes in gene expression in 
response to TFA and/or MSG consumption compared to a control diet, in male and
female C57BL/6J mice.
RESULTS: Heart and % body weight increases were greater in TFA-fed mice, who also
exhibited dyslipidemia (P < 0.05). Hearts from MSG-fed females weighed less than 
males (P < 0.05). 2-factor ANOVA indicated that the TFA diet induced over twice
as many cardiac differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in males compared to
females (P < 0.001); and 4 times as many male DEGs were downregulated including
Gata4, Mef2d and Srebf2. Enrichment of functional Gene Ontology (GO) categories
were related to transcription, phosphorylation and anatomic structure (P < 0.01).
A number of genes were upregulated in males and downregulated in females,
including pro-apoptotic histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2). Sexual dimorphism was also
observed in cardiac transcription from MSG-fed animals, with both sexes
upregulating approximately 100 DEGs exhibiting sex-specific differences in GO
categories. A comparison of cardiac gene expression between all diet combinations
together identified a subset of 111 DEGs significant only in males, 64 DEGs
significant in females only, and 74 transcripts identified as differentially
expressed in response to dietary manipulation in both sexes.
CONCLUSION: Our model identified major changes in the cardiac transcriptional
profile of TFA and/or MSG-fed mice compared to controls, which was reflected by
significant differences in the physiological profile within the 4 diet groups.
Identification of sexual dimorphism in cardiac transcription may provide the
basis for sex-specific medicine in the future.

PMCID: PMC3238303
PMID: 22078008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2011 Dec;63(12):1604-12. doi:
10.1111/j.2042-7158.2011.01363.x. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Curcumin: a potential therapeutic polyphenol, prevents noradrenaline-induced
hypertrophy in rat cardiac myocytes.

Ahuja S(1), Kohli S, Krishnan S, Dogra D, Sharma D, Rani V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology,
Government Post Graduate College, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to evaluate the effect of curcumin on H9c2
cardiac cell line and primary rat cardiac myocytes, using purified noradrenaline 
as a hypertrophy-inducing agent.
METHODS: The concentration of curcumin at which cells were treated was determined
by MTT (3-(4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) assay.
The effect of this safe dose in preventing noradrenaline-induced cardiac
hypertrophy was assessed by biochemical analysis (estimating total protein
content), molecular analysis (using RT-PCR to study the expression of fetal genes
like ANF), immunological analysis (by determining the nuclear localization of
GATA-4) and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA; to study DNA binding
activity of GATA-4).
KEY FINDINGS: Curcumin at a concentration of 8 µm was found to suppress the
increase in cell size, protein content and enhanced marker gene expression (ANF) 
caused by noradrenaline. Immunocytochemistry and Western blot analysis showed
that curcumin suppressed the localization of transcription factor GATA-4 in the
nucleus. It also showed a reduced DNA-binding activity in the presence of
noradrenaline as confirmed by EMSA.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that curcumin reduces the hypertrophic marker
gene expression by inhibiting nuclear localization and DNA binding activity of
GATA-4. Thus it has a great anti-hypertrophic potential.

© 2011 The Authors. JPP © 2011 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 22060292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):439-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

ETS-dependent regulation of a distal Gata4 cardiac enhancer.

Schachterle W(1), Rojas A, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The developing heart contains an inner tube of specialized endothelium known as
endocardium, which performs multiple essential functions. In spite of the
essential role of the endocardium in heart development and function, the
transcriptional pathways that regulate its development remain largely undefined. 
GATA4 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple
cardiovascular lineages and is required for endocardial cushion development and
embryonic viability, but the transcriptional pathways upstream of Gata4 in the
endocardium and its derivatives in the endocardial cushions are unknown. Here, we
describe a distal enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene that is briefly active in
multiple cardiac lineages early in cardiac development but restricts to the
endocardium where it remains active through cardiogenesis. The activity of this
Gata4 cardiac enhancer in transgenic embryos and in cultured aortic endothelial
cells is dependent on four ETS sites. To identify which ETS transcription factors
might be involved in Gata4 regulation via the ETS sites in the enhancer, we
determined the expression profile of 24 distinct ETS factors in embryonic mouse
hearts. Among multiple ETS transcripts present, ETS1, FLI1, ETV1, ETV5, ERG, and 
ETV6 were the most abundant in the early embryonic heart. We found that ETS1,
FLI1, and ERG were strongly expressed in the heart at embryonic day 8.5 and that 
ETS1 and ERG bound to the endogenous Gata4 enhancer in cultured endothelial
cells. Thus, these studies define the ETS expression profile in the early
embryonic heart and identify an ETS-dependent enhancer from the Gata4 locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246565
PMID: 22056786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2011 Oct;17(10):867-72.

[Reconstructed seminiferous tubules from ectopic grafting of testicular cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian RH(1), Hu HL, Liu P, Li P, Yang S, Zhu Y, Ma M, Sun C, Zou SS, Guo XZ, Huang
YR, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology/Laboratory of Sperm Development and Genetics, Shanghai
Human Sperm Bank, Shanghai Institute of Andrology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200001, China.
tianruhui@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the ectopic grafts of mouse testicular cells by
observing the reconstruction of seminiferous tubules, colonization of
spermatogenic cells and spermatogenesis using immunodeficient mice as recipients.
METHODS: The testes of newborn male ICR mice were digested to obtain single cell 
suspension. The cells were then mixed with matrigel and subcutaneously grafted
into the dorsal region of the male nude mice. The mice were castrated after the
operation and the grafts were dissected from 5 of the nude mice at 4, 6, 8 and 10
weeks, respectively. The success rates of transplantation and the graft diameters
were calculated, and the structure of the reconstituted seminiferous tubules,
colonization of the germ cells and spermatogenesis were observed by HE staining
and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: All the mice recipients survived after the testicular cell
transplantation. Within 10 weeks after the operation, tissue masses could be
observed, with the diameter increased from (3.91 +/- 0.71) mm at 4 weeks to (6.69
+/- 0.50) mm. Neovascularization was detected at the surface of the masses and
seminiferous tubule structures found in the grafts. The germ cells that developed
from spermatogonia to round spermatids were observed, but with no sperm in the
tubules. Germ cells, Sertoli cells and Leydig cells were identified by
immunochemical detection of Mvh, Gata4 and P450Scc in the grafts at 8 weeks.
CONCLUSION: Seminiferous tubules could be ectopically reconstructed from
suspension of neonatal mouse testicular cells. Ectopic grafting provided a
preferable model for the studies on testis tissue engineering and interactions
between testicular cells during testicular development and spermatogenesis.

PMID: 22049786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2416-21.

Somatic mutations in NKX25, GATA4, and HAND1 are not a common cause of tetralogy
of Fallot or hypoplastic left heart.

Esposito G(1), Butler TL, Blue GM, Cole AD, Sholler GF, Kirk EP, Grossfeld P,
Perryman BM, Harvey RP, Winlaw DS.

Author information: 
(1)Kids Heart Research, The Childrens Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia.

The majority of congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs as a sporadic finding, with
a minority of cases associated with a known genetic abnormality. Combinations of 
genetic and environmental factors are implicated, with the recent and intriguing 
hypothesis that an apparently high rate of somatic mutations might explain some
sporadic CHD. We used samples of right ventricular myocardium from patients
undergoing surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and hypoplastic left
heart (HLH) to examine the incidence of somatic mutation in cardiac tissue. TOF
is a common form of cyanotic CHD, occurring in 3.3 per 10,000 live births. HLH is
a rare defect in which the left side of the heart is severely under-developed.
Both are severe malformations whose genetic etiology is largely unknown. We
carried out direct sequence analysis of the NKX25 and GATA4 genes from fresh
frozen cardiac tissues and matched blood samples of nine TOF patients. Analysis
of NKX25, GATA4, and HAND1 was performed from cardiac tissue of 24 HLH patients 
and three matched blood samples. No somatic or germline mutations were identified
in the TOF or HLH patients. Although limited by sample size, our study suggests
that somatic mutations in NKX25 and GATA4 are not a common cause of isolated TOF
or HLH.

PMID: 22043484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biomed Res. 2011 Nov;25(6):425-30. doi: 10.1016/S1674-8301(11)60056-0.

Mutational screening of affected cardiac tissues and peripheral blood cells
identified novel somatic mutations in GATA4 in patients with ventricular septal
defect.

Cheng C(1), Lin Y, Yang F, Wang W, Wu C, Qin J, Shao X, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China;

The aim of this study was to examine how somatic mutations of the GATA4 gene
contributed to the genesis of ventricular septal defect (VSD). The coding and
intron-exon boundary regions of GATA4 were sequenced of DNA samples from
peripheral blood cells and cardiac tissues of twenty surgically treated probands 
with VSD. Seven novel heterozygous variants were detected in cardiac tissues from
VSD patients, but they were not detected in the peripheral blood cells of VSD
patients or in 500 healthy control samples. We replicated 14 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) reported in NCBI. Bioinformatics analysis was performed to
analyze the possible mechanism by which mutations were linked to VSD. Among those
variants, c. 1004C>A (p.S335X) occurred in the highly conserved domain of GATA4
and generated a termination codon, which led to the production of truncated
GATA4. The seven novel heterozygous GATA4 mutations were only identified in
cardiac tissues with VSD, suggesting that they are of somatic origin. A higher
mutation rate in cardiac tissues than in peripheral blood cells implies that the 
genetic contribution to VSD may have been underestimated.

PMCID: PMC3596722
PMID: 23554720  [PubMed]


160. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e24117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024117. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Mutation analysis of NR5A1 encoding steroidogenic factor 1 in 77 patients with
46, XY disorders of sex development (DSD) including hypospadias.

Allali S(1), Muller JB, Brauner R, Lourenço D, Boudjenah R, Karageorgou V, Trivin
C, Lottmann H, Lortat-Jacob S, Nihoul-Fékété C, De Dreuzy O, McElreavey K,
Bashamboo A.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de médecine and AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre,
Unité d'Endocrinologie, Pédiatrique, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of the NR5A1 gene encoding steroidogenic factor-1 have been
reported in association with a wide spectrum of 46,XY DSD (Disorder of Sex
Development) phenotypes including severe forms of hypospadias.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We evaluated the frequency of NR5A1 gene
mutations in a large series of patients presenting with 46,XY DSD and
hypospadias. Based on their clinical presentation 77 patients were classified
either as complete or partial gonadal dysgenesis (uterus seen at genitography
and/or surgery, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>11), ambiguous external genitalia without uterus (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>33) or 
hypospadias (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>33). We identified heterozygous NR5A1 mutations in 4 cases of
ambiguous external genitalia without uterus (12.1%; p.Trp279Arg, pArg39Pro,
c.390delG, c140_141insCACG) and a de novo missense mutation in one case with
distal hypospadias (3%; p.Arg313Cys). Mutant proteins showed reduced
transactivation activity and mutants p.Arg39Pro and p.Arg313Cys did not synergize
with the GATA4 cofactor to stimulate reporter gene activity, although they
retained their ability to physically interact with the GATA4 protein.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Mutations in NR5A1 were observed in 5/77 (6.5%) cases
of 46,XY DSD including hypospadias. Excluding the cases of 46,XY gonadal
dysgenesis the incidence of NR5A1 mutations was 5/66 (7.6%). An individual with
isolated distal hypopadias carried a de novo heterozygous missense mutation, thus
extending the range of phenotypes associated with NR5A1 mutations and suggesting 
that this group of patients should be screened for NR5A1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3197579
PMID: 22028768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Genet. 2011 Sep;204(9):492-500. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.010.

Heterogeneity and degree of TIMP4, GATA4, SOX18, and EGFL7 gene promoter
methylation in non-small cell lung cancer and surrounding tissues.

Azhikina T(1), Kozlova A, Skvortsov T, Sverdlov E.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow. tatazhik@ibch.ru

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2012 Feb;4(1):13-4.

We used methylation-sensitive high resolution melting analysis to assess
methylation of CpG islands within the promoters of the TIMP4, GATA4, SOX18, and
EGFL7 genes in samples of non-small cell lung cancer and surrounding apparently
normal tissue and noncancerous lung tissues. We found that the promoter
methylation was heterogeneous in both tumor and surrounding normal tissue. This
is in contrast to healthy lung tissue, where the promoters were normally either
non- or hypomethylated, and the heterogeneity of methylation was low. An
increased heterogeneity of methylation in the normal tissues surrounding the
tumor may suggest an early start of epigenetic processes preceding genetic and
morphologic changes and can be used as a biomarker of early cancerization events.
This analysis is an easy and sensitive tool for studying epigenetic heterogeneity
and could be used in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Congenit Heart Dis. 2012 Mar-Apr;7(2):151-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00573.x. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Combined mutation screening of NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 in congenital heart
disease: multiple heterozygosity and novel mutations.

Granados-Riveron JT(1), Pope M, Bu'lock FA, Thornborough C, Eason J, Setchfield
K, Ketley A, Kirk EP, Fatkin D, Feneley MP, Harvey RP, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Biology, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.

Background.  Variants of several genes encoding transcription modulators, signal 
transduction, and structural proteins are known to cause Mendelian congenital
heart disease (CHD). NKX2-5 and GATA4 were the first CHD-causing genes identified
by linkage analysis in large affected families. Mutations of TBX5 cause Holt-Oram
syndrome, which includes CHD as a clinical feature. All three genes have a
well-established role in cardiac development. Design.  In order to investigate
the possible role of multiple mutations in CHD, a combined mutation screening was
performed in NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 in the same patient cohort. Samples from a
cohort of 331 CHD patients were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction, double
high-performance liquid chromatography and sequencing in order to identify
changes in the NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 genes. Results.  Two cases of multiple
heterozygosity of putative disease-causing mutations were identified. One patient
was found with a novel L122P NKX2-5 mutation in combination with the private
A1443D mutation of MYH6. A patient heterozygote for a D425N GATA4 mutation
carries also a private mutation of the MYH6 gene (V700M). Conclusions.  In
addition to reporting two novel mutations of NKX2-5 in CHD, we describe families 
where multiple individual mutations seem to have an additive effect over the
pathogenesis of CHD. Our findings highlight the usefulness of multiple gene
mutational analysis of large CHD cohorts.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3370385
PMID: 22011241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Biochem Funct. 2012 Jan;30(1):24-32. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1813. Epub 2011 Oct
18.

Adenovirus-mediated expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a double mutant
converts neonatal cardiac fibroblasts into (cardio)myocyte phenotype.

Wang Y(1), Sun A, Xue J, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. yesong_wang@yahoo.com.cn.

Adenovirus-mediated expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a double mutant
(pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803) can be effectively transfected into bone marrow stem
cells (MSCs) in the MSCs and cardiomyocytes co-culture system at normoxia to
regulate the expression of downstream target genes of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a
(HIF-1a), which in turn can promote MSC differentiation into cardiomyocytes.
Fibroblasts share common characteristics with MSCs such as the morphology,
phenotype and differentiation potential. Therefore, we further studied whether
the pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 also can convert neonatal rat cardiac fibroblasts
(NCFs) into (cardio)myocyte phenotype via regulating the downstream target genes 
of HIF-1a at normoxia. The immunostaining analysis showed that NCFs treated with 
pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 exhibited higher protein expression levels of smooth
muscle a-actin (SMA, myocyte marker) and cardiac troponin T (cTnT, cardiomyocyte 
marker), compared with phosphate-buffered saline and pAd-LacZ treatments. The
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction results showed that NCFs
transfected with pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 augmented messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1), Smad4, NKx2.5, GATA4,
myocardin, SMA and cTnT. The effects of HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 on NCFs were
attenuated by pre-transfection of TGF-ß1 or myocardin small interference RNAs.
Adult CFs transfected with pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 showed a lower protein
expression of SMA but not cTnT without any change in the mRNA expression level of
NKx2.5, myocardin. Therefore, NCFs but not adult CFs possess a similar
differentiation potential to MSCs as evidenced by the fact that
pAd-HIF-1a-Ala564-Ala803 can convert NCFs into (cardio)myocyte phenotype via
regulating its downstream target genes.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22006794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Curr Biol. 2011 Oct 25;21(20):1759-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.09.010. Epub 2011 
Oct 13.

Blimp1 expression predicts embryonic stem cell development in vitro.

Chu LF(1), Surani MA, Jaenisch R, Zwaka TP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Oct 25;21(20):R850-2.

Despite recent critical insights into the pluripotent state of embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), there is little agreement over the inaugural and subsequent steps
leading to its generation [1-4]. Here we show that inner cell mass
(ICM)-generated cells expressing Blimp1, a key transcriptional repressor of the
somatic program during germ cell specification [5, 6], emerge on day 2 of
blastocyst culture. Single-cell gene expression profiling indicated that many of 
these Blimp1-positive cells coexpress other genes typically associated with early
germ cell specification. When genetically traced in vitro, these cells acquired
properties normally associated with primordial germ cells. Importantly,
fate-mapping experiments revealed that ESCs commonly arise from Blimp1-positive
precursors; indeed, prospective sorting of such cells from ICM outgrowths
increased the rate of ESC derivation more than 9-fold. Finally, using genetic
ablation or distinct small molecules [7, 8], we show that epiblast cells can
become ESCs without first acquiring Blimp1 positivity. Our findings suggest that 
the germ cell-like state is facultative for the stabilization of pluripotency in 
vitro. Thus, the association of Blimp1 expression with ESC development furthers
understanding of how the pluripotent state of these cells is established in vitro
and suggests a means to enhance the generation of new stem cell lines from
blastocysts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3203992
PMID: 22000107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Dyn. 2012 Jan;241(1):190-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22763. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Transactivation in Drosophila of human enhancers by human transcription factors
involved in congenital heart diseases.

Amodio V(1), Tevy MF, Traina C, Ghosh TK, Capovilla M.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Department of Biology and Evolution, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The human transcription factors (TFs) GATA4, NKX2.5 and TBX5 form
part of the core network necessary to build a human heart and are involved in
Congenital Heart Diseases (CHDs). The human natriuretic peptide precursor A
(NPPA) and a-myosin heavy chain 6 (MYH6) genes are downstream effectors involved 
in cardiogenesis that have been demonstrated to be in vitro targets of such TFs.
RESULTS: To study the interactions between these human TFs and their target
enhancers in vivo, we overexpressed them in the whole Drosophila cardiac tube
using the UAS/GAL4 system. We observed that all three TFs up-regulate their
natural target enhancers in Drosophila and cause developmental defects when
overexpressed in eyes and wings.
CONCLUSIONS: A strong potential of the present model might be the development of 
combinatorial and mutational assays to study the interactions between human TFs
and their natural target promoters, which are not easily undertaken in tissue
culture cells because of the variability in transfection efficiency, especially
when multiple constructs are used. Thus, this novel system could be used to
determine in vivo the genetic nature of the human mutant forms of these TFs,
setting up a powerful tool to unravel the molecular genetic mechanisms that lead 
to CHDs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3326377
PMID: 21990232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2011 Nov;43(11):857-66. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr087. Epub 2011 Oct 6.

Efficacy of Atorvastatin combined with adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell
transplantation on cardiac function in rats with acute myocardial infarction.

Cai A(1), Zheng D, Dong Y, Qiu R, Huang Y, Song Y, Jiang Z, Rao S, Liao X, Kuang 
J, Dai G, Mai W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been extensively applied for the restoration
of cardiomyocytes loss after acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, the
optimal therapeutic efficacy of MSCs in ischemic heart diseases has been hampered
by their poor survival and low differentiated rates. Therefore, the improvement
of MSC survival and differentiated rates is warranted and critical for the
efficacy of MSCs in AMI. In this paper, MSCs isolated from rat inguinal fat
tissues were termed as adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ASCs), and the
fourth passage of ASCs was pre-specified by co-culturing with cardiomyocytes in a
transwell system termed as co-ASCs. Fourteen days later, GATA-4 (a transcription 
factor) and cardiac troponin-I were detected by cellular immunofluorescence.
Atorvastatin (Ator group) or vehicle (control group) was administrated for the
first 24 h after AMI production in rats. Fourteen days later, inflammatory
parameters and cardiac function were evaluated. The other surviving rats were
injected with a total of 1 × 10(6) co-ASCs/100 µl phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS), 1×10(6) ASCs/100 µl PBS, or 100 µl PBS. Twenty-eight days after cell
injection, survival and differentiated rates of transplanted cells and cardiac
function were evaluated. The percentage of GATA-4 expression in co-ASCs was 28.5%
± 5.6% and of cardiac troponin-I was 22.8% ± 3.2%. Compared with the control
group, the number of infiltrating inflammatory cells, myeloperoxidase activity,
inflammatory cytokines (VCAM-1, TNF-a, Hs-CRP) mRNA expression, and Bax protein
expression were significantly reduced in the three Ator groups, accompanied by a 
significant improvement of Bcl-2 protein expression and cardiac function (P<
0.05). Compared with the Ator2 + ASCs group and Con + co-ASCs group, the number
of 4-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole-stained cells and cardiac troponin-I-positive
transplanted cells, concomitant with cardiac function, were improved most
prominently in the Ator3 + co-ASCs group (P< 0.05). Pre-amelioration of the
cardiac milieu, in conjunction with pre-specification of ASCs, was beneficial for
enhancing ASCs' therapeutic efficacy on cardiac function after AMI.

PMID: 21983658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cell Transplant. 2012;21(6):1225-33. doi: 10.3727/096368911X600966. Epub 2011 Sep
22.

Radiofrequency energy loop primes cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle
differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells: a new tool for improving tissue
regeneration.

Maioli M(1), Rinaldi S, Santaniello S, Castagna A, Pigliaru G, Gualini S, Fontani
V, Ventura C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Radiofrequency (RF) waves from Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) technologies have become
ubiquitous, with Internet access spreading into homes, and public areas. The
human body harbors multipotent stem cells with various grading of potentiality.
Whether stem cells may be affected by Wi-Fi RF energy remains unknown. We exposed
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to a Radio Electric Asymmetric Conveyer (REAC),
an innovative device delivering Wi-Fi RF of 2.4 GHz with its conveyer electrodes 
immersed into the culture medium. Cell responses were investigated by real-time
PCR, Western blot, and confocal microscopy. Single RF burst duration, radiated
power, electric and magnetic fields, specific absorption rate, and current
density in culture medium were monitored. REAC stimulation primed transcription
of genes involved in cardiac (GATA4, Nkx-2.5, and prodynorphin), skeletal muscle 
(myoD) and neuronal (neurogenin1) commitment, while downregulating the self
renewal/pluripotency-associated genes Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog. REAC exposure
enhanced the expression of cardiac, skeletal, and neuronal lineage-restricted
marker proteins. The number of spontaneously beating ES-derived myocardial cells 
was also increased. In conclusion, REAC stimulation provided a "physical milieu" 
optimizing stem cell expression of pluripotentiality and the attainment of three 
major target lineages for regenerative medicine, without using chemical agonists 
or vector-mediated gene delivery.

PMID: 21975035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40782-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.263046. Epub
2011 Oct 4.

Protein kinase D3 is a pivotal activator of pathological cardiac hypertrophy by
selectively increasing the expression of hypertrophic transcription factors.

Li C(1), Li J, Cai X, Sun H, Jiao J, Bai T, Zhou XW, Chen X, Gill DL, Tang XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Nankai University School of Medicine, Nankai,
Tianjin 300071, China.

Fetal cardiac gene reactivation is a hallmark of pathological cardiac hypertrophy
(PCH) driven by cardiac transcription factors (TFs) such as nuclear factor of
activated T-cells (NFATs). Nuclear import of dephosphorylated NFATs catalyzed by 
calcineurin (CaN) is a well-established hypertrophic mechanism. Here we report
that NFATc4 expression is also up-regulated by newly expressed protein kinase D3 
(PKD3) to induce PCH. In both in vitro and in vivo cardiac hypertrophic models,
the normally undetectable PKD3 was profoundly up-regulated by isoproterenol
followed by overt expression of cardiac TFs including NFATc4, NK family of
transcription factor 2.5 (Nkx2.5), GATA4 and myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2).
Using gene silencing approaches, we demonstrate PKD3 is required for increasing
the expression of NFATc4, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 while PKD1 is required for the
increase in MEF2D expression. Upstream induction of PKD3 is driven by nuclear
entry of CaN-activated NFATc1 and c3 but not c4. Therefore, PKD3 is a pivotal
mediator of the CaN-NFATc1/c3-PKD3-NFATc4 hypertrophic signaling cascade and a
potential new drug target for the PCH.

PMCID: PMC3220477
PMID: 21971046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Dec;301(6):H2422-32. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00343.2011. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Intramuscular VEGF activates an SDF1-dependent progenitor cell cascade and an
SDF1-independent muscle paracrine cascade for cardiac repair.

Zisa D(1), Shabbir A, Mastri M, Taylor T, Aleksic I, McDaniel M, Suzuki G, Lee T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Engineering, Center for Research in 
Cardiovascular Medicine, University at Buffalo, New York, USA.

The skeletal muscle is endowed with an impressive ability to regenerate after
injury, and this ability is coupled to paracrine production of many trophic
factors possessing cardiovascular benefits. Taking advantage of this humoral
capacity of the muscle, we recently demonstrated an extracardiac therapeutic
regimen based on intramuscular delivery of VEGF-A(165) for repair of the failing 
hamster heart. This distal organ repair mechanism activates production from the
injected hamstring of many trophic factors, among which stromal-derived factor-1 
(SDF1) prominently mobilized multi-lineage progenitor cells expressing CXCR4 and 
their recruitment to the heart. The mobilized bone marrow progenitor cells
express the cardiac transcription factors myocyte enhancer factor 2c and GATA4
and several major trophic factors, most notably IGF1 and VEGF. SDF1 blockade
abrogated myocardial recruitment of CXCR4(+) and c-kit(+) progenitor cells with
an insignificant effect on the hematopoietic progenitor lineage. The knockdown of
cardiac progenitor cells led to deprivation of myocardial trophic factors,
resulting in compromised cardiomyogenesis and angiogenesis. However, the
VEGF-injected hamstring continued to synthesize cardioprotective factors,
contributing to moderate myocardial tissue viability and function even in the
presence of SDF1 blockade. These findings thus uncover two distinct but
synergistic cardiac therapeutic mechanisms activated by intramuscular VEGF.
Whereas the SDF1/CXCR4 axis activates the progenitor cell cascade and its trophic
support of cardiomyogenesis intramuscularly, VEGF amplifies the skeletal muscle
paracrine cascade capable of directly promoting myocardial survival independent
of SDF1. Given that recent clinical trials of cardiac repair based on the use of 
marrow-mobilizing agents have been disappointing, the proposed dual therapeutic
modality warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3233810
PMID: 21963833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Ontogenez. 2011 Jul-Aug;42(4):249-63.

[Comparative characteristics of new human embryonic stem cell lines SC5, SC6,
SC7, and SC3a].

[Article in Russian]

Kol'tsova AM, Gordeeva OF, Krylova TA, Lifantseva NV, Musorina AS, Iakovleva TK, 
Polianskaia GG.

Numerous human embryonic stem cell lines with different genetic background are
widely used as cell models for fundamental, biomedical and pharmacological
research. New hES cell lines SC5, SC6, SC7, and SC3a are derived from the
blastocysts and maintained on mitotically inactivated human feeder cells. All
derived hES cell lines passed through more than 120 cell population doublings,
retained normal diploid karyotype and ability of in vitro differentiation in the 
derivates of three germ layers. These lines express the markers of
undifferentiated hES cells: Oct-4, Nanog, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and alkaline
phosphatase. Moreover, undifferentiated cells of SC5, SC6, and SC7 lines
expressed germ line specific genes DPPA3/STELLA and DAZL and did not express
somatic lineages specific genes. In contrast, undifferentiated cells of SC3a line
did not express DPPA3/STELLA and DAZL but expressed extra embryonic endoderm cell
markers GATA4 and AFP. Double staining of SC5 and SC3a colonies by antibodies
against transcription factors Oct-4 and GATA4 has demonstrated that most SC3a
cells in colonies were positive for both factors. Furthermore, the cells of SC5, 
SC6, SC7 lines but not of SC3a line formed teratomas containing the derivates of 
the three germ layers. These results indicate that, in contrast to the other cell
lines, the cells in the SC3a colonies represent an early committed cell
population. Moreover, expression of the multidrug resistance transporter gene
ABCG2 was detected in undifferentiated cells and differentiating embryonic bodies
during 10 days of all lines by immunofluorescent and RT-PCR analyses, whereas
RT-PCR analysis has revealed up-regulation of the ABCB1 transporter gene
expression in differentiating embryoid bodies of SC5, SC6, and SC7 cells only.
Thus, these findings demonstrate different characteristics and differentiation
potential of SC5, SC6, SC7, and SC3a hES cell lines which were derived in
different conditions.

PMID: 21950051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Dec;219(2):698-703. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.08.044. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Look beyond one's own nose: combination of information from publicly available
sources reveals an association of GATA4 polymorphisms with plasma triglycerides.

Lamina C(1), Coassin S, Illig T, Kronenberg F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular
and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: GATA4iKO mice exhibit impeded triglyceride absorption from intestine
and decreased plasma triglyceride levels. Data in humans are lacking. We
hypothesized that triglyceride levels might also be regulated by polymorphisms in
the GATA4 gene in humans. We used publicly available data from different sources 
to evaluate this hypothesis. Our approach is a more often applicable advance to
uncover associations and their functional implications which would have been
otherwise missed by standard genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We used the publicly available GWAS results from 137 SNPs in the GATA4
region for triglyceride levels. We embedded these results into the comprehensive 
functional genomics data provided in the UCSC Genome Browser including among
others information on regulatory elements and interspecies conservation. A
concise graphical presentation is proposed together with an R function for
automatic data preparation. This process is presented in an educational manner
using a screencast to become most useful for other researchers.
RESULTS: We observed several polymorphisms in and around the GATA4 gene which
have a significant influence on plasma triglyceride levels with the lowest
p-value at SNP rs1466785 (Bonferroni-corrected p-value = 1.76e-5). The
bioinformatic evaluation of this locus in publicly available functional genomics 
data provided converging evidence for the presence of a transcriptional regulator
downstream of GATA4.
CONCLUSION: The combination of different sources of data has revealed an
association of GATA4 with triglyceride levels in humans. Our evaluation
exemplifies how an integrative analysis including both statistical and biological
perspectives can shed new light on available association data and reveals novel
candidate genes, which are otherwise hidden in the noisy region below genome-wide
significance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Transplant. 2012;21(5):985-96. doi: 10.3727/096368911X593145. Epub 2011 Sep 
22.

Trichostatin a promotes cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem
cells after 5-azacytidine induction or during coculture with neonatal
cardiomyocytes via a mechanism independent of histone deacetylase inhibition.

Yang G(1), Tian J, Feng C, Zhao LL, Liu Z, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Pediatric Institute of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

This study was to investigate the effect of trichostatin A (TSA), a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, on cardiac differentiation of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vitro. Rat MSCs were isolated and divided into
six groups: 1) control; 2) 5-azacytidine treatment (5-aza, 10 µM); 3) treatment
with TSA (100, 300, and 500 nM); 4) treatment with 5-aza followed by incubation
with TSA; 5) coculture with neonatal cardiomyocytes (CMs); and 6) treatment with 
TSA then coculture with CMs. HDAC activity was significantly inhibited in
TSA-treated cells with the maximal inhibition after 24 h of exposure to TSA at
300 nM. No changes in HDAC activity were observed in control, 5-aza-treated, or
coculture groups. Following 7 days of differentiation, the expression of early
cardiac transcription factors GATA-4, NKx2.5, MEF2c, and cardiac troponin T
(cTnT) was increased by 6-8 times in the cells in 5-aza-treated, coculture, or
TSA-treated groups over control as determined using real-time PCR,
immunofluorescence staining, and Western blotting. However, the percent
cTnT-positive cells were dramatically different with 0.7% for control, 10% for
5-aza-treated, 25% for coculture, and 4% for TSA-treated group (500 nM). TSA
treatment of the cells pretreated with 5-aza or cocultured with CMs dramatically 
increased the expression of GATA-4, NKx2.5, and MEF2c by 35-50 times over
control. The cTnT protein expression was also significantly increased by over
threefold by TSA treatment (500 nM) in both 5-aza-treated and coculture group
over control. The percent cTnT-positive cells in both 5-aza-pre-treated and
coculture groups were significantly increased by TSA treatment after 1 week of
differentiation by up to 92.6% (from 10.3% to 19.8%) and 23.9% (from 24.5% to
30.2%), respectively. These data suggested that TSA enhanced the cardiac
differentiation of MSCs after 5-aza induction or during coculture with CMs
through a mechanism beyond the inhibition of HDAC activity.

PMID: 21944777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Stem Cells Int. 2011;2011:130970. doi: 10.4061/2011/130970. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Transcription factor lbx1 expression in mouse embryonic stem cell-derived
phenotypes.

Schmitteckert S(1), Ziegler C, Kartes L, Rolletschek A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Interfaces 1, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Campus North, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen,
Germany.

Transcription factor Lbx1 is known to play a role in the migration of muscle
progenitor cells in limb buds and also in neuronal determination processes. In
addition, involvement of Lbx1 in cardiac neural crest-related cardiogenesis was
postulated. Here, we used mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells which have the capacity
to develop into cells of all three primary germ layers. During in vitro
differentiation, ES cells recapitulate cellular developmental processes and gene 
expression patterns of early embryogenesis. Transcript analysis revealed a
significant upregulation of Lbx1 at the progenitor cell stage. Immunofluorescence
staining confirmed the expression of Lbx1 in skeletal muscle cell progenitors and
GABAergic neurons. To verify the presence of Lbx1 in cardiac cells, triple
immunocytochemistry of ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes and a quantification assay 
were performed at different developmental stages. Colabeling of Lbx1 and cardiac 
specific markers troponin T, a-actinin, GATA4, and Nkx2.5 suggested a potential
role in early myocardial development.

PMCID: PMC3175398
PMID: 21941564  [PubMed]


174. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Dec;4(6):620-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.960302.
Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Cardiac defects are infrequent findings in individuals with 8p23.1 genomic
duplications containing GATA4.

Yu S(1), Zhou XG, Fiedler SD, Brawner SJ, Joyce JM, Liu HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics and University
of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The GATA4 gene is critical to regulating myocardial differentiation
and function. Haploinsufficiency of GATA4 is strongly associated with congenital 
heart defects (CHD). However, it is inconclusive whether duplicated GATA4 causes 
CHD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated 1645 consecutive pediatric patients with
various developmental disorders by high-resolution microarray-based comparative
genomic hybridization and found 8 probands and 2 relatives with pathogenic
genomic imbalances containing GATA4. Four probands contain an 4.0-Mb
interstitial duplication of 8p23.1 flanked by the 2 olfactory receptor gene
clusters REPD and REPP, representing 0.24% (4/1645) of the patients analyzed.
None of the 4 patients has CHD or any other heart diseases and 1 mother who
transmitted the duplication to her child has a history of aortic stenosis. Two
patients who carry multiple genomic abnormalities, including a duplication
containing GATA4, have complex CHD. Only 1 of the 3 individuals carrying genomic 
deletion containing GATA4 has atrial septal and ventricular septal defects.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac defects are infrequent findings in individuals with 8p23.1
genomic duplications containing GATA4. A 0.24% detection rate of this duplication
in this study is significantly higher than previously estimated. Observation in 2
patients with multiple genomic abnormalities and complex CHD is consistent with a
2-hit model that emphasizes accumulative effects of >1 insult to the genome,
leading to a visible or more severe clinical manifestation. Haploinsufficient
GATA4 may show variable expressivity with a wide spectrum of clinical findings,
including CHD.

PMID: 21933911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Dec;92(6):526-33. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20336. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Effects of in utero exposure to Bisphenol A or diethylstilbestrol on the adult
male reproductive system.

LaRocca J(1), Boyajian A, Brown C, Smith SD, Hixon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, USA.

The objective of this study was to determine whether in utero exposure to
Bisphenol A (BPA) induced reproductive tract abnormalities in the adult male
testis. Using the C57/Bl6 mouse, we examined sex-organ weights, anogenital
distance, and testis histopathology in adult males exposed in utero via oral
gavage to sesame oil, 50<U+2009>µg/kg BPA, 1000<U+2009>µg/kg BPA, or 2<U+2009>µg/kg diethylstilbestrol
(DES) as a positive control from gestational days 10 to 16. No changes in sperm
production or germ cell apoptosis were observed in adult testes after exposure to
either chemical. Adult mRNA levels of genes associated with sexual maturation and
differentiation, GATA4 and ID2, were significantly lower only in DES-exposed
testes. In summary, the data indicate no gross alterations in spermatogenesis
after in utero exposure to BPA or DES. At the molecular level, in utero exposure 
to DES, but not BPA, leads to decreased mRNA expression of genes associated with 
Sertoli cell differentiation.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3237790
PMID: 21922642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;31(21):4366-78. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05701-11. Epub 2011 Sep 
6.

Essential roles of ECAT15-2/Dppa2 in functional lung development.

Nakamura T(1), Nakagawa M, Ichisaka T, Shiota A, Yamanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

Many transcription factors and DNA binding proteins play essential roles in the
development of organs in which they are highly and/or specifically expressed.
Embryonic stem cell (ESC)-associated transcript 15-1 (ECAT15-1) and ECAT15-2,
also known as developmental pluripotency-associated 4 (Dppa4) and Dppa2,
respectively, are enriched in mouse ESCs and preimplantation embryos, and their
genes encode homologous proteins with a common DNA binding domain known as the
SAP motif. Previously, ECAT15-1 was shown to be important in lung development,
while it is dispensable in early development. In this study, we generated
ECAT15-2 single and ECAT15-1 ECAT15-2 double knockout (double KO) mice and found 
that almost all mutants, like ECAT15-1 mutants, died around birth with
respiratory defects. Paradoxically, the expression of neither ECAT15-1 nor
ECAT15-2 was detected in lung organogenesis. Several genes, such as Nkx2-5,
Gata4, and Pitx2, were downregulated in the ECAT15-2-null lung. On the other
hand, genomic DNA of these genes showed inactive chromatin statuses in
ECAT15-2-null ESCs, but not in wild-type ESCs. The chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assay revealed that ECAT15-2 binds to the regulatory region of Nkx2-5 in
ESCs. These data suggest that ECAT15-2 has important roles in lung development,
where it is no longer expressed, by leaving epigenetic marks from earlier
developmental stages.

PMCID: PMC3209334
PMID: 21896782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Nov 1;317(18):2661-70. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.08.011. Epub 
2011 Aug 22.

The subpopulation of mesenchymal stem cells that differentiate toward
cardiomyocytes is cardiac progenitor cells.

Wei F(1), Wang T, Liu J, Du Y, Ma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes
Related to Diseases, Ministry of Education, No. 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an,
Shaanxi 710061, PR China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are regarded as a promising source of cell-based
therapy for heart injury. In fact, less than 30% of MSCs contribute to
cardiomyocytes differentiation, and the isolation procedure and biological
characteristics of this population of cells remain unknown. Here we isolate and
investigate the biological characteristics of this subpopulation of MSCs. Twenty 
four MSC clones were randomly selected using single-cell monoclonal technology.
After induced with 5-azacytidine, eight clones displayed cardiomyocyte-like
morphologies, and highly (over 90%) expressed cardiac-specific markers cTnT and
a-actin, and displayed transient outward K(+) current (I(to)), inwardly
rectifying K(+) current (I(K1)) and delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(KDR)),
which were typical of cardiomocytes. Other clones merely showed I(to) current,
and the current densities were different from those of cardiomyocytes. In
contrast to the other clones, before induced with 5-azacytidine, the eight clones
expressed early cardiac markers GATA4 and NKX2.5, but not cTnT, a-actin, CD44 and
CD90, and had no potentials for adiopogenesis, osteogenesis or chondrogenesis
after induction. Our data suggest that the subgroup of MSCs that contributes to
cardiomyocytes differentiation is cardiac progenitor cells. Moreover, we show the
preliminary purification of this population of cells with a high potential for
cardiomyocytes differentiation using single-cell monoclonal technology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21878326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 23;413(2):171-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.036. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Conserved GC-boxes, E-box and GATA motif are essential for GATA-4 gene expression
in P19CL6 cells.

Ishibashi T(1), Yokura Y, Ohashi K, Yamamoto H, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The promoter of the GATA-4 gene was analyzed in P19CL6 cells. A 124bp segment
containing conserved two GC-boxes and E-box was essential for the basal promoter 
activity, as determined with a transient luciferase reporter gene assay. However,
an extended 1312 bp reporter construct but not the 124 bp segment, when ligated
to the GFP gene and stably inserted into the chromosome, showed regulated
promoter activity since GFP was expressed upon DMSO addition. Mutations of the
two GC-boxes and/or E-box significantly impaired the GFP expression. Furthermore,
mutation of the distal conserved GATA motif in the 1312 bp sequence decreased the
expression of GFP. Chromatin immuno-precipitation assay showed that GATA-6 binds 
to this conserved GATA motif. These results suggest that the distal GATA motif
recognized by GATA-6 together with the GC- and E-boxes may be important for
transcriptional activation of the GATA-4 gene in the chromosome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21878320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Dec;28(6):1025-32. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.783. Epub 2011 Aug 
26.

Novel GATA4 mutations in lone atrial fibrillation.

Jiang JQ(1), Shen FF, Fang WY, Liu X, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical College of Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, PR China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most frequent cardiac arrhythmia and is a major
cause of morbidity and mortality. Previous studies have established genetic
defects as a risk factor for AF in a minority of patients. However, AF is of
substantial genetic heterogeneity and the molecular determinants for AF in a
majority of cases remain unclear. In this study, the entire coding sequence and
splice junctions of GATA4, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor
essential for cardiogenesis, were sequenced in 160 unrelated patients with lone
AF. A total of 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy individuals were used as 
controls. The available relatives of the patient carrying an identified mutation 
were genotyped. The functional characteristics of the mutant GATA4 were analyzed 
using a luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, two novel heterozygous
GATA4 mutations of p.G16C and p.H28D, were identified in 2 unrelated families
with AF, respectively, which co-segregated with AF in each family with complete
penetrance. Functional analysis demonstrated that the mutations of GATA4 were
associated with a significantly decreased transcriptional activity. The findings 
expand the mutation spectrum of GATA4 linked to AF and provide novel insight into
the molecular mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of AF.

PMID: 21874226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 20;21(8):1250-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0578. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

A model of early human embryonic stem cell differentiation reveals inter- and
intracellular changes on transition to squamous epithelium.

Galat V(1), Malchenko S, Galat Y, Ishkin A, Nikolsky Y, Kosak ST, Soares BM,
Iannaccone P, Crispino JD, Hendrix MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, iPS and Human Stem Cell Core Facility,
Children's Memorial Research Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614-3394, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

The molecular events leading to human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation 
are the subject of considerable scrutiny. Here, we characterize an in vitro model
that permits analysis of the earliest steps in the transition of hESC colonies to
squamous epithelium on basic fibroblast growth factor withdrawal. A set of
markers (GSC, CK18, Gata4, Eomes, and Sox17) point to a mesendodermal nature of
the epithelial cells with subsequent commitment to definitive endoderm (Sox17,
Cdx2, nestin, and Islet1). We assayed alterations in the transcriptome in
parallel with the distribution of immunohistochemical markers. Our results
indicate that the alterations of tight junctions in pluripotent culture precede
the beginning of differentiation. We defined this cell population as "specified,"
as it is committed toward differentiation. The transitional zone between
"specified" pluripotent and differentiated cells displays significant
up-regulation of keratin-18 (CK18) along with a decrease in the functional
activity of gap junctions and the down-regulation of 2 gap junction proteins,
connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 45 (Cx45), which is coincidental with substantial
elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels. These findings reveal a set of cellular
changes that may represent the earliest markers of in vitro hESC transition to an
epithelial phenotype, before the induction of gene expression networks that guide
hESC differentiation. Moreover, we hypothesize that these events may be common
during the primary steps of hESC commitment to functionally varied epithelial
tissue derivatives of different embryological origins.

PMCID: PMC3353739
PMID: 21861759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. BMC Genomics. 2011 Aug 18;12:417. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-417.

Transcriptome profiling of sheep granulosa cells and oocytes during early
follicular development obtained by laser capture microdissection.

Bonnet A(1), Bevilacqua C, Benne F, Bodin L, Cotinot C, Liaubet L, Sancristobal
M, Sarry J, Terenina E, Martin P, Tosser-Klopp G, Mandon-Pepin B.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR444 Génétique Cellulaire, Auzeville, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
agnes.bonnet@toulouse.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Successful achievement of early folliculogenesis is crucial for
female reproductive function. The process is finely regulated by cell-cell
interactions and by the coordinated expression of genes in both the oocyte and in
granulosa cells. Despite many studies, little is known about the cell-specific
gene expression driving early folliculogenesis. The very small size of these
follicles and the mixture of types of follicles within the developing ovary make 
the experimental study of isolated follicular components very difficult.The
recently developed laser capture microdissection (LCM) technique coupled with
microarray experiments is a promising way to address the molecular profile of
pure cell populations. However, one main challenge was to preserve the RNA
quality during the isolation of single cells or groups of cells and also to
obtain sufficient amounts of RNA.Using a new LCM method, we describe here the
separate expression profiles of oocytes and follicular cells during the first
stages of sheep folliculogenesis.
RESULTS: We developed a new tissue fixation protocol ensuring efficient single
cell capture and RNA integrity during the microdissection procedure. Enrichment
in specific cell types was controlled by qRT-PCR analysis of known genes: six
oocyte-specific genes (SOHLH2, MAEL, MATER, VASA, GDF9, BMP15) and three
granulosa cell-specific genes (KL, GATA4, AMH).A global gene expression profile
for each follicular compartment during early developmental stages was identified 
here for the first time, using a bovine Affymetrix chip. Most notably, the
granulosa cell dataset is unique to date. The comparison of oocyte vs. follicular
cell transcriptomes revealed 1050 transcripts specific to the granulosa cell and 
759 specific to the oocyte.Functional analyses allowed the characterization of
the three main cellular events involved in early folliculogenesis and confirmed
the relevance and potential of LCM-derived RNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The ovary is a complex mixture of different cell types. Distinct
cell populations need therefore to be analyzed for a better understanding of
their potential interactions. LCM and microarray analysis allowed us to identify 
novel gene expression patterns in follicular cells at different stages and in
oocyte populations.

PMCID: PMC3166951
PMID: 21851638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cytotherapy. 2011 Oct;13(9):1057-65. doi: 10.3109/14653249.2011.597380. Epub 2011
Aug 17.

GATA-4 promotes myocardial transdifferentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells via 
up-regulating IGFBP-4.

Li H(1), Zuo S, Pasha Z, Yu B, He Z, Wang Y, Yang X, Ashraf M, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45867, USA.

BACKGROUND AIMS: GATA-4 is a cardiac transcription factor and plays an important 
role in cell lineage differentiation during development. We investigated whether 
overexpression of GATA-4 increases adult mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC)
transdifferentiation into a cardiac phenotype in vitro.
METHODS: MSC were harvested from rat bone marrow (BM) and transduced with GATA-4 
(MSC(GATA-4)) using a murine stem cell virus (pMSCV) retroviral expression
system. Gene expression in MSC(GATA-4) was analyzed using quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting. Native
cardiomyocytes (CM) were isolated from ventricles of neonatal rats. Myocardial
transdifferentiation of MSC was determined by immunostaining and
electrophysiologic recording. The transdifferentiation rate was calculated
directly from flow cytometery.
RESULTS: The expression of cardiac genes, including brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP), Islet-1 and a-sarcomeric actinin (a-SA), was up-regulated in MSC(GATA-4)
compared with control cells that were transfected with Green Fluorescent Protein 
(GFP) only (MSC(Null)). At the same time, insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein (IGFBP)-4 was significantly up-regulated in MSC(GATA-4). A synchronous
beating of MSC with native CM was detected and an action potential was recorded. 
Some GFP (+) cells were positive for a-SA staining after MSC were co-cultured
with native CM for 7 days. The transdifferentiation rate was significantly higher
in MSC(GATA-4). Functional studies indicated that the differentiation potential
of MSC(GATA-4) was decreased by knockdown of IGFBP-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of GATA-4 significantly increases MSC differentiation
into a myocardial phenotype, which might be associated with the up-regulation of 
IGFBP-4.

PMCID: PMC3366502
PMID: 21846294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.037. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

GATA5 interacts with GATA4 and GATA6 in outflow tract development.

Laforest B(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différentiation Cardiaque, Programme de
Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are critical regulators of
heart development and mutations in 2 of them, GATA4 and GATA6 are associated with
outflow tract and septal defects in human. The heart expresses 3 GATA factors,
GATA4, 5 and 6 in a partially overlapping pattern. Here, we report that compound 
Gata4/Gata5 and Gata5/Gata6 mutants die embryonically or perinatally due to
severe congenital heart defects. Almost all Gata4(+/-)Gata5(+/-) mutant embryos
have double outlet right ventricles (DORV), large ventricular septal defects
(VSD) as well as hypertrophied mitral and tricuspid valves. Only 25% of double
compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have
aortic stenosis. Compound loss of a Gata5 and a Gata6 allele also leads to DORVs 
associated with subaortic VSDs. Expression of several transcription factors
important for endocardial and myocardial cell differentiation, such as Tbx20,
Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand2, was reduced in compound heterozygote embryos. These
findings suggest the existence of important genetic interactions between Gata5
and the 2 other cardiac GATA factors in endocardial cushion formation and outflow
tract morphogenesis. The data identify GATA5 as a potential genetic modifier of
congenital heart disease and provide insight for elucidating the genetic basis of
an important class of human birth defects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21839733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2215-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34129. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

Noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium in a boy with a novel chromosome
8p23.1 deletion.

Blinder JJ(1), Martinez HR, Craigen WJ, Belmont J, Pignatelli RH, Jefferies JL.

Author information: 
(1)The Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Interstitial deletion of chromosome 8p23.1 has been reported in patients with
congenital heart defects, including atrial and ventricular septal defects,
pulmonary stenosis, and complex cyanotic heart defects. GATA4, a zinc-finger
transcription factor gene, has been localized to this region. GATA4 interacts
with additional transcription factors in the embryogenesis of the primitive heart
tube. Mutations in GATA4 are thought to be responsible for the congenital heart
defects reported in association with this chromosomal deletion, and several
familial point mutations leading to amino acid substitutions have also been
identified. Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is a clinically heterogeneous
disorder characterized by LV myocardial trabeculations and intertrabecular
recesses that communicate with the LV cavity. Patients may be asymptomatic or may
present with evidence of severely depressed LV systolic and diastolic function.
The LV may be dilated or hypertrophied, and clinical expression may be
undulating. Several genetic causes of LVNC have been reported, with variable
modes of inheritance, including autosomal dominant and X-linked inheritance, but 
relatively few responsible genes have been identified. A 12-year-old boy with a
history of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, dysmorphic features, and LVNC with
preserved LV systolic function was referred to the Cardiovascular Genetics Clinic
at our institution. The patient was asymptomatic in terms of cardiovascular
function. Chromosome microarray testing revealed an interstitial deletion in the 
region of 8p23.1 containing GATA4. LVNC has not been reported previously in
association with this chromosome deletion. Further investigation into the role of
GATA4 in patients with LVNC is warranted.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21834050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;359(1-2):9-16. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0992-1. Epub
2011 Jul 16.

Gastrodin protects against cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis.

Shu C(1), Chen C, Zhang DP, Guo H, Zhou H, Zong J, Bian Z, Dong X, Dai J, Zhang
Y, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, JieFang Road
238, Wuhan, 430060, People's Republic of China.

Phenolic glucoside gastrodin (Gas), which is a main component extracted from the 
Chinese herbs Gastrodia elata Bl, is a well-known natural calcium antagonist with
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions. It has long been used clinically for
treatment of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. Previous studies have
shown that gastrodin possesses comprehensive pharmacological functions. However, 
very little is known about whether gastrodin has protective role on cardiac
hypertrophy. The aim of this study was to determine whether gastrodin attenuates 
pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy in mice and to clarify the
underlying molecular mechanisms. Our data demonstrated that gastrodin prevented
cardiac hypertrophy induced by aortic banding (AB), as assessed by heart
weight/body weight and lung weight/body weight ratios, echocardiographic
parameters, and gene expression of hypertrophic markers. The inhibitory effect of
gastrodin on cardiac hypertrophy is mediated by ERK1/2 signaling and GATA-4
activation. Further studies showed that gastrodin attenuated fibrosis and
collagen synthesis through abrogating ERK1/2 signaling pathway. Therefore, these 
findings indicated that gastrodin, which is a potentially safe and inexpensive
therapy for clinical use, has protective potential in targeting cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis through suppression of ERK1/2 signaling.

PMID: 21833534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Circ J. 2011;75(11):2683-91. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Overexpression of Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 enhances the efficacy of mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation after myocardial infarction.

Gao XR(1), Tan YZ, Wang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Shanghai Medical School of
Fudan University, Japan. xrgao2008@163.com

BACKGROUND: The high death rate of the transplanted stem cells in the infarcted
heart and low efficiency of differentiation toward cardiomyocytes show that
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) transplantation after myocardial infarction (MI) is
not effective. Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 are considered to be key regulators of
cardiogenesis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of
transplanting MSC overexpressing Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 (MSCs-CG) after MI.
METHODS AND RESULTS: According to acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining,
MSCs-CG were more resistant to anoxia as compared with MSCs in vitro. In a mouse 
MI model, ejection fraction and fractional shortening were higher in the MSC-CG
group than in the MSC or phosphate-buffered saline group. Wall thickness of the
infarct area was increased and collagen deposition was clearly reduced in the
MSC-CG group as compared with the other groups. There were more surviving MSCs in
the MSC-CG group than in the MSC group. Most of the Y chromosome-positive cells
expressed cardiac troponin T and connexin43 (Cx-43). Cx-43 was localized between 
Y chromosome-positive cells and recipient cardiomyocytes. Microvessel density in 
the peri-infarct regions and infarct regions increased significantly in the
MSC-CG group.
CONCLUSIONS: Transplantation of MSCs overexpressing Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA-4
represents a new treatment strategy with the potential to improve cardiac
function after MI.

PMID: 21828931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biomaterials. 2011 Nov;32(32):8058-66. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.07.052.
Epub 2011 Aug 6.

A synthetic substrate to support early mesodermal differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells.

Liu Y(1), Wang X, Kaufman DS, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

Our ability to guide differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs)
toward desired lineages efficiently and reproducibly in xeno-free conditions is
the key to advancing hPSC technology from the laboratory to clinical use. Here we
report an engineered biomimetic substrate functionalized with both peptide
ligands for a5ß1 and a6ß1 integrins to support efficient early mesodermal
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) when cultured in a
differentiation medium containing BMP4. In contrast, mesodermal differentiation
is not induced on substrates functionalized with either ligand alone even though 
the culture medium is identical. Mesodermal differentiation was characterized by 
immunofluorescent staining, flow cytometric analysis, and RT-PCR analysis of
early mesodermal markers Brachyury, Mixl1, and Wnt3. The early mesodermal
progenitors derived on the substrate functionalized with both integrin ligands
have the normal developmental potential to further differentiate along the
hemato-endothelial and cardiac lineages. Immobilized ligands for a5ß1 and a6ß1
integrins both are permissive, necessary, and sufficient insoluble ligands in
this engineered system to support early mesodermal differentiation of hESCs. This
synthetic substrate, in conjunction with defined soluble factors, constructs a
well-controlled and xeno-free early mesodermal differentiation niche that offers 
advantages over the previously reported niche constructed with the
Matrigel-coated substrate.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3189998
PMID: 21821284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 26;412(2):253-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.079. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) induces differentiation and proliferation of
mouse embryonic carcinoma P19CL6 cells.

Meng Q(1), Jia Z, Wang W, Li B, Ma K, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of
Education of China, Peking University, 38 Xueyuan Road, 100191 Beijing, China.

The inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) family of genes encodes negative regulators of 
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors and has been implicated in such
diverse cellular processes as differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and
migration. Id knockout mouse embryos display multiple cardiac defects but the
specific role of Id1 in cardiac differentiation is unclear. In the present study,
we investigated the function of Id1 in DMSO-induced P19CL6 cells, a
widely-accepted cell model of cardiac differentiation. We found that Id1 was
upregulated during the cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells. The expression of
cardiac specific marker genes, Gata4, a-MHC and ISL1, was upregulated in P19CL6
cells stably transfected with Id1 (P19CL6-Id1) during cardiac differentiation.
The overexpression of Id1 reduced the number of cells in G1 phase and increased
the cell population in G2, M and S phases, while knockdown of Id1 increased the
number of cells in G1 phase from 48.6 ± 2.51% to 62.2 ± 1.52% at day 0 of cardiac
induction, and from 52.5 ± 3.41% to 63.7 ± 1.02% at day 3 after cardiac
induction, indicating that Id1 promoted proliferation of P19CL6 cells. Luciferase
assays showed that the activity of TOP flash was higher in P19CL6-Id1 cells than 
wildtype P19CL6 cells, while Id1 expression was also upregulated in P19CL6 cells 
treated with Wnt3a or LiCl. This indicates that there may be positive feedback
between Id1 and Wnt signaling which plays an important role in cardiac
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21820417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2196-202. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34131. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

Ebstein anomaly: Genetic heterogeneity and association with microdeletions 1p36
and 8p23.1.

Digilio MC(1), Bernardini L, Lepri F, Giuffrida MG, Guida V, Baban A, Versacci P,
Capolino R, Torres B, De Luca A, Novelli A, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy. digilio@opbg.net

Ebstein anomaly is an uncommon congenital heart defect (CHD), characterized by
downward displacement of the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. To uncover
the genetic associations with Ebstein anomaly, we have searched chromosomal
imbalances using standard cytogenetic and array-CGH analysis, and single gene
conditions associated with syndromic Ebstein anomaly (with extracardiac
anomalies), and screened GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in nonsyndromic patients
(without extracardiac anomalies). Between January 1997 and September 2009, 44
consecutive patients with Ebstein anomaly were evaluated in two centers of
Pediatric Cardiology. Ebstein anomaly was syndromic in 12 (27%) patients, and
nonsyndromic in 32 (73%). A recognizable syndrome or complex was diagnosed by
clinical criteria in seven patients. In one syndromic patient an 18q deletion was
diagnosed by standard cytogenetic analysis. Array-CGH analysis performed in 10 of
the 12 syndromic patients detected an interstitial deletion of about 4<U+2009>Mb at
8p23.1 in one patient, and a deletion 1pter<U+2009>><U+2009>1p36.32/dup Xpter-<U+2009>><U+2009>Xp22.32 in
another patient. In the 28 of 32 nonsyndromic patients who underwent molecular
testing, no mutation in GATA4 and NKX2.5 genes were detected. We conclude that
Ebstein anomaly is a genetically heterogeneous defect, and that deletion 1p36 and
deletion 8p23.1 are the most frequent chromosomal imbalances associated with
Ebstein anomaly. Candidate genes include the GATA4 gene (in patients with del
8p23.1), NKX2.5 (based on published patients with isolated Ebstein anomaly) and a
hypothetical gene in patients with del 1p36).

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21815254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):H1531-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00216.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

LEOPARD-type SHP2 mutant Gln510Glu attenuates cardiomyocyte differentiation and
promotes cardiac hypertrophy via dysregulation of Akt/GSK-3ß/ß-catenin signaling.

Ishida H(1), Kogaki S, Narita J, Ichimori H, Nawa N, Okada Y, Takahashi K, Ozono 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.

LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant inherited multisystemic disorder. 
Most cases involve mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the protein
tyrosine phosphatase Src homology 2-containing protein phosphatase 2 (SHP2). LS
frequently causes severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), even from the fetal
period. However, the molecular pathogenesis has not been clearly elucidated.
Here, we analyzed the roles of the LS-type SHP2 mutant Gln510Glu (Q510E), which
showed the most severe type of HCM in LS, in cardiomyocyte differentiation, and
in morphological changes. We generated mutant P19CL6 cell lines, the most
convenient cardiomyocyte differentiation model, which continuously expressed
SHP2-Q510E, SHP2-D61N (Noonan-type mutant), wild-type SHP2, and green fluorescent
protein (native SHP2 expression only). SHP2-Q510E mutant P19CL6 cells showed
significant attenuation of myofibrillogenesis, with increased proliferative
activity. Mature cardiomyocytes from the SHP2-Q510E mutant were significantly
larger than those of controls and the other mutants. However, expression of
cardiac-specific transcriptional factors (Gata4, Tbx5, and Nkx2.5) did not differ
significantly between the LS-type SHP2-Q510E mutants and the other mutants and
controls. Our results indicate that SHP2-Q510E mutants can differentiate into
cardiac progenitors but are inhibited from undergoing terminal differentiation
into mature cardiomyocytes. In contrast, Akt and glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK)-3ß phosphorylation were upregulated, and nuclear ß-catenin at the late
stage of differentiation was highly accumulated in SHP2-Q510E mutant P19CL6
cells. Supplementation with the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt inhibitor LY-294002
during the late stage of differentiation was found to partially restore
myofibrillogenesis while suppressing the increase in size of individual mature
cardiomyocytes derived from the SHP2-Q510E mutants. Our findings suggest that
dysregulation of the Akt/GSK-3ß/ß-catenin pathway can contribute to the
pathogenesis of HCM in LS patients, not only through hypertrophic changes in
individual cardiac cells but also via the expansion of cardiac progenitors.

PMID: 21803945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022550. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Improvement of cardiac function in mouse myocardial infarction after
transplantation of epigenetically-modified bone marrow progenitor cells.

Rajasingh J(1), Thangavel J, Siddiqui MR, Gomes I, Gao XP, Kishore R, Malik AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center of Lung and Vascular Biology, University
of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
rjohnson9@kumc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To study usefulness of bone marrow progenitor cells (BPCs)
epigenetically altered by chromatin modifying agents in mediating heart repair
after myocardial infarction in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We tested the therapeutic efficacy of bone marrow progenitor
cells treated with the clinically-used chromatin modifying agents Trichostatin A 
(TSA, histone deacetylase inhibitor) and 5Aza-2-deoxycytidine (Aza, DNA
methylation inhibitor) in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
Treatment of BPCs with Aza and TSA induced expression of pluripotent genes Oct4, 
Nanog, Sox2, and thereafter culturing these cells in defined cardiac
myocyte-conditioned medium resulted in their differentiation into cardiomyocyte
progenitors and subsequently into cardiac myocytes. Their transition was deduced 
by expression of repertoire of markers: Nkx2.5, GATA4, cardiotroponin T,
cardiotroponin I, a-sarcomeric actinin, Mef2c and MHC-a. We observed that the
modified BPCs had greater AceH3K9 expression and reduced histone deacetylase1
(HDAC1) and lysine-specific demethylase1 (LSD1) expression compared to untreated 
BPCs, characteristic of epigenetic changes. Intra-myocardial injection of
modified BPCs after AMI in mice significantly improved left ventricular function.
These changes were ascribed to differentiation of the injected cells into
cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of BPCs with Aza and TSA converts BPCs into multipotent
cells, which can then be differentiated into myocyte progenitors. Transplantation
of these modified progenitor cells into infarcted mouse hearts improved left
ventricular function secondary to differentiation of cells in the niche into
myocytes and endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3142193
PMID: 21799893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012 Jan;54(1):101-8. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e31822d52cf.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is abundantly expressed in childhood but not in adult
liver tumors.

Soini T(1), Haveri H, Elo JM, Kauppinen M, Kyrönlahti A, Salo MK, Lohi J,
Andersson LC, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Transcription factor GATA-4 is expressed in early fetal liver and
essential for organogenesis. It is also implicated in carcinogenesis in several
endoderm-derived organs. Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common malignant pediatric
liver tumor, has features of fetal liver including extramedullary hematopoiesis. 
We investigated the expression of GATA-4 and its purported target gene
erythropoietin (Epo) in liver tumors and the role of GATA-4 in HB pathogenesis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, Western blotting, and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used for liver samples from patients
with HB or hepatocellular carcinoma. To further investigate the role of GATA-4 in
pediatric liver tumors, we used adenoviral transfections of wild-type or dominant
negative GATA-4 constructs in the human HB cell line, HUH6.
RESULTS: We found abundant GATA-4 expression in both types of liver tumors in
children, whereas it was absent in adult hepatocellular carcinoma. A close family
member GATA-6 was expressed in a minority of childhood but not adult liver
tumors. Epo, present in the fetal liver, was also expressed in childhood liver
tumors. Moreover, cell line HUH6 was GATA-4 positive and produced Epo. We found
that altering the amount of functional GATA-4 in HUH6 cells did not significantly
affect either proliferation or apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA-4 is abundant in pediatric liver tumors, but unraveling its
exact role in these neoplasms requires further investigation.

PMID: 21788913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Genes Cancer. 2010 Dec;1(12):1178-88. doi: 10.1177/1947601911404223.

GATA Transcription Factors and Cancer.

Zheng R(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

It has been almost a quarter century since it was first appreciated that a class 
of oncogenes contained in rapidly transforming avian retroviruses encoded
DNA-binding transcription factors. As with other oncogenes, genetic recombination
with the viral genome led to their overexpression or functional alteration. In
the years that followed, alterations of numerous transcription factors were shown
to be causatively involved in various cancers in human patients and model
organisms. Depending on their normal cellular functions, these factors were
subsequently categorized as proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. This
review focuses on the role of GATA transcription factors in carcinogenesis. GATA 
factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that control the development of
diverse tissues by activating or repressing transcription. GATA factors thus
coordinate cellular maturation with proliferation arrest and cell survival.
Therefore, a role of this family of genes in human cancers is not surprising.
Prominent examples include structural mutations in GATA1 that are found in almost
all megakaryoblastic leukemias in patients with Down syndrome; loss of GATA3
expression in aggressive, dedifferentiated breast cancers; and silencing of GATA4
and GATA5 expression in colorectal and lung cancers. Here, we discuss possible
mechanisms of carcinogenesis vis-à-vis the normal functions of GATA factors as
they pertain to human patients and mouse models of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092280
PMID: 21779441  [PubMed]


194. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):946-53. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093203. Epub 2011
Jul 20.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 promotes primitive endoderm development in bovine
blastocyst outgrowths.

Yang QE(1), Fields SD, Zhang K, Ozawa M, Johnson SE, Ealy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611-0910, USA.

Primitive endoderm (PE) is the second extraembryonic tissue to form during
embryogenesis in mammals. The PE develops from pluripotent cells of the
blastocyst inner cell mass. Experimental results described herein provide
evidence that FGF2 stimulates PE development during bovine blastocyst development
in vitro. Bovine blastocysts were cultured individually on a feeder layer-free,
Matrigel-coated surface in the presence or absence of FGF2. A majority of
blastocysts cultures formed outgrowths (76.8%) and the rate of outgrowth
formation was not affected by FGF2 supplementation. However, supplementation with
FGF2 increased the incidence of PE outgrowths on Days 13 and 15 after in vitro
fertilization. Presumptive PE cultures contained cells with a phenotype distinct 
from trophectoderm (TE). Cell identity was validated by expression of GATA4 and
GATA6 mRNA and transferrin protein, all markers of the PE lineage. Expression of 
GATA4 occurred coincident with blastocyst expansion and hatching. These cells did
not express IFNT and CDX2 (TE lineage markers). Profiles of FGF receptor (FGFR)
isoforms were distinct between PE and TE cultures. Specifically, FGFR1b and
FGFR1c were the predominant FGFR transcripts in PE whereas FGFR2b transcripts
were abundant in TE. Supplementation with FGF2 increased the mitotic index of PE 
but not TE. Moreover, FGF signaling appears important for initiation of PE
formation in blastocysts, presumably by lineage committal from NANOG-positive
epiblast cells, because chemical disruption of FGFR kinase activity with PD173074
reduces GATA4 expression and increases NANOG expression. Collectively, these
results indicate that FGF2 and potentially other FGFs specify PE formation and
mediate PE proliferation during early pregnancy in cattle.

PMID: 21778141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Transplantation. 2011 Sep 15;92(5):529-35. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318229f785.

Downregulation of mucins in graft bile ducts after liver transplantation in rats.

Tian F(1), Cheng L, Li D, Liu Z, Zeng Y, Xu J, Li X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, No. 20 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Nonanastomotic biliary strictures represent a serious complication
after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). This study investigates the
potential role of mucins in bile duct injury after OLT.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: normal group (Normal,
n=5), sham-operated group (Sham, n=20), OLT group with 1 hr donor cold ischemic
time (n=20), and OLT group with 12 hr donor cold ischemic time (OLTn=20).
Expression of mucins and GATA factors in bile ducts was examined by real-time
polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting. Bile was
collected for biochemical analysis, and the histological changes associated with 
bile duct injury were evaluated.
RESULTS: In normal bile ducts, Muc1, Muc2, Muc3A, Muc4, and Muc6 mRNA were
expressed, whereas Muc5AC mRNA was undetectable. The expression of Muc1, Muc3A,
and Muc4 but not Muc2 and Muc6 at mRNA level in graft bile ducts decreased
remarkably early after OLT. The decreased expression of Muc1 and Muc4 was further
confirmed at protein level by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting.
Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold ischemic time was
significantly associated with the injury severity scores of large but not small
bile ducts. Among six GATA factors, GATA3, GATA4, and GATA6 mRNA were expressed
in normal bile ducts. GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels decreased significantly after
OLT.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold
ischemic time may play a potential role in large bile duct injury early after
OLT.

PMID: 21775928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Nov;112(11):3246-55. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23251.

HDAC inhibition promotes cardiogenesis and the survival of embryonic stem cells
through proteasome-dependent pathway.

Chen HP(1), Denicola M, Qin X, Zhao Y, Zhang L, Long XL, Zhuang S, Liu PY, Zhao
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Roger William Medical Center, Boston University Medical
School, Providence, Rhode Island 02908, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition plays a crucial role in mediating
cardiogenesis and myocardial protection, whereas HDAC degradation has recently
attracted attention in mediating the biological function of HDACs. However, it
remains unknown whether HDAC inhibition modulates cardiogenesis and embryonic
stem cell (ESC) survival through the proteasome pathway. Using the
well-established mouse ESC culture, we demonstrated that HDAC inhibitors, both
trichostatin A (TSA,50<U+2009> nmol/L) and sodium butyrate (NaB, 200 <U+2009>µmol/L) that
causes the pronounced reduction of HDAC4 activity, decreased cell death and
increased viability of ESCs in response to oxidant stress. HDAC inhibition
reduced the cleaved caspases 3, 6, 9, PARP, and TUNEL positive ESCs, which were
abrogated with MG132 (0.5 <U+2009>µmol/L), a specific proteasome inhibitor. Furthermore,
HDAC inhibition stimulates the growth of embryoid bodies (EB), which are
associated with a faster spontaneous rhythmic contraction. HDAC inhibition
increases the up-regulation of GATA4, MEF2C, Nkx2.5, cardiac actin, and a-SMA
mRNA and protein levels that were abrogated by MG132. TSA and NaB resulted in a
significant increase in cardiac lineage commitments that were blocked by the
proteasome inhibition. Notably, HDAC inhibitors led to noticeable HDAC4
degradation, which was effectively prevented by MG132. Luciferase assay
demonstrates an activation of MEF2 cardiac transcriptional factor by HDAC
inhibition, which was repressed by MG132, revealing that the degradation of HDAC4
allows for the activation of MEF2. Taken together, our study is the first to
demonstrate that HDAC inhibition through proteasome pathway forms a novel
signaling to determine the cardiac lineage commitment and elicits the survival
pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3357124
PMID: 21751234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 26;108(30):12331-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104499108. Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Serine 105 phosphorylation of transcription factor GATA4 is necessary for
stress-induced cardiac hypertrophy in vivo.

van Berlo JH(1), Elrod JW, Aronow BJ, Pu WT, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive growth process that occurs in response to
stress stimulation or injury wherein multiple signal transduction pathways are
induced, culminating in transcription factor activation and the reprogramming of 
gene expression. GATA4 is a critical transcription factor in the heart that is
known to induce/regulate the hypertrophic program, in part, by receiving signals 
from MAPKs. Here we generated knock-in mice in which a known MAPK phosphorylation
site at serine 105 (S105) in Gata4 that augments activity was mutated to alanine.
Homozygous Gata4-S105A mutant mice were viable as adults, although they showed a 
compromised stress response of the myocardium. For example, cardiac hypertrophy
in response to phenylephrine agonist infusion for 2 wk was largely blunted in
Gata4-S105A mice, as was the hypertrophic response to pressure overload at 1 and 
2 wk of applied stimulation. Gata4-S105A mice were also more susceptible to heart
failure and cardiac dilation after 2 wk of pressure overload. With respect to the
upstream pathway, hearts from Gata4-S105A mice did not efficiently hypertrophy
following direct ERK1/2 activation using an activated MEK1 transgene in vivo.
Mechanistically, GATA4 mutant protein from these hearts failed to show enhanced
DNA binding in response to hypertrophic stimulation. Moreover, hearts from
Gata4-S105A mice had significant changes in the expression of
hypertrophy-inducible, fetal, and remodeling-related genes.

PMCID: PMC3145698
PMID: 21746915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):965-76. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093013. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Upstream stimulatory factor induces Nr5a1 and Shbg gene expression during the
onset of rat Sertoli cell differentiation.

Wood MA(1), Mukherjee P, Toocheck CA, Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology, Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproduction Services, Magee Women's Research Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Within the testis, each Sertoli cell can support a finite number of developing
germ cells. During development, the cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and
the onset of differentiation establish the final number of Sertoli cells and,
thus, the total number of sperm that can be produced. The upstream stimulatory
factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2, respectively) differentially regulate numerous
Sertoli cell genes during differentiation. To identify genes that are activated
by USF proteins during differentiation, studies were conducted in Sertoli cells
isolated from 5- and 11-day-old rats, representing proliferating and
differentiating cells, respectively. Usf1 mRNA and USF1 protein levels were
increased between 5 and 11 days after birth. In vitro studies revealed that USF1 
and USF2 DNA-binding activity also increased at 11 days for the promoters of four
potential target genes, Fshr, Gata4, Nr5a1, and Shbg. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that USF recruitment increased in vivo
between 5 and 11 days after birth at the Fshr, Gata4, and Nr5a1 promoters.
Expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg, but not of Fshr or Gata4, mRNAs was elevated in
11-day-old Sertoli cells compared with 5-day-old Sertoli cells. Transient
transfection of USF1 and USF2 expression vectors up-regulated Nr5a1 and Shbg
promoter activity. RNA interference assays demonstrated that USF1 and USF2
contribute to Nr5a1 and Shbg expression in differentiating cells. Together, these
data indicate that increased USF levels induce the expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg
during the differentiation of Sertoli cells, whereas Fshr and Gata4 expression is
not altered by USF proteins during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3197915
PMID: 21734262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(7):974-9.

Curcumin ameliorates cardiac inflammation in rats with autoimmune myocarditis.

Mito S(1), Watanabe K, Harima M, Thandavarayan RA, Veeraveedu PT, Sukumaran V,
Suzuki K, Kodama M, Aizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Niigata University of Pharmacy and
Applied Life Sciences, 2651 Higashijima, Akiha-ku, Niigata 9568603, Japan.

Curcumin is a natural polyphenolic compound abundant in the rhizome of the
perennial herb turmeric, Curcuma longa. It is commonly used as a dietary spice
and coloring agent in cooking, and is used anecdotally as an herb in traditional 
Indian and Chinese medicine. It has been reported that curcumin has the potential
to protect against cardiac inflammation through suppression of GATA-4 and nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B); however, no study to date has addressed the effect of curcumin
on experimental autoimmune myocarditis (EAM) in rats. In this study, 8-week-old
male Lewis rats were immunized with cardiac myosin to induce EAM. They were then 
divided randomly into a treatment or vehicle group and orally administrated
curcumin (50 mg/kg/d) or 1% gum arabic, respectively, for 3 weeks after myosin
injection. We performed hemodynamic, echocardiographic, hematoxylin and eosin
staining, mast cell staining and Western blotting studies to evaluate the
protective effect of curcumin in the acute phase of EAM. Cardiac functional
parameters measured by hemodynamic and echocardiographic studies were
significantly improved by curcumin treatment. Furthermore, curcumin reduced the
heart weight-to-body weight ratio, area of inflammatory lesions and the
myocardial protein level of NF-<U+03BA>B, interleukin (IL)-1ß, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-a and GATA-4. Our results indicate that curcumin has the potential to
protect against cardiac inflammation through suppression of IL-1ß, TNF-a, GATA-4 
and NF-<U+03BA>B expresses, and may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for autoimmune 
myocarditis.

PMID: 21720000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 2011 Aug;138(15):3113-23. doi: 10.1242/dev.064279. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Smarcd3b and Gata5 promote a cardiac progenitor fate in the zebrafish embryo.

Lou X(1), Deshwar AR, Crump JG, Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

Development of the heart requires recruitment of cardiovascular progenitor cells 
(CPCs) to the future heart-forming region. CPCs are the building blocks of the
heart, and have the potential to form all the major cardiac lineages. However,
little is known regarding what regulates CPC fate and behavior. Activity of
GATA4, SMARCD3 and TBX5 - the `cardiac BAF' (cBAF) complex, can promote
myocardial differentiation in embryonic mouse mesoderm. Here, we exploit the
advantages of the zebrafish embryo to gain mechanistic understanding of cBAF
activity. Overexpression of smarcd3b and gata5 in zebrafish results in an
enlarged heart, whereas combinatorial loss of cBAF components inhibits cardiac
differentiation. In transplantation experiments, cBAF acts cell autonomously to
promote cardiac fate. Remarkably, cells overexpressing cBAF migrate to the
developing heart and differentiate as cardiomyocytes, endocardium and smooth
muscle. This is observed even in host embryos that lack endoderm or cardiac
mesoderm. Our results reveal an evolutionarily conserved role for cBAF activity
in cardiac differentiation. Importantly, they demonstrate that Smarcd3b and Gata5
can induce a primitive, CPC-like state.

PMID: 21715426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Sep 18;412(19-20):1825-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.06.017.
Epub 2011 Jun 25.

GATA4 loss-of-function mutations in familial atrial fibrillation.

Yang YQ(1), Wang MY, Zhang XL, Tan HW, Shi HF, Jiang WF, Wang XH, Fang WY, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, PR China. yang99yang66@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained cardiac
arrhythmia and a major source of the substantially increased morbidity and
mortality. Growing studies demonstrate that genetic defects play pivotal roles in
a subgroup of AF. However, AF is a genetically heterogeneous disorder and the
molecular basis of AF in a majority of cases remains unknown.
METHODS: The whole coding region of the GATA4 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor essential for cardiogenesis, was analyzed in 130 unrelated
probands with AF in contrast to 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy
individuals used as controls. The available family members of the probands
harboring the identified mutations were genotyped. The functional effect of the
mutant GATA4 was characterized using a luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous GATA4 mutations, p.S70T and p.S160T, were
identified in 2 unrelated families with AF inherited as an autosomal dominant
trait, respectively, which co-segregated with AF in each family with complete
penetrance. Functional analysis showed that the mutations of GATA4 were
associated with a significantly decreased transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSION: The findings provide new insight into the molecular mechanism
involved in the pathogenesis of AF, suggesting the potential implications in the 
genetic diagnosis and gene-specific therapy of this common arrhythmia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21708142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2011 Jun 24;10:57. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-10-57.

Molecular role of GATA binding protein 4 (GATA-4) in hyperglycemia-induced
reduction of cardiac contractility.

Ku PM(1), Chen LJ, Liang JR, Cheng KC, Li YX, Cheng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Chi-Mei Medical Center, No, 901 Chon-Hwa Road,
Yong Kang, Tainan City, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic cardiomyopathy, a diabetes-specific complication, refers to 
a disorder that eventually leads to left ventricular hypertrophy in addition to
diastolic and systolic dysfunction. In recent studies, hyperglycemia-induced
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cardiomyocytes have been linked to diabetic
cardiomyopathy. GATA binding protein 4 (GATA-4) regulates the expression of many 
cardio-structural genes including cardiac troponin-I (cTnI).
METHODS: Streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats and H9c2 embryonic rat
cardiomyocytes treated with a high concentration of glucose (a D-glucose
concentration of 30 mM was used and cells were cultured for 24 hr) were used to
examine the effect of hyperglycemia on GATA-4 accumulation in the nucleus. cTnI
expression was found to be linked to cardiac tonic dysfunction, and we evaluated 
the expression levels of cTnI and GATA-4 by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Cardiac output was lowered in STZ-induced diabetic rats. In addition,
higher expressions of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and phosphorylated GATA-4 were
identified in these rats by Western blotting. The changes were reversed by
treatment with insulin or phlorizin after correction of the blood sugar level. In
H9c2 cells, ROS production owing to the high glucose concentration increased the 
expression of cTnI and GATA-4 phosphorylation. However, hyperglycemia failed to
increase the expression of cTnI when GATA-4 was silenced by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) in H9c2 cells. Otherwise, activation of ERK is known to be a signal for
phosphorylation of serine105 in GATA-4 to increase the DNA binding ability of
this transcription factor. Moreover, GSK3ß could directly interact with GATA-4 to
cause GATA-4 to be exported from the nucleus. GATA-4 nuclear translocation and
GSK3ß ser9 phosphorylation were both elevated by a high glucose concentration in 
H9c2 cells. These changes were reversed by tiron (ROS scavenger), PD98059
(MEK/ERK inhibitor), or siRNA of GATA-4. Cell contractility measurement also
indicated that the high glucose concentration decreased the contractility of H9c2
cells, and this was reduced by siRNA of GATA-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperglycemia can cause systolic dysfunction and a higher expression
of cTnI in cardiomyocytes through ROS, enhancing MEK/ERK-induced GATA-4
phosphorylation and accumulation in the cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3141394
PMID: 21702924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Ther. 2011 Sep;19(9):1695-703. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.125. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to interrogate the cardiac
gene regulatory network.

Dixon JE(1), Dick E, Rajamohan D, Shakesheff KM, Denning C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Wolfson Centre for Stem Cells, Tissue Engineering, and
Modelling, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2011 Sep;19(9):1576-8.

The limited ability of the heart to regenerate has prompted development of new
systems to produce cardiomyocytes for therapeutics. While differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into cardiomyocytes has been well documented, 
the process remains inefficient and/or expensive, and progress would be
facilitated by better understanding the early genetic events that cause cardiac
specification. By maintaining a transgenic cardiac-specific MYH6-monomeric red
fluorescent protein (mRFP) reporter hESC line in conditions that promote
pluripotency, we tested the ability of combinations of 15 genes to induce cardiac
specification. Screening identified GATA4 plus TBX5 as the minimum requirement to
activate the cardiac gene regulatory network and produce mRFP(+) cells, while a
combination of GATA4, TBX5, NKX2.5, and BAF60c (GTNB) was necessary to generate
beating cardiomyocytes positive for cTnI and a-actinin. Including the
chemotherapeutic agent, Ara-C, from day 10 of induced differentiation enriched
for cTnI/a-actinin double positive cells to 45%. Transient expression of GTNB for
5-7 days was necessary to activate the cardiogenesis through progenitor
intermediates in a manner consistent with normal heart development. This system
provides a route to test the effect of different factors on human cardiac
differentiation and will be useful in understanding the network failures that
underlie disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3182351
PMID: 21694703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;301(3):E539-47. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00187.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

SOX9 and SF1 are involved in cyclic AMP-mediated upregulation of anti-Mullerian
gene expression in the testicular prepubertal Sertoli cell line SMAT1.

Lasala C(1), Schteingart HF, Arouche N, Bedecarrás P, Grinspon RP, Picard JY,
Josso N, di Clemente N, Rey RA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, Hospital de Niños R. Gutiérrez,
Gallo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

In Sertoli cells, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) expression is upregulated by FSH
via cyclic AMP (cAMP), although no classical cAMP response elements exist in the 
AMH promoter. The response to cAMP involves NF-<U+03BA>B and AP2; however, targeted
mutagenesis of their binding sites in the AMH promoter do not completely abolish 
the response. In this work we assessed whether SOX9, SF1, GATA4, and AP1 might
represent alternative pathways involved in cAMP-mediated AMH upregulation, using 
real-time RT-PCR (qPCR), targeted mutagenesis, luciferase assays, and
immunocytochemistry in the Sertoli cell line SMAT1. We also explored the
signaling cascades potentially involved. In qPCR experiments, Amh, Sox9, Sf1, and
Gata4 mRNA levels increased after SMAT1 cells were incubated with cAMP. Blocking 
PKA abolished the effect of cAMP on Sox9, Sf1, and Gata4 expression, inhibiting
PI3K/PKB impaired the effect on Sf1 and Gata4, and reducing MEK1/2 and p38 MAPK
activities curtailed Gata4 increase. SOX9 and SF1 translocated to the nucleus
after incubation with cAMP. Mutations of the SOX9 or SF1 sites, but not of GAT4
or AP1 sites, precluded the response of a 3,063-bp AMH promoter to cAMP. In
conclusion, in the Sertoli cell line SMAT1 cAMP upregulates SOX9, SF1, and GATA4 
expression and induces SOX9 and SF1 nuclear translocation mainly through PKA,
although other kinases may also participate. SOX9 and SF1 binding to the AMH
promoter is essential to increase the activity of the AMH promoter in response to
cAMP.

PMID: 21693691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Mar;39(3):2585-95. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1011-z. Epub 2011
Jun 21.

Over-expression of Nkx2.5 and/or cardiac a-actin inhibit the contraction ability 
of ADSCs-derived cardiomyocytes.

Zhao L(1), Ju D, Gao Q, Zheng X, Yang G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Fat Deposition and Muscle Development, College of Animal 
Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling,
Shaanxi Province 712100, People's Republic of China.

Adipose tissue-derived stromal cells (ADSCs) can differentiate into
cardiomyocytes, which provide a source of new cardiomyocyte progenitors for
tissue engineering. Here, we showed that ADSCs isolated from subcutaneous adipose
tissues of mouse were largely negative for CD31, CD34, but positive for CD105.
About 1.62% cells in these cells can spontaneously differentiate into
cardiac-like cells (cells expressing cardiac marker proteins) when cultured in
Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented only with penicillin,
streptomycin, and 20% newborn bovine serum (NBS), expressed cardiac markers such 
as MF20, Connexin45, cMHC, cTnT, a-actin, Nkx2.5, and GATA4, and part of these
cells (account for about 0.47% of inoculated cells) showed spontaneous
contractions accompanied by transient Ca(2+) activity in culture. In vitro,
although over-expression of Nkx2.5 and/or cardiac a-actin increased the number of
cardiac-like cells expressing cardiac-specific proteins, but while inhibited the 
contraction function of ADSCs-derived cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 21691712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Sep;105(1-2):71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.05.012. Epub
2011 May 20.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate impairs the cardiac development of a marine medaka
(Oryzias melastigma).

Huang Q(1), Fang C, Wu X, Fan J, Dong S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen 361021, PR
China.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is a persistent organic contaminant and has been
widely detected in the sea water. However, toxic effects of PFOS on cardiac
development in marine organisms have not been reported. In the present study, we 
investigated the toxicity of PFOS on the cardiac development using Oryzias
melastigma embryos. The embryos at 2 days post-fertilization (dpf) were
continuous exposed to PFOS (1, 4 and 16 mg/L) for various periods, cardiac
function and morphology were examined at different developmental stages. The
results showed that exposure to 4 and 16 mg/L PFOS resulted in enlarged the sinus
venosus (SV)-bulbus arteriosus (BA) distance and altered the heart rate. We
further investigated eight heart-development related genes to test the effects of
PFOS on molecular level. Seven genes were first cloned in O. melastigma and their
temporal expression patterns were assayed. Most of the genes were highly
expressed in the 6dpf, which is the critical stage for heart development. Their
expression levels upon PFOS exposure were studied. The expressions of GATA4 and
NKX2.5 were significantly down-regulated while COX-2, FGF8 and ATPase were
significantly up-regulated at 6dpf. Our results showed for the first time that
PFOS exposure affected the expression of cardiac development-related genes,
development and function of heart in the marine medaka.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020711. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Investigation of association between PFO complicated by cryptogenic stroke and a 
common variant of the cardiac transcription factor GATA4.

Moradi Marjaneh M(1), Kirk EP, Posch MG, Ozcelik C, Berger F, Hetzer R, Otway R, 
Butler TL, Blue GM, Griffiths LR, Fatkin D, Martinson JJ, Winlaw DS, Feneley MP, 
Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)The Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, Australia.

Patent foramen ovale (PFO) is associated with clinical conditions including
cryptogenic stroke, migraine and varicose veins. Data from studies in humans and 
mouse suggest that PFO and the secundum form of atrial septal defect (ASDII)
exist in an anatomical continuum of septal dysmorphogenesis with a common genetic
basis. Mutations in multiple members of the evolutionarily conserved cardiac
transcription factor network, including GATA4, cause or predispose to ASDII and
PFO. Here, we assessed whether the most prevalent variant of the GATA4 gene,
S377G, was significantly associated with PFO or ASD. Our analysis of world
indigenous populations showed that GATA4 S377G was largely Caucasian-specific,
and so subjects were restricted to those of Caucasian descent. To select for
patients with larger PFO, we limited our analysis to those with cryptogenic
stroke in which PFO was a subsequent finding. In an initial study of Australian
subjects, we observed a weak association between GATA4 S377G and PFO/Stroke
relative to Caucasian controls in whom ASD and PFO had been excluded (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.16; 
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02). However, in a follow up study of German Caucasians no association was 
found with either PFO or ASD. Analysis of combined Australian and German data
confirmed the lack of a significant association. Thus, the common GATA4 variant
S377G is likely to be relatively benign in terms of its participation in CHD and 
PFO/Stroke.

PMCID: PMC3108965
PMID: 21673957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Oct;28(4):557-64. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.715. Epub 2011 Jun
1.

A novel GATA4 mutation responsible for congenital ventricular septal defects.

Wang J(1), Fang M, Liu XY, Xin YF, Liu ZM, Chen XZ, Wang XZ, Fang WY, Liu X, Yang
YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, PR China.

Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common type of cardiovascular
developmental anomaly and is an important risk factor for the substantially
increased morbidity and mortality in newborns. Aggregating evidence implicates
genetic defects in the pathogenesis of congenital VSD. However, VSD is
genetically heterogeneous and the genetic determinants for VSD in most patients
remain to be identified. In this study, the whole coding region of the GATA4
gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor pivotal to cardiogenesis, 
was initially sequenced in 210 unrelated patients with VSD. The relatives of the 
index patient carrying the identified mutation and 200 unrelated
ethnically-matched healthy individuals used as controls were subsequently
genotyped. The functional effect of the mutant GATA4 was characterized in
contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a luciferase reporter assay system. A
novel heterozygous GATA4 mutation, p.G296R, was identified in a family with VSD
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Absent in 200 control individuals, the 
mutation co-segregated with VSD in the family with 100% penetrance and was
completely conserved evolutionarily across species. Functional analysis displayed
that the p.G296R mutation of GATA4 was associated with a decreased
transcriptional activity. The findings expand the spectrum of mutations in GATA4 
linked to VSD and provide more insight into the molecular mechanism involved in
VSD. The results of the present study imply the potential implications in the
genetic diagnosis and gene-specific therapy of this common malformation in
infancy.

PMID: 21637914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem J. 2011 Sep 1;438(2):337-47. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101484.

Ca2+-induced PARP-1 activation and ANF expression are coupled events in
cardiomyocytes.

Geistrikh I(1), Visochek L, Klein R, Miller L, Mittelman L, Shainberg A,
Cohen-Armon M.

Author information: 
(1)Neufeld Cardiac Research Institute, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Israel.

The nuclear protein PARP-1 [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1] is activated in
cardiomyocytes exposed to hypoxia causing DNA breaks. Unlike this stress-induced 
PARP-1 activation, our results provide evidence for Ca(2+)-induced PARP-1
activation in contracting newborn cardiomyocytes treated with growth factors and 
hormones that increased their contraction rate, induced intracellular Ca(2+)
mobilization and its rhythmical and transient translocation into the nucleus.
Furthermore, activated PARP-1 up-regulated the activity of phosphorylated ERK
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) in the nucleus, promoting expression of
the Elk1 target gene c-fos. Up-regulation of the transcription factor
c-Fos/GATA-4 promoted ANF (atrial natriuretic factor) expression. Given that
expression of ANF is known to be implicated in morphological changes, growth and 
development of cardiomyocytes, these results outline a PARP-1-dependent signal
transduction mechanism that links contraction rate and Ca(2+) mobilization with
the expression of genes underlying morphological changes in cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 21635224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Oct;15(10):715-20. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0278.
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

GATA4 specific nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms in congenital heart 
disease patients of Mysore, India.

Dinesh SM(1), Lingaiah K, Savitha MR, Krishnamurthy B, Narayanappa D, Ramachandra
NB.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Laboratory, Department of Studies in Zoology, University of Mysore,
Mysore, India.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common type of birth defect, affecting
1% of all live births. The recent exponential increase in the knowledge of
medical genetics has revolutionized the understanding of CHDs during the past few
decades. GATA4, a transcription factor, is involved in heart development. There
are many contradictory reports on involvement of single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of GATA4 in the manifestation of CHD. In view of this, an attempt has been
made to analyze the known SNPs of GATA4 in Mysore patients with CHD. Of the 308
CHD patients recruited, 100 were screened for SNPs of GATA4 by MassARRAY, which
identified 11 SNPs, of which 6 were found in both CHD cases and controls. The
other 5 SNPs, c.278G>C (G93A), c.1207C>A (L403M), c.1232C>T (A411V), c.1295T>C
(L432S), and c.1180C>G (P394A), were found only in CHD patients. Secondary
structure analysis revealed that mutant proteins with the SNPs G93A, L403M, and
L432S showed structural changes in their helix, sheet, and turn. Thus, these
findings suggest the involvement of specific SNPs of GATA4 in the manifestation
of CHD, reported for the first time in an Indian scenario. However, screening for
a larger number of CHD patients would help us to establish genotype-phenotype
correlation.

PMID: 21631294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem J. 2011 Aug 1;437(3):477-82. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110225.

GATA-4 transcription factor regulates hepatic hepcidin expression.

Island ML(1), Fatih N, Leroyer P, Brissot P, Loreal O.

Author information: 
(1)UMR-INSERM U991, IFR140, University of Rennes 1, Rue Henri Le Guilloux, 35033 
Rennes cedex, France.

Hepcidin, a hormone mainly synthesized by hepatocytes and secreted in plasma,
controls iron bioavailability. Thus, by inducing the internalization of the iron 
exporter ferroportin, it regulates iron release from macrophages, enterocytes and
hepatocytes towards plasma. Abnormal levels of hepcidin expression alter plasma
iron parameters and lead to iron metabolism disorders. Understanding the
mechanisms controlling hepcidin (HAMP encodes hepcidin) gene expression is
therefore an important goal. We identified a potential GATA-binding site within
the human hepcidin promoter. Indeed, in hepatic HepG2 cells, luciferase
experiments demonstrated that mutation of this GATA-binding site impaired the
hepcidin promoter transcriptional activity in basal conditions. Gel-retardation
experiments showed that GATA-4 could bind to this site. Co-transfection of a
GATA-4 expression vector with a hepcidin promoter reporter construct enhanced
hepcidin promoter transcriptional activity. Furthermore, modulation of GATA4 mRNA
expression using specific siRNAs (small interfering RNAs) down-regulated
endogenous hepcidin gene expression. Finally, we found that mutation of the
GATA-binding site impaired the interleukin-6 induction of hepcidin gene
expression, but did not prevent the bone morphogenetic protein-6 response. In
conclusion, the findings of the present study (i) indicate that GATA-4 may
participate in the control of hepcidin expression, and (ii) suggest that
alteration of its expression could contribute to the development of iron-related 
disorders.

© The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Biochemical Society

PMID: 21609320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Recenti Prog Med. 2011 Mar;102(3):120-5. doi: 10.1701/608.7068.

[Genetic screening of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 mutations in hereditary congenital heart
defects: 5 familial cases].

[Article in Italian]

Pulignani S(1), Foffa I, Cresci M, Vittorini S, Ait-Ali L, Andreassi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Silvia Pulignani, Ilenia Foffa, Monica Cresci, Simona Vittorini, Lamia
Ait-Alì, Maria Grazia Andreassi.

Single gene mutations in Gata4 and Nkx2.5 genes have been identified as a
causative factor for various clinical forms of hereditary congenital heart
diseases (CHDs), especially for cardiac septal defects. However, the role of
Gata4 and Nkx2.5 mutations in familial CHD is not clear yet. We report 5 cases of
familial CHD with a positive history of cardiac septal defects. Our data suggest 
that mutations of either the Gata4 or Nkx2.5 genes are very uncommonly found in
familial cases of CHD, supporting the genetic heterogeneity of cardiac congenital
defects and the limitation of genetic testing in clinical setting.

PMID: 21572484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul 18;47(1):45-58. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0137. Print 2011
Aug.

GATA transcription factors regulate LHß gene expression.

Lo A(1), Zheng W, Gong Y, Crochet JR, Halvorson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75390-9032, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors are critical determinants of cell
differentiation as well as regulation of adult gene expression throughout the
reproductive axis. Within the anterior pituitary gland, GATA factors have been
shown to increase glycoprotein a-subunit gene promoter activity; however, nothing
has been known about the impact of these factors on expression of the
gonadotropin ß-subunits. In this study, we demonstrate expression of both GATA2
and GATA4 in primary mouse gonadotropes and the gonadotrope cell line, LßT2.
Based on the transient transfection in fibroblast cells, GATA factors increase LH
ß-subunit gene (LHß) promoter activity alone and in synergy with the orphan
nuclear receptors steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and liver receptor homologue-1
(LRH-1). The GATA response was localized to a DNA regulatory region at position
-101 in the rat LHß gene promoter which overlaps with a previously described
cis-element for pituitary homeobox-1 (Pitx1) and is flanked by two SF-1/LRH-1
regulatory sites. As determined by gel shift, GATA and Pitx1 can compete for
binding to this element. Furthermore, mutation analysis revealed a requirement
for both the GATA/Pitx1 and the SF-1/LRH-1 cis-elements in order to achieve
synergy. These studies identify a novel role for GATA transcription factors in
the pituitary and reveal additional molecular mechanisms by which precise
modulation of LHß gene expression can be achieved.

PMID: 21571865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biomaterials. 2011 Aug;32(24):5568-80. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.04.038.
Epub 2011 May 12.

The stimulation of the cardiac differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in
tissue constructs that mimic myocardium structure and biomechanics.

Guan J(1), Wang F, Li Z, Chen J, Guo X, Liao J, Moldovan NI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science & Engineering, The Ohio State University, 2041
College Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. guan.21@osu.edu

We investigated whether tissue constructs resembling structural and mechanical
properties of the myocardium would induce mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to
differentiate into a cardiac lineage, and whether further mimicking the 3-D cell 
alignment of myocardium would enhance cardiac differentiation. The tissue
constructs were generated by integrating MSCs with elastic polyurethane
nanofibers in an electrical field. Control of processing parameters resulted in
tissue constructs recapitulating the fibrous and anisotropic structure, and
typical stress-strain response of native porcine myocardium. MSCs proliferated in
the tissue constructs when cultured dynamically, but retained a round morphology.
mRNA expression demonstrated that cardiac differentiation was significantly
stimulated. Enhanced cardiac differentiation was achieved by 3-D alignment of
MSCs within the tissue constructs. Cell alignment was attained by statically
stretching tissue constructs during culture. Increasing stretching strain from
25% to 75% increased the degree of 3-D cell alignment. Real time RT-PCR results
showed that when cells assuming a high degree of alignment (with application of
75% strain), their expression of cardiac markers (GATA4, Nkx2.5 and MEF2C)
remarkably increased. The differentiated cells also developed calcium channels,
which are required to have electrophysiological properties. This report to some
extent explains the outcome of many in vivo studies, where only a limited amount 
of the injected MSCs differentiated into cardiomyocytes. It is possible that the 
strain of the heartbeat (~20%) cannot allow the MSCs to have an alignment high
enough for a remarkable cardiac differentiation. This work suggests that
pre-differentiation of MSCs into cardiomyocytes prior to injection may result in 
a greater degree of cardiac regeneration than simply injecting un-differentiated 
MSCs into heart.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4141541
PMID: 21570113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul;25(7):1126-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0463. Epub 2011 May 
12.

GATA4 regulates estrogen receptor-alpha-mediated osteoblast transcription.

Miranda-Carboni GA(1), Guemes M, Bailey S, Anaya E, Corselli M, Peault B, Krum
SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Estrogens regulate osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. We identified
GATA4 as a transcription factor expressed in osteoblasts and directly regulated
by 17ß-estradiol in this cell type but not in breast cancer cells, another
estrogen-responsive tissue. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing) reveals that estrogen receptor a (ERa) binds to
chromatin near GATA4 at five different enhancers. GATA4 and ERa are both
recruited to ERa binding sites near genes that are specifically expressed in
osteoblasts and control osteoblast differentiation. Maximal binding of GATA4
precedes ERa binding, and GATA4 is necessary for histone 3 lysine 4 dimethylation
at ERa binding sites, suggesting that GATA4 is a pioneer factor for ERa. As such,
knockdown of GATA4 reduced recruitment of ERa to DNA. Our study illustrates that 
GATA4 is a pioneer factor for ERa recruitment to osteoblast-specific enhancers.

PMCID: PMC3125091
PMID: 21566084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nature. 2011 May 11;475(7356):386-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10116.

Induction of functional hepatocyte-like cells from mouse fibroblasts by defined
factors.

Huang P(1), He Z, Ji S, Sun H, Xiang D, Liu C, Hu Y, Wang X, Hui L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy for
Sciences, Yueyang Road 320, 200031 Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):89-91.
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):316-8.

The generation of functional hepatocytes independent of donor liver organs is of 
great therapeutic interest with regard to regenerative medicine and possible
cures for liver disease. Induced hepatic differentiation has been achieved
previously using embryonic stem cells or induced pluripotent stem cells.
Particularly, hepatocytes generated from a patient's own induced pluripotent stem
cells could theoretically avoid immunological rejection. However, the induction
of hepatocytes from induced pluripotent stem cells is a complicated process that 
would probably be replaced with the arrival of improved technology.
Overexpression of lineage-specific transcription factors directly converts
terminally differentiated cells into some other lineages, including neurons,
cardiomyocytes and blood progenitors; however, it remains unclear whether these
lineage-converted cells could repair damaged tissues in vivo. Here we demonstrate
the direct induction of functional hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells from mouse
tail-tip fibroblasts by transduction of Gata4, Hnf1a and Foxa3, and inactivation 
of p19(Arf). iHep cells show typical epithelial morphology, express hepatic genes
and acquire hepatocyte functions. Notably, transplanted iHep cells repopulate the
livers of fumarylacetoacetate-hydrolase-deficient (Fah(-/-)) mice and rescue
almost half of recipients from death by restoring liver functions. Our study
provides a novel strategy to generate functional hepatocyte-like cells for the
purpose of liver engineering and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 21562492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Mar;16(3):507-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01328.x.

Relaxin promotes growth and maturation of mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes in vitro:
clues for cardiac regeneration.

Nistri S(1), Pini A, Sassoli C, Squecco R, Francini F, Formigli L, Bani D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology & Forensic Medicine, Section Histology,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

The demonstration that the adult heart contains myocardial progenitor cells which
can be recruited in an attempt to replace the injured myocardium has sparkled
interest towards novel molecules capable of improving the differentiation of
these cells. In this context, the peptide hormone relaxin (RLX), recently
validated as a cardiovascular hormone, is a promising candidate. This study was
designed to test the hypothesis that RLX may promote the growth and maturation of
mouse neonatal immature cardiomyocytes in primary culture. The cultures were
studied at 2, 12, 24 and 48 hrs after the addition of human recombinant H2 RLX
(100 ng/ml), the main circulating form of the hormone, or plain medium by
combining molecular biology, morphology and electrophysiology. RLX modulated cell
proliferation, promoting it at 2 and 12 hrs and inhibiting it at 24 hrs; RLX also
induced the expression of both cardiac-specific transcription factors (GATA-4 and
Nkx2-5) and cardiac-specific structural genes (connexin 43, troponin T and HCN4
ion channel) at both the mRNA and protein level. Consistently, RLX induced the
appearance of ultrastructural and electrophysiological signs of functionally
competent, mature cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, this study provides novel
circumstantial evidence that RLX specifically acts on immature cardiomyocytes by 
promoting their proliferation and maturation. This notion suggests that RLX, for 
which the heart is both a source and target organ, may be an endogenous regulator
of cardiac morphogenesis during pre-natal life and could participate in heart
regeneration and repair, both as endogenous myocardium-derived factor and
exogenous cardiotropic drug, during adult life.

© 2012 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822927
PMID: 21554533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Pathology. 2011 Jun;43(4):322-6. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e32834635a9.

Investigation of somatic NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 mutations in patients with
tetralogy of Fallot.

Wang J(1), Lu Y, Chen H, Yin M, Yu T, Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division of Birth Defects, Institute of Pediatric Translational
Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

AIMS: Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common type of congenital heart
disease (CHD). Several genes essential for heart development have been
identified. In recent years, there have been a few reports of the high frequency 
of somatic mutation in the heart tissues of CHD patients. The majority of
findings were reported by the same investigators using formalin fixed tissues. In
this study, we investigate the possibility of somatic mutation in fresh
pathological cardiac tissues.
METHODS: We sequenced all exons and their boundaries of the NKX2-5, GATA4 and
HAND1 genes from the right ventricular outflow tract muscle and peripheral blood 
of 38 unrelated non-syndromic TOF children who had undergone routine surgery. The
same group of genes was also sequenced in the peripheral blood of 105 control
subjects. We also compared the DNA yield in different tissue storage methods and 
sequenced 10 formalin fixed specimens.
RESULTS: Sequencing cardiac muscle and peripheral blood from the same patient
showed identical findings. The previously reported p.Pro407Gln mutation in GATA4 
gene and a novel heterozygous p.Ala58Glu mutation in HAND1 gene were identified
in two of the 38 patients, both in the affected cardiac tissues and in the
lymphocytes. These mutations were not seen in any control subjects. The formalin 
fixation rendered less DNA yield than the frozen method, but no artificial
mutations were generated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows no evidence of somatic NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1
mutations playing a role in the pathogenesis of TOF. Our findings suggest that
the GATA4 and HAND1 germline mutations are associated with non-syndromic CHD.

PMID: 21519287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jul 1;20(13):2642-50. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr166. Epub 2011 Apr 
19.

Allelic reduction of Dlx5 and Dlx6 results in early follicular depletion: a new
mouse model of primary ovarian insufficiency.

Bouhali K(1), Dipietromaria A, Fontaine A, Caburet S, Barbieri O, Bellessort B,
Fellous M, Veitia RA, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by the loss of ovarian
function before the age of 40 in humans. Although most cases of POI are
idiopathic, many are familial, underlying a genetic origin of the disease.
Mutations in genes involved in the control of steroidogenesis, such as NR5A1
(SF-1, Steroidogenic Factor 1), CYP17, CYP19A1 (aromatase), StAR (Steroidogenic
Acute Regulatory), and the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 have been
associated with different forms of POI. In males, the homeobox transcription
factors Dlx5 and Dlx6 are involved in the control of steroidogenesis through the 
activation of GATA4-induced-StAR transcription. Here, we analyze the potential
involvement of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in female reproduction. To this end, we make use of 
an existing mouse model in which Dlx5 and Dlx6 are simultaneously disrupted. We
show that: (i) allelic reduction of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in the mouse results in a
POI-like phenotype, characterized by reduced fertility and early follicular
exhaustion; (ii) in granulosa cell lines, a reciprocal regulation exists between 
Dlx5 and Foxl2; (iii) in the mouse ovary, allelic reduction of Dlx5/6 results in 
the upregulation of Foxl2. We propose that the mutual regulation between Dlx5/6
and Foxl2 and their opposite effects on StAR expression might contribute to
determine the homeostatic control of steroidogenesis within the ovary.
Dysregulation of this homeostatic control would result in abnormal follicular
maturation and reduced fertility. Our results bring new elements to our
conceptual model of follicle maturation and maintenance and provide new potential
genetic targets for cases of familial POI.

PMID: 21505076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Med Rep. 2010 May-Jun;3(3):497-501. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000287.

Adrenergic receptor blockade-induced regression of pressure-overload cardiac
hypertrophy is associated with inhibition of the calcineurin/NFAT3/GATA4 pathway.

Yang D(1), Ma S, Tan Y, Li D, Tang B, Chen J, Su X, Li G, Zhang X, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, General Hospital of PLA Chengdu Military Area
Command, Chengdu, Sichuan 610083, P.R. China.

Calcineurin and its downstream effectors nuclear factor of activated T-cells 3
(NFAT3) and zinc finger-containing transcription factor (GATA4) have been
implicated in the development of cardiac hypertrophy. The aims of the present
study were to investigate alterations in the calcineurin/NFAT3/GATA4 pathway in
pressure-overload hypertrophy, and to determine whether adrenergic receptor
blockade affects this signaling pathway. In aorta-banded rats compared with
sham-operated rats, a significant increase in the phosphorylation levels of
calcineurin and GATA4 was observed (both p<0.05), while the NFAT3 phosphorylation
level was markedly decreased (p<0.05). Oral administration of either the
non-selective ß blocker/a-1 blocker carvedilol or the selective ß-1 blocker
metoprolol, but not the selective a-1 blocker terazosin, significantly suppressed
the activated calcineurin/NFAT3/GATA4 pathway (all p<0.05) in addition to
inducing a regression of cardiac hypertrophy. Pressure overload-induced
up-regulation of c-myc was markedly attenuated by treatment with either
carvedilol or metoprolol (both p<0.05). The present findings may expand our
understanding of the correlation between sympathetic activity and the
calcineurin/NFAT3/GATA4 pathway, and highlight these signal transducers as
effective targets in the management of pressure overload-induced cardiac
hypertrophy.

PMID: 21472269  [PubMed]


221. J Exp Med. 2011 Apr 11;208(4):689-702. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102099. Epub 2011 Apr
4.

A GATA4-regulated tumor suppressor network represses formation of malignant human
astrocytomas.

Agnihotri S(1), Wolf A, Munoz DM, Smith CJ, Gajadhar A, Restrepo A, Clarke ID,
Fuller GN, Kesari S, Dirks PB, McGlade CJ, Stanford WL, Aldape K, Mischel PS,
Hawkins C, Guha A.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt's Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for
Sick Children's Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto M5A 2N4, Ontario, Canada.

Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), the most common and lethal primary human brain
tumor, exhibits multiple molecular aberrations. We report that loss of the
transcription factor GATA4, a negative regulator of normal astrocyte
proliferation, is a driver in glioma formation and fulfills the hallmarks of a
tumor suppressor gene (TSG). Although GATA4 was expressed in normal brain, loss
of GATA4 was observed in 94/163 GBM operative samples and was a negative survival
prognostic marker. GATA4 loss occurred through promoter hypermethylation or novel
somatic mutations. Loss of GATA4 in normal human astrocytes promoted high-grade
astrocytoma formation, in cooperation with other relevant genetic alterations
such as activated Ras or loss of TP53. Loss of GATA4 with activated Ras in normal
astrocytes promoted a progenitor-like phenotype, formation of neurospheres, and
the ability to differentiate into astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes.
Re-expression of GATA4 in human GBM cell lines, primary cultures, and brain
tumor-initiating cells suppressed tumor growth in vitro and in vivo through
direct activation of the cell cycle inhibitor P21(CIP1), independent of TP53.
Re-expression of GATA4 also conferred sensitivity of GBM cells to temozolomide, a
DNA alkylating agent currently used in GBM therapy. This sensitivity was
independent of MGMT (O-6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase), the DNA repair
enzyme which is often implicated in temozolomide resistance. Instead, GATA4
reduced expression of APNG (alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase), a DNA repair enzyme
which is poorly characterized in GBM-mediated temozolomide resistance.
Identification and validation of GATA4 as a TSG and its downstream targets in GBM
may yield promising novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3135351
PMID: 21464220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Biol. 2011 Jun 1;354(1):67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.03.021. Epub 2011
Mar 30.

Recapitulation of developmental cardiogenesis governs the morphological and
functional regeneration of adult newt hearts following injury.

Witman N(1), Murtuza B, Davis B, Arner A, Morrison JI.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, Stockholm University, Svante
Arrheniusväg 20C, Stockholm, Sweden.

Urodele amphibians, like the newt, are the "champions of regeneration" as they
are able to regenerate many body parts and tissues. Previous experiments,
however, have suggested that the newt heart has only a limited regeneration
capacity, similar to the human heart. Using a novel, reproducible ventricular
resection model, we show for the first time that adult newt hearts can fully
regenerate without any evidence of scarring. This process is governed by
increased proliferation and the up-regulation of cardiac transcription factors
normally expressed during developmental cardiogenesis. Furthermore, we are able
to identify cells within the newly regenerated regions of the myocardium that
express the LIM-homeodomain protein Islet1 and GATA4, transcription factors found
in cardiac progenitors. Information acquired from using the newt as a model
organism may help to shed light on the regeneration deficits demonstrated in
damaged human hearts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21457708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Development. 2011 May;138(9):1771-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.059295. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Coordinated regulation of differentiation and proliferation of embryonic
cardiomyocytes by a jumonji (Jarid2)-cyclin D1 pathway.

Nakajima K(1), Inagawa M, Uchida C, Okada K, Tane S, Kojima M, Kubota M, Noda M, 
Ogawa S, Shirato H, Sato M, Suzuki-Migishima R, Hino T, Satoh Y, Kitagawa M,
Takeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences, Machida 194-8511, Japan.

In general, cell proliferation and differentiation show an inverse relationship, 
and are regulated in a coordinated manner during development. Embryonic
cardiomyocytes must support embryonic life by functional differentiation such as 
beating, and proliferate actively to increase the size of the heart. Therefore,
progression of both proliferation and differentiation is indispensable. It
remains unknown whether proliferation and differentiation are related in these
embryonic cardiomyocytes. We focused on abnormal phenotypes, such as
hyperproliferation, inhibition of differentiation and enhanced expression of
cyclin D1 in cardiomyocytes of mice with mutant jumonji (Jmj, Jarid2), which
encodes the repressor of cyclin D1. Analysis of Jmj/cyclin D1 double mutant mice 
showed that Jmj was required for normal differentiation and normal expression of 
GATA4 protein through cyclin D1. Analysis of transgenic mice revealed that
enhanced expression of cyclin D1 decreased GATA4 protein expression and inhibited
the differentiation of cardiomyocytes in a CDK4/6-dependent manner, and that
exogenous expression of GATA4 rescued the abnormal differentiation. Finally, CDK4
phosphorylated GATA4 directly, which promoted the degradation of GATA4 in
cultured cells. These results suggest that CDK4 activated by cyclin D1 inhibits
differentiation of cardiomyocytes by degradation of GATA4, and that initiation of
Jmj expression unleashes the inhibition by repression of cyclin D1 expression and
allows progression of differentiation, as well as repression of proliferation.
Thus, a Jmj-cyclin D1 pathway coordinately regulates proliferation and
differentiation of cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 21447557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Periodontal Res. 2011 Aug;46(4):438-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2011.01358.x. 
Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human gingival fibroblasts and
periodontal ligament fibroblasts.

Wada N(1), Wang B, Lin NH, Laslett AL, Gronthos S, Bartold PM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Colgate Australian Clinical Dental Research Centre,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which have 
similar properties to human embryonic stem (hES) cells, have been generated from 
neonatal and adult human dermal fibroblasts by reprogramming. iPS cells have high
pluripotency and differentiation potential, and may be a potential autologous
stem cell source for future regenerative therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: iPS cell lines from human gingival fibroblasts and, for the
first time, from periodontal ligament fibroblasts, were generated by
reprogramming using a retroviral transduction cocktail of OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and 
c-MYC. iPS induction was investigated through expression of the embryonic stem
cell markers SSEA4, OCT4, NANOG, GCTM-2, TG30 and TRA-1-60. Following in vitro
differentiation, the expression of genes for differentiation markers for ectoderm
(SOX1, PAX6), mesoderm [RUNX1, T(Brachyury)] and endoderm (GATA4, AFP) was
assessed by real-time RT-PCR. The ability to form teratomas following
implantation into mouse testes was assessed by histology.
RESULTS: Human gingival fibroblast- and periodontal ligament fibroblast-derived
iPS cells showed similar characteristics to hES cells. Both sets of iPS cells
displayed colony morphology comparable to that of hES cells and expressed the hES
cell-associated cell-surface antigens, SSEA3, SSEA4, GCTM-2, TG30 (CD9) and
Tra-1-60, and the hES cell marker genes, OCT4, NANOG and GDF3. These iPS cells
showed differentiation potential to form embryoid bodies in vitro and expressed
genes for endoderm, ectoderm and mesoderm. Teratoma formation following
implantation into mouse testes was observed.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that iPS cells can be successfully
generated from adult human gingival and periodontal ligament fibroblasts.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21443752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5632-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016959108. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Co-occupancy by multiple cardiac transcription factors identifies transcriptional
enhancers active in heart.

He A(1), Kong SW, Ma Q, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Children's Hospital Informatics Program,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Identification of genomic regions that control tissue-specific gene expression is
currently problematic. ChIP and high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) of
enhancer-associated proteins such as p300 identifies some but not all enhancers
active in a tissue. Here we show that co-occupancy of a chromatin region by
multiple transcription factors (TFs) identifies a distinct set of enhancers.
GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4), NK2 transcription factor-related, locus 5
(NKX2-5), T-box 5 (TBX5), serum response factor (SRF), and myocyte-enhancer
factor 2A (MEF2A), here referred to as "cardiac TFs," have been hypothesized to
collaborate to direct cardiac gene expression. Using a modified ChIP-seq
procedure, we defined chromatin occupancy by these TFs and p300 genome wide and
provided unbiased support for this hypothesis. We used this principle to show
that co-occupancy of a chromatin region by multiple TFs can be used to identify
cardiac enhancers. Of 13 such regions tested in transient transgenic embryos,
seven (54%) drove cardiac gene expression. Among these regions were three
cardiac-specific enhancers of Gata4, Srf, and swItch/sucrose
nonfermentable-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of
chromatin, subfamily d, member 3 (Smarcd3), an epigenetic regulator of cardiac
gene expression. Multiple cardiac TFs and p300-bound regions were associated with
cardiac-enriched genes and with functional annotations related to heart
development. Importantly, the large majority (1,375/1,715) of loci bound by
multiple cardiac TFs did not overlap loci bound by p300. Our data identify
thousands of prospective cardiac regulatory sequences and indicate that multiple 
TF co-occupancy of a genomic region identifies developmentally relevant enhancers
that are largely distinct from p300-associated enhancers.

PMCID: PMC3078411
PMID: 21415370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Reproduction. 2011 Jun;141(6):801-8. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0006. Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Transcriptional sexual dimorphism in elongating bovine embryos: implications for 
XCI and sex determination genes.

Bermejo-Alvarez P(1), Rizos D, Lonergan P, Gutierrez-Adan A.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto. de Reproducción Animal y Conservación de Recursos Zoogenéticos, INIA,
Ctra de la Coruña Km 5.9, Madrid 28040, Spain. borrillobermejo@hotmail.com

Sex chromosome transcripts can lead to a broad transcriptional sexual dimorphism 
in the absence of concomitant or previous exposure to sex hormones, especially
when X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is not complete. XCI timing has been
suggested to differ greatly among species, and in bovine, most of the X-linked
transcripts are upregulated in female blastocysts. To determine the timing of
XCI, we analyzed in day 14 bovine embryos the sexual dimorphic transcription of
seven X-linked genes known to be upregulated in female blastocysts (X24112,
brain-expressed X-linked 2 (BEX2), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2A (UBE2A),
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), brain-expressed X-linked 1 (BEX1),
calpain 6 (CAPN6), and spermidine/spermine N-acetyltransferase 1 (SAT1)). The
transcription of five genes whose expression differs between sexes at the
blastocyst stage (DNMT3A, interferon tau (IFNT2), glutathione S-transferase mu 3 
(GSTM3), progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1), and laminin alpha 1
(LAMA1)) and four genes related with sex determination (Wilms tumor 1 (WT1), gata
binding protein 4 (GATA4), zinc finger protein multitype 2 (ZFPM2), and DMRT1)
was also analyzed to determine the evolution of transcriptional sexual
dimorphism. The expression level of five X-linked transcripts was effectively
equalized among sexes suggesting that, in cattle, a substantial XCI occurs during
the period between blastocyst hatching and initiation of elongation, although
UBE2A and SAT1 displayed significant transcriptional differences. Similarly,
sexual dimorphism was also reduced for autosomal genes with only DNMT3A and IFNT2
exhibiting sex-related differences. Among the genes potentially involved in sex
determination, Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) was significantly upregulated in males and
GATA4 in females, whereas no differences were observed for ZFPM2 and DMRT1. In
conclusion, a major XCI occurred between the blastocyst and early elongation
stages leading to a reduction in the transcriptional sexual dimorphism of
autosomal genes, which makes the period the most susceptible to sex-specific
embryo loss.

PMID: 21411694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 7;6(3):e17793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017793.

Copy number variation in patients with disorders of sex development due to 46,XY 
gonadal dysgenesis.

White S(1), Ohnesorg T, Notini A, Roeszler K, Hewitt J, Daggag H, Smith C,
Turbitt E, Gustin S, van den Bergen J, Miles D, Western P, Arboleda V, Schumacher
V, Gordon L, Bell K, Bengtsson H, Speed T, Hutson J, Warne G, Harley V, Koopman
P, Vilain E, Sinclair A.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

Disorders of sex development (DSD), ranging in severity from mild genital
abnormalities to complete sex reversal, represent a major concern for patients
and their families. DSD are often due to disruption of the genetic programs that 
regulate gonad development. Although some genes have been identified in these
developmental pathways, the causative mutations have not been identified in more 
than 50% 46,XY DSD cases. We used the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 
to analyse copy number variation in 23 individuals with unexplained 46,XY DSD due
to gonadal dysgenesis (GD). Here we describe three discrete changes in copy
number that are the likely cause of the GD. Firstly, we identified a large
duplication on the X chromosome that included DAX1 (NR0B1). Secondly, we
identified a rearrangement that appears to affect a novel gonad-specific
regulatory region in a known testis gene, SOX9. Surprisingly this patient lacked 
any signs of campomelic dysplasia, suggesting that the deletion affected
expression of SOX9 only in the gonad. Functional analysis of potential SRY
binding sites within this deleted region identified five putative enhancers,
suggesting that sequences additional to the known SRY-binding TES enhancer
influence human testis-specific SOX9 expression. Thirdly, we identified a small
deletion immediately downstream of GATA4, supporting a role for GATA4 in gonad
development in humans. These CNV analyses give new insights into the pathways
involved in human gonad development and dysfunction, and suggest that
rearrangements of non-coding sequences disturbing gene regulation may account for
significant proportion of DSD cases.

PMCID: PMC3049794
PMID: 21408189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 9;6(3):e17536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017536.

A new FACS approach isolates hESC derived endoderm using transcription factors.

Pan Y(1), Ouyang Z, Wong WH, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United
States of America.

We show that high quality microarray gene expression profiles can be obtained
following FACS sorting of cells using combinations of transcription factors. We
use this transcription factor FACS (tfFACS) methodology to perform a genomic
analysis of hESC-derived endodermal lineages marked by combinations of SOX17,
GATA4, and CXCR4, and find that triple positive cells have a much stronger
definitive endoderm signature than other combinations of these markers.
Additionally, SOX17(+) GATA4(+) cells can be obtained at a much earlier stage of 
differentiation, prior to expression of CXCR4(+) cells, providing an important
new tool to isolate this earlier definitive endoderm subtype. Overall, tfFACS
represents an advancement in FACS technology which broadly crosses multiple
disciplines, most notably in regenerative medicine to redefine cellular
populations.

PMCID: PMC3052315
PMID: 21408072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;194(5):349-62. doi: 10.1159/000323533. Epub 2011 Mar
9.

Pitx2c modulates cardiac-specific transcription factors networks in
differentiating cardiomyocytes from murine embryonic stem cells.

Lozano-Velasco E(1), Chinchilla A, Martínez-Fernández S, Hernández-Torres F,
Navarro F, Lyons GE, Franco D, Aránega AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, Jaén, Spain.

AIM: The knowledge of the molecular signals that control cell differentiation
into cardiomyocytes is critical to apply cell-based therapies and repair an
injured heart. The transcription factor Pitx2 has essential roles in the
development of different organs including the heart. Although a direct role of
Pitx2 in the developing myocardium has recently been reported, the molecular
pathways driven by Pitx2 as well as its cardiac target genes remain largely
unexplored. The aim of this study was to unravel the molecular mechanisms driven 
by Pitx2 during the process of cardiomyocyte differentiation in vitro in mouse
embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pitx2c was overexpressed in the R1-embryonic stem cell line.
mRNA levels and protein distribution of several specific cardiac genes were
analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry experiments in R1-embryonic
stem cell-derived beating areas at different stages of in vitro differentiation. 
Our results show that overexpression of Pitx2c in embryonic stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes is able to dynamically upregulate several cardiac-enriched
transcription factors such as Isl1, Mef2c and Gata4. Additionally, Pitx2c induces
the expression of chamber-specific cardiac genes such as Tbx5, Nppa and Cx40.
These data were validated in an in vivo model of Pitx2 loss of function.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results demonstrate that Pitx2 plays a major
role reinforcing the transcriptional program of cardiac differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21389672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;19(7):820-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.33. Epub 2011 Mar
9.

A novel autosomal dominant condition consisting of congenital heart defects and
low atrial rhythm maps to chromosome 9q.

van de Meerakker JB(1), van Engelen K, Mathijssen IB, Lekanne dit Deprez RH, Lam 
J, Wilde AA, Baars MJ, Mannens MM, Mulder BJ, Moorman AF, Postma AV.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Centre, Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Academic 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) occur mostly sporadic, but familial CHD cases
have been reported. Mutations in several genes, including NKX2.5, GATA4 and
NOTCH1, were identified in families and patients with CHD, but the mechanisms
underlying CHD are largely unknown. We performed genome-wide linkage analysis in 
a large four-generation family with autosomal dominant CHD (including atrial
septal defect type I and II, tetralogy of Fallot and persistent left superior
vena cava) and low atrial rhythm, a unique phenotype that has not been described 
before. We obtained phenotypic information including electrocardiography,
echocardiography and DNA of 23 family members. Genome-wide linkage analysis on 12
affected, 5 unaffected individuals and 1 obligate carrier demonstrated
significant linkage only to chromosome 9q21-33 with a multipoint maximum LOD
score of 4.1 at marker D9S1690, between markers D9S167 and D9S1682. This 48-cM
critical interval corresponds to 39<U+2009>Mb and contains 402 genes. Sequence analysis 
of nine candidate genes in this region (INVS, TMOD1, TGFBR1, KLF4, IPPK, BARX1,
PTCH1, MEGF9 and S1PR3) revealed no mutations, nor were genomic imbalances
detected using array comparative genomic hybridization. In conclusion, we
describe a large family with CHD and low atrial rhythm with a significant LOD
score to chromosome 9q. The phenotype is representative of a mild form of left
atrial isomerism or a developmental defect of the sinus node and surrounding
tissue. Because the mechanisms underlying CHD are largely unknown, this study
represents an important step towards the discovery of genes implied in
cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3137501
PMID: 21386876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):229-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.032. Epub 2011 
Mar 6.

Conditional ablation of Gata4 and Fog2 genes in mice reveals their distinct roles
in mammalian sexual differentiation.

Manuylov NL(1), Zhou B, Ma Q, Fox SC, Pu WT, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Assembly of functioning testis and ovary requires a GATA4-FOG2 transcriptional
complex. To define the separate roles for GATA4 and FOG2 proteins in sexual
development of the testis we have ablated the corresponding genes in somatic
gonadal cells. We have established that GATA4 is required for testis
differentiation, for the expression of Dmrt1 gene, and for testis cord
morphogenesis. While Sf1Cre-mediated excision of Gata4 permitted normal
expression of most genes associated with embryonic testis development, gonadal
loss of Fog2 resulted in an early partial block in male pathway and sex reversal.
We have also determined that testis sexual differentiation is sensitive to the
timing of GATA4 loss during embryogenesis. Our results now demonstrate that these
two genes also have non-overlapping essential functions in testis development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3360587
PMID: 21385577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS Genet. 2011 Feb;7(2):e1001313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001313. Epub 2011 
Feb 17.

The cardiac transcription network modulated by Gata4, Mef2a, Nkx2.5, Srf, histone
modifications, and microRNAs.

Schlesinger J(1), Schueler M, Grunert M, Fischer JJ, Zhang Q, Krueger T, Lange M,
Tönjes M, Dunkel I, Sperling SR.

Author information: 
(1)Group Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The transcriptome, as the pool of all transcribed elements in a given cell, is
regulated by the interaction between different molecular levels, involving
epigenetic, transcriptional, and post-transcriptional mechanisms. However, many
previous studies investigated each of these levels individually, and little is
known about their interdependency. We present a systems biology study integrating
mRNA profiles with DNA-binding events of key cardiac transcription factors
(Gata4, Mef2a, Nkx2.5, and Srf), activating histone modifications (H3ac, H4ac,
H3K4me2, and H3K4me3), and microRNA profiles obtained in wild-type and
RNAi-mediated knockdown. Finally, we confirmed conclusions primarily obtained in 
cardiomyocyte cell culture in a time-course of cardiac maturation in mouse around
birth. We provide insights into the combinatorial regulation by cardiac
transcription factors and show that they can partially compensate each other's
function. Genes regulated by multiple transcription factors are less likely
differentially expressed in RNAi knockdown of one respective factor. In addition 
to the analysis of the individual transcription factors, we found that histone 3 
acetylation correlates with Srf- and Gata4-dependent gene expression and is
complementarily reduced in cardiac Srf knockdown. Further, we found that altered 
microRNA expression in Srf knockdown potentially explains up to 45% of indirect
mRNA targets. Considering all three levels of regulation, we present an
Srf-centered transcription network providing on a single-gene level insights into
the regulatory circuits establishing respective mRNA profiles. In summary, we
show the combinatorial contribution of four DNA-binding transcription factors in 
regulating the cardiac transcriptome and provide evidence that histone
modifications and microRNAs modulate their functional consequence. This opens a
new perspective to understand heart development and the complexity cardiovascular
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3040678
PMID: 21379568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell Signal. 2011 Jul;23(7):1094-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.02.007. Epub 2011
Mar 1.

Cell signaling pathways for the regulation of GATA4 transcription factor:
Implications for cell growth and apoptosis.

Suzuki YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, 3900
Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA. ys82@georgetown.edu

GATA4 is a member of the GATA family of zinc finger transcription factor, which
regulates gene transcription by binding to GATA elements. GATA4 was originally
discovered as a regulator of cardiac development and subsequently identified as a
major regulator of adult cardiac hypertrophy. GATA4 regulates gene expression of 
various genes, which are involved in cardiac development and cardiac hypertrophy 
and heart failure. In addition to the heart, GATA4 plays important roles in the
reproductive system, gastrointestinal system, respiratory system and cancer.
Positive and negative regulations of GATA4 therefore are important components of 
biologic functions. The activation of GATA4 occurs via various cell signaling
events. Earlier studies have identified protein-protein interactions of GATA4
with other factors. The discovery of interactions of GATA4 with nuclear factor
for activated T cells (NFAT) revealed the importance of calcium signaling in the 
activation of GATA4. GATA4 can also be phosphorylated by mitogen activated
protein kinases and protein kinase A. Lysine modifications also occur on the
GATA4 molecule including acetylation and sumoylation. Both reactive
oxygen-dependent and -independent antioxidant-sensitive pathways for GATA4
activation have also been demonstrated. The GATA4 activity is also regulated by
modulating the level of GATA4 expression via transcriptional as well as
translational mechanisms. This work summarizes the current understanding of
regulatory mechanisms for modulating GATA4 activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3078531
PMID: 21376121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Jul;28(1):17-23. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.638. Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Involvement of a novel GATA4 mutation in atrial septal defects.

Liu XY(1), Wang J, Zheng JH, Bai K, Liu ZM, Wang XZ, Liu X, Fang WY, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, PR China.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the most common types of congenital heart
disease and is associated with a significant increase in the morbidity and
mortality of affected individuals. Accumulating evidence indicates that genetic
defects play important roles in the pathogenesis of congenital ASD. However, ASD 
is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic determinants for ASD in the majority
of the patients remain to be identified. In this study, the entire coding region 
of GATA4, a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor crucial to
embryogenesis, was initially sequenced in 120 unrelated patients with ASD. The
available relatives of patients carrying the identified mutation and 200
ethnicity-matched unrelated control individuals were genotyped. The functional
characteristics of the GATA4 mutant were compared to its wild-type counterpart
using a luciferase reporter assay system. A novel heterozygous missense GATA4
mutation, p.G21V, was identified in 2 unrelated families with ASD, which was not 
detected in the control population nor reported in the human gene mutation
database. Alignment of multiple GATA4 proteins displayed that the affected amino 
acid residue was highly conserved across species. Functional analysis showed that
the p.G21V GATA4 mutation was associated with a decreased transcriptional
activity. The findings underscore the pathogenic link between compromised GATA4
function and congenital ASD, providing new insight into the molecular mechanism
involved in this common form of congenital cardiovascular anomalies.

PMID: 21373748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Death Dis. 2010 Oct 7;1:e80. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.57.

Low concentrations of nitric oxide delay the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells and promote their survival.

Tejedo JR(1), Tapia-Limonchi R, Mora-Castilla S, Cahuana GM, Hmadcha A, Martin F,
Bedoya FJ, Soria B.

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine-University
Pablo de Olavide, CIBERDEM, Seville, Spain. juan.tejedo@cabimer.es

Nitric oxide (NO) is an intracellular messenger in several cell systems, but its 
contribution to embryonic stem cell (ESC) biology has not been characterized.
Exposure of ESCs to low concentrations (2-20<U+2009>µM) of the NO donor
diethylenetriamine NO adduct confers protection from apoptosis elicited by
leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. NO blocked caspase 3 activation,
PARP degradation, downregulation of the pro-apoptotic genes Casp7, Casp9, Bax and
Bak1 and upregulation of the anti-apoptotic genes Bcl-2 111, Bcl-2 and Birc6.
These effects were also observed in cells overexpressing eNOS. Exposure of
LIF-deprived mESCs to low NO prevented the loss of expression of self-renewal
genes (Oct4, Nanog and Sox2) and the SSEA marker. Moreover, NO blocked the
differentiation process promoted by the absence of LIF and bFGF in mouse and
human ESCs. NO treatment decreased the expression of differentiation markers,
such as Brachyury, Gata6 and Gata4. Constitutive overexpression of eNOS in cells 
exposed to LIF deprivation maintained the expression of self-renewal markers,
whereas the differentiation genes were repressed. These effects were reversed by 
addition of the NOS inhibitor L-NMMA. Altogether, the data suggest that low NO
has a role in the regulation of ESC differentiation by delaying the entry into
differentiation, arresting the loss of self-renewal markers and promoting cell
survival by inhibiting apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3035898
PMID: 21368853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 May 16;338(1-2):18-27. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.02.015. 
Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Distinct regulation of B-type natriuretic peptide transcription by p38 MAPK
isoforms.

Koivisto E(1), Kaikkonen L, Tokola H, Pikkarainen S, Aro J, Pennanen H, Karvonen 
T, Rysä J, Kerkelä R, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Persistent controversy underlies the functional roles of specific p38 MAPK
isoforms in cardiac biology and regulation of hypertrophy-associated genes. Here 
we show that adenoviral gene transfer of p38ß but not p38a increased B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) mRNA levels in vitro as well as atrial natriuretic
peptide mRNA levels both in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of p38a, in turn,
augmented the expression fibrosis-related genes connective tissue growth factor, 
basic fibroblast growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-9 both in vitro and
in vivo. p38ß-induced BNP transcription was diminished by mutation of GATA-4
binding site, whereas overexpression of MKK6b, an upstream regulator of p38a and 
p38ß, activated BNP transcription through both GATA-4 and AP-1. Overexpression of
MKK3, upstream regulator of p38a, induced BNP transcription independently from
AP-1 and GATA-4. These data provide new evidence for diversity in downstream
targets and functional roles of p38 pathway kinases in regulation of
hypertrophy-associated cardiac genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Dev Biol. 2011 May 1;353(1):29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.016. Epub 2011
Feb 23.

Promotion of avian endothelial cell differentiation by GATA transcription
factors.

Kamei CN(1), Kempf H, Yelin R, Daoud G, James RG, Lassar AB, Tabin CJ,
Schultheiss TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In the avian embryo, endothelial cells originate from several sources, including 
the lateral plate and somite mesoderm. In this study, we show that Gata
transcription factors are expressed in the lateral plate and in vasculogenic
regions of the avian somite and are able to promote a vascular endothelial fate
when ectopically expressed in somite precursors. A fusion of GATA4 to the
transcriptional activator VP16 promoted endothelium formation, indicating that
GATA transcription factors promote vasculogenesis via activation of downstream
targets, while a fusion of GATA4 to the transcriptional repressor engrailed
repressed expression of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor 2, a marker
of endothelial precursors. These findings indicate a role for GATA transcription 
factors in the differentiation of the endothelium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3165022
PMID: 21354132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Androl. 2012 Jan-Feb;33(1):81-7. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.110.012039. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Functional cooperation between GATA factors and cJUN on the star promoter in
MA-10 Leydig cells.

Martin LJ(1), Bergeron F, Viger RS, Tremblay JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal, and Child Health, CHUQ Research Centre, 2705 Laurier 
Blvd, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada .

Steroid hormone biosynthesis requires the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
(STAR). STAR is part of a protein complex that transports cholesterol through the
mitochondrial membrane where steroidogenesis begins. Several transcription
factors participate to direct the proper spatiotemporal and hormonal regulation
of the Star gene in Leydig cells. Mechanistically, this is believed to involve
the functional interplay between many of these factors. Here we report a novel
transcriptional cooperation between GATA factors and cJUN on the mouse Star and
human STAR promoters in MA-10 Leydig cells. This cooperation was observed with
different GATA members (GATA1, 4, and 6), whereas only cJUN could cooperate with 
GATA factors. GATA/cJUN transcriptional cooperation on the Star promoter is
mediated via closely juxtaposed GATA and AP-1 binding motifs. Mutation of all
functional GATA and cJUN elements abolished GATA/cJUN cooperation, which is in
agreement with previous data reporting a direct interaction between GATA4 and
cJUN in a heterologous system. These data add valuable new insights that further 
define the molecular mechanisms that govern Star transcription in steroidogenic
cells of the testis.

PMID: 21350237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cells. 2011 Feb;31(2):123-32. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-0016-8. Epub 2011 Jan
18.

Biochemical and morphological effects of hypoxic environment on human embryonic
stem cells in long-term culture and differentiating embryoid bodies.

Lim HJ(1), Han J, Woo DH, Kim SE, Kim SK, Kang HG, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.

The mammalian reproductive tract is known to contain 1.5-5.3% oxygen (O(2)), but 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) derived from preimplantation embryos are
typically cultured under 21% O(2) tension. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of O(2) tension on the long-term culture of hESCs and on 
cell-fate determination during early differentiation. hESCs and embryoid bodies
(EBs) were grown under different O(2) tensions (3, 12, and 21% O(2)). The
expression of markers associated with pluripotency, embryonic germ layers, and
hypoxia was analyzed using RTPCR, immunostaining, and Western blotting.
Proliferation, apoptosis, and chromosomal aberrations were examined using BrdU
incorporation, caspase-3 immunostaining, and karyotype analysis, respectively.
Structural and morphological changes of EBs under different O(2) tensions were
comparatively examined using azan- and hematoxylineosin staining, and scanning
and transmission electron microscopy. Mild hypoxia (12% O(2)) increased the
number of cells expressing Oct4/Nanog and reduced BrdU incorporation and
aneuploidy. The percentage of cells positive for active caspase-3, which was high
during normoxia (21% O(2)), gradually decreased when hESCs were continuously
cultured under mild hypoxia. EBs subjected to hypoxia (3% O(2)) exhibited
well-differentiated microvilli on their surface, secreted high levels of
collagen, and showed enhanced differentiation into primitive endoderm. These
changes were associated with increased expression of Foxa2, Sox17, AFP, and GATA4
on the EB periphery. Our data suggest that mild hypoxia facilitates the slow
mitotic division of hESCs in long-term culture and reduces the frequency of
chromosomal abnormalities and apoptosis. In addition, hypoxia promotes the
differentiation of EBs into extraembryonic endoderm.

PMCID: PMC3932683
PMID: 21347709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. BMB Rep. 2011 Feb;44(2):123-8. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.2.123.

Cloning and characterization of the cardiac-specific Lrrc10 promoter.

Fan X(1), Yang Q, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Wang J, Yuan J, Li Y, Wang Y, Deng Y, Yuan W, 
Mo X, Wan Y, Ocorr K, Yang X, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Heart Development, Key Lab of MOE for Development Biology and
Protein Chemistry, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
410081, Hunan, China.

Leucine-rich repeat containing protein 10 (LRRC10) is characterized as a
cardiac-specific gene, suggesting a role in heart development and disease. A
severe cardiac morphogenic defect in zebrafish morphants was recently reported
but a contradictory result was found in mice, suggesting a more complicated
molecular mechanism exists during mouse embryonic development. To elucidate how
LRRC10 is regulated, we analyzed the 5'enhancer region approximately 3 kilo bases
(kb) upstream of the Lrrc10 start site using luciferase reporter gene assays. Our
characterization of the Lrrc10 promoter indicates it possesses complicated
cis-and trans-acting elements. We show that GATA4 and MEF2C could both increase
transcriptional activity of Lrrc10 promoter individually but that they do not act
synergistically, suggesting that there exists a more complex regulation pattern. 
Surprisingly, knockout of Gata4 and Mef2c binding sites in the 5'enhancer region 
(-2,894/-2,889) didn't change the transcriptional activity of the Lrrc10 promoter
and the likely GATA4 binding site identified was located in a region only 100
base pair (bp) upstream of the promoter. Our data provides insight into the
molecular regulation of Lrrc10 expression, which probably also contributes to its
tissue-specific expression.

PMID: 21345312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3422-32. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22697.

Collagen I regulates the self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells through a2ß1 
integrin- and DDR1-dependent Bmi-1.

Suh HN(1), Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix (ECM) influences vital aspects of
anchorage-dependent cell behavior including survival, proliferation, and
differentiation. However, the role of collagen I in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs) is not well-known. Therefore, in the present study we examined the effect
of collagen I on mESC self-renewal and related signal pathways. Collagen I
(10<U+2009>µg/ml) maintained mESCs in an undifferentiated state (Nanog, OCT4, and
SSEA-1) and did not affect differentiation (GATA4, Tbx5, Fgf5, and Cdx2) in the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Treatment with collagen I bound
both a2ß1 integrin and discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), and stimulated
intracellular signaling pathways. Collagen I-bound a2ß1 integrin increased
integrin-linked kinase (ILK) phosphorylation, cleaved Notch protein expression in
the nuclear fraction, and Gli-1 mRNA expression. In addition, collagen I-bound
DDR1 increased GTP-bound Ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p85a catalytic
subunit protein expression, and Akt and ERK phosphorylation. Importantly,
collagen I increased Bmi-1 protein expression in the nucleus which was blocked by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) specific for Gli-1 and ERK, showing that parallel
pathways of integrins and DDR1 merge at Bmi-1. Furthermore, collagen I-induced
p16 decrease and p-Rb increase were reversed by Bmi-1-specific siRNA. Moreover,
Bmi-1 silencing abolished the collagen I-induced increase of proliferation
indices and undifferentiation markers. These results indicate that collagen I
stimulates the self-renewal of mESCs mediated by Bmi-1 through a2ß1
integrin-dependent ILK, Notch, Gli-1, and DDR1-dependent Ras, PI3K/Akt, and ERK.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4006-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1019025108. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Transcription factor genes Smad4 and Gata4 cooperatively regulate cardiac valve
development. [corrected]

Moskowitz IP(1), Wang J, Peterson MA, Pu WT, Mackinnon AC, Oxburgh L, Chu GC,
Sarkar M, Berul C, Smoot L, Robertson EJ, Schwartz R, Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
imoskowitz@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5921.

We report that the dominant human missense mutations G303E and G296S in GATA4, a 
cardiac-specific transcription factor gene, cause atrioventricular septal defects
and valve abnormalities by disrupting a signaling cascade involved in endocardial
cushion development. These GATA4 missense mutations, but not a mutation causing
secundum atrial septal defects (S52F), demonstrated impaired protein interactions
with SMAD4, a transcription factor required for canonical bone morphogenetic
protein/transforming growth factor-ß (BMP/TGF-ß) signaling. Gata4 and Smad4
genetically interact in vivo: atrioventricular septal defects result from
endothelial-specific Gata4 and Smad4 compound haploinsufficiency.
Endothelial-specific knockout of Smad4 caused an absence of valve-forming
activity: Smad4-deficient endocardium was associated with acellular endocardial
cushions, absent epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation, reduced endocardial
proliferation, and loss of Id2 expression in valve-forming regions. We show that 
Gata4 and Smad4 cooperatively activated the Id2 promoter, that human GATA4
mutations abrogated this activity, and that Id2 deficiency in mice could cause
atrioventricular septal defects. We suggest that one determinant of the
phenotypic spectrum caused by human GATA4 mutations is differential effects on
GATA4/SMAD4 interactions required for endocardial cushion development.

PMCID: PMC3053967
PMID: 21330551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;25(4):645-55. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0297. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

FSH and its second messenger cAMP stimulate the transcription of human
anti-Müllerian hormone in cultured granulosa cells.

Taieb J(1), Grynberg M, Pierre A, Arouche N, Massart P, Belville C, Hesters L,
Frydman R, Catteau-Jonard S, Fanchin R, Picard JY, Josso N, Rey RA, di Clemente
N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 782, 32 rue
des Carnets, 92120 Clamart, France.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), also called Müllerian-inhibiting substance, a
member of the TGF-ß family, is responsible for the regression of Müllerian ducts 
in the male fetus. In females, AMH is synthesized by granulosa cells of preantral
and small antral follicles, and production wanes at later stages of follicle
maturation. Using RT-PCR in luteal granulosa cells in primary culture and
reporter gene techniques in the KK1 granulosa cell line, we show that FSH and
cAMP enhance AMH transcription, and LH has an additive effect. Gonadotropins and 
cAMP act through protein kinase A and p38 MAPK signaling pathways and involve the
GATA binding factor-4 and steroidogenic factor-1 transcription factors, among
others. The expression profile of AMH and the dynamics of serum AMH after
gonadotropin stimulation have been interpreted as a down-regulating effect of FSH
upon AMH production by granulosa cells. The specific effect of gonadotropins upon
granulosa cells may be obscured in vivo by the effect of FSH upon follicular
maturation and by the presence of other hormones and growth factors, acting
individually or in concert.

PMID: 21330407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Nucleus. 2010 Sep-Oct;1(5):397-401. doi: 10.4161/nucl.1.5.12394.

Multiple novel functions of lamina associated polypeptide 2a in striated muscle.

Gotic I(1), Foisner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Lamina-associated polypeptide 2a (LAP2a) is a nucleoplasmic protein that
interacts with A-type lamins and the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and affects
pRb-mediated cell cycle regulation and chromatin organization. Mutations in lamin
A/C and LAP2a cause late onset striated muscle diseases, but the molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. We have recently reported on the striated
muscle phenotype of LAP2a-deficient mice, revealing new unexpected roles of
LAP2a. Loss of LAP2a in skeletal muscle caused an upregulated stem cell-type gene
expression in muscle satellite cell progeny and their delayed myogenic
differentiation in vitro. In vivo, the myofiber-associated muscle stem cell pool 
was increased. In addition, absence of LAP2a promoted muscle remodeling towards
fast myofiber types in the soleus muscle of old animals. In cardiac tissue,
deletion of LAP2a caused systolic dysfunction in young mice with an increased
susceptibility for fibrosis in old animals. The functional impairment in the
heart was accompanied by a deregulation of major cardiac transcription factors,
GATA4 and MEF2c and activation of compensatory pathways, including the
downregulation of ß-adrenergic receptor signaling.Here we discuss potential
functions of LAP2a in striated muscle at molecular level and how loss of these
functions may cause the diverse muscle phenotypes. We propose that LAP2a serves
as a transcriptional co-regulator, which controls muscle specific gene expression
during muscle regeneration, muscle remodeling and stress response.

PMCID: PMC3037534
PMID: 21326822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Jun;352(1-2):99-108. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0744-2. Epub 
2011 Feb 13.

mTOR mediates RhoA-dependent leptin-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Zeidan A(1), Hunter JC, Javadov S, Karmazyn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada.

Obesity is associated with increased leptin production which may contribute to
cardiac hypertrophy. However, the mechanism of leptin-induced cardiac hypertrophy
remains incompletely understood. The Rho family (RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42) and
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) have recently emerged as important
regulators of cell growth. We therefore explored the roles and interrelationships
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), mTOR, and the Rho family in the
regulation of actin polymerization and leptin-induced hypertrophy in cultured
neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. Five minutes treatment with leptin (3.1 nM)
resulted in activation of RhoA and Rac1 (by 330 and 160%, respectively, P < 0.05)
which was significantly attenuated by AG-490 (50 µM) and LY294002 (10 µM),
specific inhibitors of JAK2 and PI3K, respectively. However, Cdc42 activity was
unaffected by leptin. The hypertrophic effect of leptin was associated with an
increase in phosphorylation of p70(S6K), the major target of mTOR, by 110% (P <
0.05). The specific mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (10 nM) attenuated leptin-induced
RhoA and Rac1 activation. Furthermore, the leptin-induced decrease in the
G/F-actin ratio, a measure of actin polymerization, was blunted by rapamycin.
Leptin produced activation of the transcriptional factor GATA4 which was
attenuated by the RhoA inhibitor C3, the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 (10 µM) as
well as rapamycin. Our results demonstrate a critical role for PI3K/mTOR/p70(S6K)
in leptin-induced RhoA activation resulting in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
associated with GATA4 stimulation.

PMID: 21318349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Mar 1;19(5):1734-42. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.01.022. Epub
2011 Jan 18.

Identification of new GATA4-small molecule inhibitors by structure-based virtual 
screening.

El-Hachem N(1), Nemer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are zinc finger proteins that
were shown to play evolutionary conserved roles in cell differentiation and
proliferation in different organisms. We hypothesized that by finding new
molecules that inhibit their function to be crucial in future therapeutical
interventions for various diseases. By virtual high throughput screening using a 
version of glide (Schrodinger®) program with both crystal and NMR structure of
GATA C-terminal zinc finger, we identified new small molecular weight chemicals
with lead-like properties. We used in vitro cell-based assays to show that these 
molecules selectively and efficiently inhibit GATA4 activity by inhibiting its
interaction with the DNA. In addition we showed that these molecules can block
the activation of downstream target genes by GATA4. Moreover these compounds can 
moderately enhanced a mouse model of myoblast differentiation into myotubes. This
might be partially due to decreased GATA4/DNA interaction as shown by gel
retardation assays. Further investigation is needed to reach selectivity and
efficacy. Our study however do show that in silico screening combined with in
vitro studies are efficient tools to unravel new molecules that interact with
zinc finger proteins such as GATA4.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Dev Dyn. 2011 Mar;240(3):649-62. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22570. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Different requirements for GATA factors in cardiogenesis are mediated by
non-canonical Wnt signaling.

Afouda BA(1), Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Program, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, 
United Kingdom. boni.afouda@abdn.ac.uk

GATA factors and Wnt signals are key regulators of vertebrate cardiogenesis, but 
specific roles for individual GATA factors and how they interact with Wnt
signaling remain unknown. We use loss of function and overexpression approaches
to elucidate how these molecules regulate early cardiogenesis in Xenopus. In
order to minimize indirect effects due to abnormal early embryogenesis, we use
pluripotent embryonic tissues as cardiogenic assays. We confirm central roles for
GATA4, 5, and 6 in cardiogenesis, but also discover individual and different
requirements. We show that GATA4 or 6 regulate both cardiogenic potential and
subsequent cardiomyocyte differentiation but that GATA5 is involved in regulating
cardiomyocyte differentiation. We also show that Wnt11b signaling can rescue
reduced cardiac differentiation resulting from loss of function of GATA4 and 6
but not GATA5. We conclude that Wnt11b mediates the differential requirements for
GATA factors during vertebrate cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21305652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biomaterials. 2011 Apr;32(12):3220-32. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.050.
Epub 2011 Feb 5.

Differentiation of cardiosphere-derived cells into a mature cardiac lineage using
biodegradable poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogels.

Li Z(1), Guo X, Matsushita S, Guan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

A family of injectable and thermosensitive hydrogels suitable for myocardial
injection was developed to deliver cardiosphere-derived cells (CDCs), an emerging
and promising cell type for cardiac cell therapy. The hydrogels were based on
polycaprolactone, N-isopropylacrylamide, 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate and
dimethyl-<U+03B3>-butyrolactone acrylate. Atom transfer radical polymerization was used 
to synthesize hydrogels with a well-defined structure and well-controlled
properties. The hydrogel solutions possessed thermal transition temperatures
around room temperature and exhibited injectability suitable for myocardial
injection. At 37 °C, the hydrogel solutions were capable of forming solid gels
within 5s. This would allow the hydrogels to largely retain in the heart during
injection. The hydrogels were highly flexible at body temperature with moduli
matching those of the rat and human myocardium, and breaking strains higher than 
those of the myocardium, enabling them to respond synchronically with heart
motion. The well-controlled polymer structure allowed for precisely controlling
and decoupling water content and stiffness that affect cell differentiation. DNA 
assay demonstrated that CDCs proliferated in the 3D hydrogels during a 2-week
culture period. CDCs maintained their colony formation capability in the
hydrogel. Interestingly, hydrogels directed CDCs differentiation into mature
cardiac lineage. At mRNA level, the mature cardiac specific transcript factors
cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac myosin heavy chain (MYH6) were
up-regulated, while the pre-mature cardiac marker GATA4 was down-regulated even
after 1 day of encapsulation. CDC differentiation was interplayed by hydrogel
stiffness and collagen in the hydrogel. Hydrogel with modulus ~31 kPa was found
to more significantly up-regulate cardiac expression than that with modulus ~5 or
~63 kPa. cTnT expression was largely regulated by both stiffness and collagen
while MYH6 was mainly regulated by stiffness. Immunohistochemistry study showed
that CDCs expressed cardiac troponin I and MYH6 proteins after 2 weeks of
culture. These results demonstrate that the thermosensitive hydrogels not only
possess physical properties suitable for myocardial injection, but also promote
CDC proliferation and cardiac differentiation. These hydrogels represent
potential candidates for delivery of CDCs into infarcted hearts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21296413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2011 Jul;60(3):259-66. doi: 10.1007/s12013-010-9148-2.

Fabp3 inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis of embryonic myocardial
cells.

Zhu C(1), Hu DL, Liu YQ, Zhang QJ, Chen FK, Kong XQ, Cao KJ, Zhang JS, Qian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, People's Republic of China.

Fatty acid binding protein 3 (FABP3) is a member of a family of binding proteins.
The protein is mainly expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle cells, and it has 
been linked to fatty acid metabolism, trafficking, and signaling. Using
suppression subtractive hybridization, we previously found that FABP3 is highly
regulated in ventricular septal defect (VSD) patients and may play a significant 
role in the development of human VSD. We therefore aimed to identify the
biological characteristics of the FABP3 gene in embryonic myocardial cells. On
the basis of RT-PCR and western blotting analyses, we demonstrated that the
expression levels of FABP3 mRNA and protein were up-regulated initially and then 
gradually decreased with P19 cell differentiation. MTT assays and cell cycle
analysis showed that FABP3 inhibits P19 cell proliferation, and data from annexin
V-FITC assays revealed that FABP3 can promote apoptosis of P19 cells. Further
data from quantitative real-time RT-PCR revealed lower expression levels of
cardiac muscle-specific molecular markers (cTnT, alpha-MHC, GATA4, and MEF2c) in 
FABP3-overexpressing cell lines than in the control cells during differentiation.
Our results demonstrate that FABP3 may be involved in the differentiation of
cardiac myocytes.

PMCID: PMC3112483
PMID: 21293949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 May-Jun;54(3):306-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.01.004. Epub 
2011 Jan 27.

Search of somatic GATA4 and NKX2.5 gene mutations in sporadic septal heart
defects.

Salazar M(1), Consoli F, Villegas V, Caicedo V, Maddaloni V, Daniele P,
Caianiello G, Pachón S, Nuñez F, Limongelli G, Pacileo G, Marino B, Bernal JE, De
Luca A, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad del Quindío, Armenia, Colombia.

High prevalence of somatic mutations in the cardiac transcription factor genes
NKX2.5 and GATA4 have been reported in the affected cardiovascular tissue of
patients with isolated cardiac septal defects, suggesting a role of somatic
mutations in the pathogenesis of these congenital heart defects (CHDs). However, 
all somatic mutations have been identified in DNA extracted from an archive of
formalin-fixed cardiac tissues. In the present study, to address the hypothesis
that somatic mutations are important in isolated CHDs, we analyzed the GATA4 and 
NKX2.5 genes in the fresh-frozen pathologic cardiac tissue specimen and
corresponding non-diseased tissue obtained from a series of 62 CHD patients,
including 35 patients with cardiac septal defects and 27 with other cardiac
anomalies. We identified one variant and two common polymorphisms in the NKX2.5
gene, and six variants and two common polymorphisms in the GATA4 gene. All
identified variants were seen in both the fresh-frozen pathologic cardiac tissue 
and the corresponding non-diseased tissue, which indicates that they all were
constitutional variants. The present study has identified NKX2.5 and GATA4
constitutional variants in our CHD cohort, but was unable to replicate the
previously published findings of high prevalence of somatically derived sequence 
mutations in patients with cardiac septal defects using fresh-frozen cardiac
tissues rather than formalin-fixed tissues.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21276881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Mar;124(1-2):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.01.008. Epub 2011 Jan 22.

Alterations of folliculogenesis in women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Sander VA(1), Hapon MB, Sícaro L, Lombardi EP, Jahn GA, Motta AB.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudios Farmacológicos y Botánicos (CEFYBO), Universidad de Buenos 
Aires (UBA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The objective of the present study was to examine some factors involved in
follicular development of women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Women with
PCOS showed increased levels of serum luteinizing hormone (LH) but decreased
follicular production of progesterone and estradiol by pre-ovulatory follicles.
The mRNA expression corresponding to steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR), and 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20a-HSD) was increased, while
that corresponding to cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom) was decreased in PCOS 
follicles as compared to controls. No changes in the mRNA expression for
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 (3ß-HSD2), cytochrome P450 side-chain
cleavage (P450scc), cytochrome P450 17 alpha hydroxylase/lyase (P450c17),
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), and transcription factors (GATA-4 and GATA-6) were
found. We conclude that despite the hyper-luteinized environment of PCOS
follicles, these follicles produce lower levels of progesterone and estradiol,
and that this is characterized by increased degradation of progesterone and
decreased estradiol synthesis. Our data demonstrate that the synthesis of
prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a) may be affected in PCOS-follicles and that the
transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are present in PCOS-follicles but they
are not involved in the abnormal transcription observed in the steroidogenic
enzymes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21262361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Gastroenterology. 2011 Apr;140(4):1219-1229.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.01.033. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

GATA factors regulate proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression in
small intestine of mature mice.

Beuling E(1), Baffour-Awuah NY, Stapleton KA, Aronson BE, Noah TK, Shroyer NF,
Duncan SA, Fleet JC, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: GATA transcription factors regulate proliferation,
differentiation, and gene expression in multiple organs. GATA4 is expressed in
the proximal 85% of the small intestine and regulates the jejunal-ileal gradient 
in absorptive enterocyte gene expression. GATA6 is co-expressed with GATA4 but
also is expressed in the ileum; its function in the mature small intestine is
unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the function of GATA6 in small intestine using adult
mice with conditional, inducible deletion of Gata6, or Gata6 and Gata4,
specifically in the intestine.
RESULTS: In ileum, deletion of Gata6 caused a decrease in crypt cell
proliferation and numbers of enteroendocrine and Paneth cells, an increase in
numbers of goblet-like cells in crypts, and altered expression of genes specific 
to absorptive enterocytes. In contrast to ileum, deletion of Gata6 caused an
increase in numbers of Paneth cells in jejunum and ileum. Deletion of Gata6 and
Gata4 resulted in a jejunal and duodenal phenotype that was nearly identical to
that in the ileum after deletion of Gata6 alone, revealing common functions for
GATA6 and GATA4.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA transcription factors are required for crypt cell
proliferation, secretory cell differentiation, and absorptive enterocyte gene
expression in the small intestinal epithelium.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541694
PMID: 21262227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1033-44. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.086850. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

GATA4 deficiency impairs ovarian function in adult mice.

Kyrönlahti A(1), Vetter M, Euler R, Bielinska M, Jay PY, Anttonen M, Heikinheimo 
M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University and St. Louis Children's
Hospital, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Transcription factor GATA4 is expressed in granulosa cells and, to a lesser
extent, in other ovarian cell types. Studies of mutant mice have shown that
interactions between GATA4 and its cofactor, ZFPM2 (also termed FOG2), are
required for proper development of the fetal ovary. The role of GATA4 in
postnatal ovarian function, however, has remained unclear, in part because of
prenatal lethality of homozygous mutations in the Gata4 gene in mice. To
circumvent this limitation, we studied ovarian function in two genetically
engineered mouse lines: C57BL/6 (B6) female mice heterozygous for a Gata4-null
allele, and 129;B6 female mice in which Gata4 is deleted specifically in
proliferating granulosa cells using the Cre-loxP recombination system and
Amhr2-cre. Female B6 Gata4(+/-) mice had delayed puberty but normal estrous cycle
lengths and litter size. Compared to wild-type mice, the ovaries of
gonadotropin-stimulated B6 Gata4(+/-) mice were significantly smaller, released
fewer oocytes, produced less estrogen, and expressed less mRNA for the putative
GATA4 target genes Star, Cyp11a1, and Cyp19. Gata4 conditional knockout (cKO)
mice had a more severe phenotype, including impaired fertility and cystic ovarian
changes. Like Gata4(+/-) mice, the ovaries of gonadotropin-stimulated cKO mice
released fewer oocytes and expressed less Cyp19 than those of control mice. Our
findings, coupled with those of other investigators, support the premise that
GATA4 is a key transcriptional regulator of ovarian somatic cell function in both
fetal and adult mice.

PMCID: PMC3080425
PMID: 21248289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Proteome Sci. 2011 Jan 19;9(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-3.

Cardiogenol C can induce Mouse Hair Bulge Progenitor Cells to Transdifferentiate 
into Cardiomyocyte-like Cells.

Yau WW(1), Tang MK, Chen E, Yaoyao, Wong IW, Lee HS, Lee KKh.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regeneration Thematic Research Programme, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
kaholee@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Hair bulge progenitor cells (HBPCs) are multipotent stem cells
derived from the bulge region of mice vibrissal hairs. The purified HBPCs express
CD34, K15 and K14 surface markers. It has been reported that HBPCs could be
readily induced to transdifferentiate into adipocytes and osteocytes. However,
the ability of HBPCs to transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes has not yet been
investigated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The cardiomyogenic potential of HBPCs was
investigated using a small cell-permeable molecule called Cardiogenol C. We
established that Cardiogenol C could induce HBPCs to express transcription
factors GATA4, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5, which are early specific markers for
pre-cardiomyogenic cells. In prolonged cultures, the Cardiogenol C-treated HBPCs 
can also express muscle proteins, cardiac-specific troponin I and sarcomeric
myosin heavy chain. However, we did not observe the ability of these cells to
functionally contract. Hence, we called these cells cardiomyocyte-like cells
rather than cardiomyocytes. We tried to remedy this deficiency by pre-treating
HBPCs with Valproic acid first before exposing them to Cardiogenol C. This
pretreatment inhibited, rather than improved, the effectiveness of Cardiogenol C 
in reprogramming the HBPCs. We used comparative proteomics to determine how
Cardiogenol C worked by identifying proteins that were differentially expressed. 
We identified proteins that were involved in promoting cell differentiation,
cardiomyocyte development and for the normal function of striated muscles. From
those differentially expressed proteins, we further propose that Cardiogenol C
might exert its effect by activating the Wnt signaling pathway through the
suppression of Kremen1. In addition, by up-regulating the expression of chromatin
remodeling proteins, SIK1 and Smarce1 would initiate cardiac differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, our CD34+/K15+ HBPCs could be induced to
transdifferentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells using a small molecule called
Cardiogenol C. The process involves activation of the Wnt signaling pathway and
altered expression of several key chromatin remodeling proteins. The finding is
clinically significant as HBPCs offer a readily accessible and autologous source 
of progenitor cells for cell-based therapy of heart disease, which is one of
major killers in developed countries.

PMCID: PMC3033794
PMID: 21247432  [PubMed]


255. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2010 Oct;16(10):901-4.

[Determination of GATA-4 in the testis of the mouse].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang JZ(1), Zhao YF, Wang YM, Jing CX, Miao NZ, Ai QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Histology and Embryology, Yan'an University School of
Medicine, Yan'an, Shaanxi 716000, China. jiazhouy@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the characteristics and distribution of GATA-4 in the
testis of male mice.
METHODS: Paraffin sections were obtained from the testes of 24 male B6SJLF1/J
mice, aged 0 day (n = 6), 2 weeks (n = 6), 4 weeks (n = 6) and 6 weeks (n = 6),
and the expressions of GATA-4 in the testis were observed by the
immunohistochemical ABC method and DAB visualization at different times.
RESULTS: Positive expressions of GATA4 were found in the Sertoli cells and Leydig
cells of all the mice, but significantly higher in the 4- and 6-week-old than in 
the 0-day and 2-week-old groups (P < 0.01). And they were also observed in the
germ cells of the 4- and 6-week-old mice, significantly higher in the latter than
in the former (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: GATA-4 exists in the testis of male mice, which has provided a
morphological base for sex determination and differentiation and hormone
regulation in the testis.

PMID: 21243753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Jan 14;2(1):1. doi: 10.1186/scrt42.

From fibroblast cells to cardiomyocytes: direct lineage reprogramming.

Yang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, 530 45th
Street, 8117 Rangos Research Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA. lyang@pitt.edu

Recent advances in stem cell biology have established the feasibility of
reprogramming human and murine fibroblast cells into induced pluripotent stem
cells. Three master regulators have been demonstrated to be sufficient in the
management of cell status of 'pluripotent' versus 'differentiated'. The same
strategy has been used to directly convert one somatic cell type into another
cell type, such as the converting of exocrine pancreas cells into cells closely
resembling beta cells and the reprogramming of fibroblast cells into functional
neuron cells. Srivastava's group reported the first direct reprogramming of mouse
fibroblast cells into mesoderm lineage cells (cardiomyocytes) with the enforced
expression of three cardiac transcriptional factors: Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5. The 
induced cardiomyocytes exhibit a global gene expression profile and basic
electrophysiological characteristics similar to those of postnatal
cardiomyocytes. This study made significant advances in cardiovascular and stem
cell fields and has important implications in understanding heart developmental
biology as well as in potential therapies of human cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC3092141
PMID: 21241459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Tissue Cell. 2011 Apr;43(2):67-74. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2010.11.005. Epub 2011 Jan
15.

Differentiation induction of cardiac c-kit positive cells from rat heart into
sinus node-like cells by 5-azacytidine.

Zhang J(1), Huang C, Wu P, Yang J, Song T, Chen Y, Fan X, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR
China.

Cardiac stem cells (CSCs) can differentiate into cardiac phenotypes representing 
early cardiomyocyte-like cells. However, CSCs-derived specification into sinus
nodal cells is rarely known. Using the demethylating agent, 5-Aazacytidine
(5-Aza), we tried to follow the process of cardiac specialization into sinus
node-like cells. The c-kit+ cells were isolated from 1-month-old rat hearts and
sorted by a flow cytometry cell sorting system. Then, analyses of
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction were
performed on the cells. The sorted c-kit+ cell are self-renewing and clonogenic. 
Some of the c-kit+ cell could spontaneously express GATA-4, cardiac troponin I
(cTnI), smooth muscle actin (SMA) and CD31. At week 8, the cells treated with 10 
µM 5-Aza expressed GATA-4 and cTnI at rates of 31.4±2.6% and 32.6±8.5%.
Correspondingly, the rates were 21.4±8.1% and 18.7±4.3% in the cells without
5-Aza. The difference of GATA-4 or cTnI expression rate between two groups was of
significance respectively, P<0.05. The cultured cells could express mRNA of
GATA4, hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 2 (HCN2) and HCN4. The
mRNA expression was also up-regulated in cells treated with 10 µM 5-Aza and
growth factors. By week 2 after cell sorting, inward currents could be recorded
in a fraction of the cultured cells. In conclusion, 10 µM 5-Aza could promote the
differentiation of c-kit+ cells into sinus node-like cells. 5-Aza-mediated
differentiation seems to be helpful in future cell therapy for the patients
suffering from loss of sinus node cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Oct;20(10):1771-8. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0380. Epub 2011 Feb
26.

Transduction of Wnt11 promotes mesenchymal stem cell transdifferentiation into
cardiac phenotypes.

He Z(1), Li H, Zuo S, Pasha Z, Wang Y, Yang Y, Jiang W, Ashraf M, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) has emerged as a potential
treatment for ischemic heart repair. Previous studies have suggested that Wnt11
plays a critical role in cardiac specification and morphogenesis. In this study, 
we examined whether transduction of Wnt11 directly increases MSC differentiation 
into cardiac phenotypes. MSCs harvested from rat bone marrow were transduced with
both Wnt11 and green fluorescent protein (GFP) (MSC(Wnt11)) using the murine stem
cell virus (pMSCV) retroviral expression system; control cells were only
GFP-transfected (MSC(Null)). Compared with control cells, MSC(Wnt11) was shown to
have higher expression of Wnt11 by immunofluorescence, real-time polymerase chain
reaction, and western blotting. MSC(Wnt11) shows a higher expression of
cardiac-specific genes, including GATA-4, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP),
islet-1, and a-actinin, after being cultured with cardiomyocytes (CMs) isolated
from ventricles of neonatal (1-3 day) SD rats. Some MSC(Wnt11) were positive for 
a-actinin when MSCs were cocultured with native CMs for 7 days. Electron
microscopy further confirmed the appearance of sarcomeres in MSC(Wnt11). Connexin
43 was found between GFP-positive MSCs and neonatal rat CMs labeled with red
fluorescent probe PKH26. The transdifferentiation rate was significantly higher
in MSC(Wnt11) than in MSC(Null), as assessed by flow cytometry. Functional
studies indicated that the differentiation of MSC(Wnt11) was diminished by
knockdown of GATA-4 with GATA-4-siRNA. Transduction of Wnt11 into MSCs increases 
their differentiation into CMs by upregulating GATA-4.

PMCID: PMC3156937
PMID: 21231807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 25;108(4):1597-602. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1010257108. Epub 2011 Jan 10.

Loss-of-function mutation in GATA4 causes anomalies of human testicular
development.

Lourenço D(1), Brauner R, Rybczynska M, Nihoul-Fékété C, McElreavey K, Bashamboo 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France.

Approximately 1 of every 250 newborns has some abnormality of genital and/or
gonadal development. However, a specific molecular cause is identified in only
20% of these cases of disorder of sex development (DSD). We identified a family
of French origin presenting with 46,XY DSD and congenital heart disease.
Sequencing of the ORF of GATA4 identified a heterozygous missense mutation
(p.Gly221Arg) in the conserved N-terminal zinc finger of GATA4. This mutation was
not observed in 450 ancestry-matched control individuals. The mutation
compromised the ability of the protein to bind to and transactivate the
anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) promoter. The mutation does not interfere with the
direct protein-protein interaction, but it disrupts synergistic activation of the
AMH promoter by GATA4 and NR5A1. The p.Gly221Arg mutant protein also failed to
bind to a known protein partner FOG2 that is essential for gonad formation. Our
data demonstrate the key role of GATA4 in human testicular development.

PMCID: PMC3029689
PMID: 21220346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Stem Cells. 2011;6(1):21-37.

Primary adipose-derived stem cells enriched by growth factor treatment improves
cell adaptability toward cardiovascular differentiation in a rodent model of
acute myocardial infarction.

Chang JC(1), Lee PC, Lin YC, Lee KW, Hsu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuo Kuang
Road, Taichung 40227, Taiwan.

The heterogeneous cell population in primary adipose-derived adult stem cells
(ADAS) and difficulty in keeping their primitive properties have posed certain
limitations on using these cells for cell therapy. Therefore, our objective was
to generate a population of cells enriched from the adipose stromal-vascular
fraction (SVF) with greater differentiation potential than ADAS and to explore
the mechanism behind the repair of the injured myocardium in vivo. The distinct
population of adipose stromal cells was enriched by immediate treatment of the
growth factor cocktail (EGF and PDGF-BB) to the freshly isolated SVF. These cells
(ADAS-GFs) had distinct cell morphology from ADAS and in average had a smaller
size. They presented co-expression of CD140a (pericytic markers) and CD34
(hematopoietic marker), more obvious mesenchymal (CD13, CD29, CD44, CD90 and
CD117) markers, but rare KDR, and were negative for CD45 and CD31. ADAS-GFs not
only spontaneously expressed endothelial cell markers and formed capillary-like
tubes on Matrigel but also clearly expressed early cardiomyocyte marker genes
when embedded in methylcellulose-based medium. In Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats with
left anterior descending artery (LAD)-induced myocardial infarction (MI), the
ADAS-GFs transplanted group had the left ventricular function significantly
improved compared with the ADAS transplanted group or the control group at 12
weeks post transplantation. The immunofluorescence staining revealed that the
transplanted ADAS-GFs expressed GATA4, betamyosin heavy chain and troponin T
protein but not vWF. More capillaries were also observed around the infarcted
zone in the ADAS-GFs transplanted group. These data suggested that ADAS-GFs with 
a higher proangiogenic potential may restore the cardiac function of infarcted
myocardium via the direct cardiomyocyte differentiation as well as angiogenesis
recruitment.

PMID: 22997843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Mar;1811(3):119-28. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2010.12.005.
Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Heterogeneous sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase gene expression and its regulatory
mechanism in human lung cancer cell lines.

Ito H(1), Yoshida K, Murakami M, Hagiwara K, Sasaki N, Kobayashi M, Takagi A,
Kojima T, Sobue S, Suzuki M, Tamiya-Koizumi K, Nakamura M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y,
Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

The role of sphingolipid metabolic pathway has been recognized in determining
cellular fate. Although sphingolipid degradation has been extensively studied,
gene expression of human sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase (SPL) catalyzing
sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) remains to be determined. Among 5 human lung cancer
cell lines examined, SPL protein levels paralleled the respective mRNA and enzyme
activities. Between H1155 and H1299 cells used for further experiments, higher
cellular S1P was observed in H1155 with higher SPL activity compared with H1299
with low SPL activity. GATA-4 has been reported to affect SPL transcription in
Dictyostelium discoideum. GATA-4 was observed in H1155 but not in other cell
lines. Overexpression of GATA-4 in H1299 increased SPL expression. However,
promoter analysis of human SPL revealed that the most important region was
located between -136bp and -88bp from the first exon, where 2 Sp1 sites exist but
no GATA site. DNA pull-down assay of H1155 showed increased DNA binding of Sp1
and GATA-4 within this promoter region compared with H1299. Electrophoresis
mobility shift assay (EMSA), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, reporter
assay using mutated binding motif, and mithramycin A, a specific Sp1 inhibitor,
suggest the major role of Sp1 in SPL transcription and no direct binding of
GATA-4 with this 5' promoter region. The collaborative role of GATA-4 was proved 
by showing coimmunoprecipitation of Sp1 and GATA-4 using GST-Sp1 and
overexpressed GATA-4. Thus, high SPL transcription of H1155 cells was regulated
by Sp1 and GATA-4/Sp1 complex formation, both of which bind to Sp1 sites of the
5'-SPL promoter.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21184844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 13;5(12):e14297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014297.

c-kitpos GATA-4 high rat cardiac stem cells foster adult cardiomyocyte survival
through IGF-1 paracrine signalling.

Kawaguchi N(1), Smith AJ, Waring CD, Hasan MK, Miyamoto S, Matsuoka R, Ellison
GM.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences (IREIIMS), Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Resident c-kit positive (c-kitpos) cardiac stem cells (CSCs) could be
considered the most appropriate cell type for myocardial regeneration therapies. 
However, much is still unknown regarding their biological properties and
potential.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We produced clones of high and low expressing
GATA-4 CSCs from long-term bulk-cultured c-kitpos CSCs isolated from adult rat
hearts. When c-kitpos GATA-4 high expressing clonal CSCs (cCSCs) were co-cultured
with adult rat ventricular cardiomyocytes, we observed increased survival and
contractility of the cardiomyocytes, compared to cardiomyocytes cultured alone,
co-cultured with fibroblasts or c-kitpos GATA-4 low expressing cCSCs. When
analysed by ELISA, the concentration of IGF-1 was significantly increased in the 
c-kitpos GATA-4 high cCSC/cardiomyocyte co-cultures and there was a significant
correlation between IGF-1 concentration and cardiomyocyte survival. We showed the
activation of the IGF-1 receptor and its downstream molecular targets in
cardiomyocytes co-cultured with c-kitpos GATA-4 high cCSCs but not in
cardiomyocytes that were cultured alone, co-cultured with fibroblasts or c-kitpos
GATA-4 low cCSCs. Addition of a blocking antibody specific to the IGF-1 receptor 
inhibited the survival of cardiomyocytes and prevented the activation of its
signalling in cardiomyocytes in the c-kitpos GATA-4 high cCSC/cardiomyocyte
co-culture system. IGF-1 supplementation or IGF-1 high conditioned medium taken
from the co-culture of c-kitpos GATA-4 high cCSCs plus cardiomyocytes did extend 
the survival and contractility of cardiomyocytes cultured alone and
cardiomyocytes co-cultured with c-kitpos GATA-4 low cCSCs.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: c-kitpos GATA-4 high cCSCs exert a paracrine survival
effect on cardiomyocytes through induction of the IGF-1R and signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3001457
PMID: 21179204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;300(3):E478-88. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00457.2010. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Loss of intestinal GATA4 prevents diet-induced obesity and promotes insulin
sensitivity in mice.

Patankar JV(1), Chandak PG, Obrowsky S, Pfeifer T, Diwoky C, Uellen A, Sattler W,
Stollberger R, Hoefler G, Heinemann A, Battle M, Duncan S, Kratky D, Levak-Frank 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical University of Graz,
Harrachgasse 21/3, Graz, Austria.

Transcriptional regulation of small intestinal gene expression controls plasma
total cholesterol (TC) and triglyceride (TG) levels, which are major determinants
of metabolic diseases. GATA4, a zinc finger domain transcription factor, is
critical for jejunal identity, and intestinal GATA4 deficiency leads to a
jejunoileal transition. Although intestinal GATA4 ablation is known to
misregulate jejunal gene expression, its pathophysiological impact on various
components of metabolic syndrome remains unknown. Here, we used
intestine-specific GATA4 knockout (GATA4iKO) mice to dissect the contribution of 
GATA4 on obesity development. We challenged adult GATA4iKO mice and control
littermates with a Western-type diet (WTD) for 20 wk. Our findings show that
WTD-fed GATA4iKO mice are resistant to diet-induced obesity. Accordingly, plasma 
TG and TC levels are markedly decreased. Intestinal lipid absorption in GATA4iKO 
mice was strongly reduced, whereas luminal lipolysis was unaffected. GATA4iKO
mice displayed a greater glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) release on normal chow
and even after long-term challenge with WTD remained glucose sensitive. In
summary, our findings show that the absence of intestinal GATA4 has a beneficial 
effect on decreasing intestinal lipid absorption causing resistance to
hyperlipidemia and obesity. In addition, we show that increased GLP-1 release in 
GATA4iKO mice decreases the risk for development of insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3163292
PMID: 21177287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Dec;30(12):2658-62.

[Exogenous Nkx2-5 gene expression induces the expression of cardiac markers
during P19 cell differentiation in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JP(1), Wang HJ, Shi YL, Wang LX, Zhao Y, Guo YH, Zhao CF, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China. zhangjinping@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of homeobox gene Nkx2-5 in cardiac myogenesis.
METHODS: Two P19 cell lines, namely cells transfected with exogenous expression
of Nkx2-5 gene and non-transfected cells, were cultured in suspension for 4 days 
to induce cell aggregation, and the cell aggregates were transferred to the Petri
dish for further adherent culture. On days 4, 8, 12 and 16 of adherent culture,
the expressions of a-sarcomeric actin (a-SA) and cardiac troponin T (cTnT)
protein were detected by immunocytochemistry, and the mRNA expressions of GATA-4,
a-myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) and atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) genes by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In the transfected cells, a-SA and cTnT protein expressions were
detected on days 8, 12 and 16 of adhere culture, and their expressions increased 
gradually with time. a-SA and cTnT expression was significantly higher on day 16 
than on day 8 of culture (P<0.01). RT-PCR analysis of the transfected cell showed
the presence of GATA-4 expression on day 4 of adherent culture, and the
expression increased on days 8 and 12 but decreased on day 16. ANF and a-MHC
expressions were found on days 8, 12, and 16, increasing gradually over time and 
showing significant differences from those on day 4 (P<0.05 or P<0.01). The
expression of a-MHC was significantly higher on days 12 and 16 than on day 8
(P<0.05 or P<0.01), and ANF expression was significantly higher on day 16 than on
days 8 and 12 (P<0.01). The non-transfected cells were negative for the
expressions of all these genes.
CONCLUSION: Exogenous expression of Nkx2-5 gene can induce P19 cells to express
cardiac markers in vitro.

PMID: 21177173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Feb 10;333(1):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.12.019.
Epub 2010 Dec 21.

GATA4 regulates Sertoli cell function and fertility in adult male mice.

Kyrönlahti A(1), Euler R, Bielinska M, Schoeller EL, Moley KH, Toppari J,
Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Transcription factor GATA4 is expressed in Sertoli and Leydig cells and is
required for proper development of the murine fetal testis. The role of GATA4 in 
adult testicular function, however, has remained unclear due to prenatal
lethality of mice harboring homozygous mutations in Gata4. To characterize the
function of GATA4 in the adult testis, we generated mice in which Gata4 was
conditionally deleted in Sertoli cells using Cre-LoxP recombination with
Amhr2-Cre. Conditional knockout (cKO) mice developed age-dependent testicular
atrophy and loss of fertility, which coincided with decreases in the quantity and
motility of sperm. Histological analysis demonstrated Sertoli cell vacuolation,
impaired spermatogenesis, and increased permeability of the blood-testis barrier.
RT-PCR analysis of cKO testes showed decreased expression of germ cell markers
and increased expression of testicular injury markers. Our findings support the
premise that GATA4 is a key transcriptional regulator of Sertoli cell function in
adult mice.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3026658
PMID: 21172404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Hypertens. 2011 Apr;29(4):791-7. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283424bc4.

Early cardiac gene transcript levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
patients with untreated essential hypertension.

Kontaraki JE(1), Marketou ME, Zacharis EA, Parthenakis FI, Vardas PE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, School of Medicine, University of Crete, and 
Department of Cardiology, University Hospital of Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
kontarak@med.uoc.gr

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2011 Apr;29(4):660-2.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the expression of early cardiac genes, implicated in the
hypertrophic growth response of the adult heart, in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells in patients with essential hypertension and its relationship to ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) parameters and to echocardiographic left
ventricular mass.
METHODS: Twenty-four-hour ABPM, echocardiography and blood sampling were
performed in 62 untreated participants with essential hypertension. Blood samples
from 38 healthy individuals were included for comparison. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and gene transcript levels were
determined by quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR.
RESULTS: Myocardin (3.92±0.68 versus 2.09±0.67, P<0.001), GATA4 (3.48±0.68 versus
0.32±0.08, P<0.001) and Nkx2.5 (208.91±35.01 versus 129.75±49.70, P<0.001) were
upregulated in hypertensive patients compared with controls. In hypertensive
patients, transcript levels of myocardin (r=0.698, P<0.001) and GATA4 (r=0.374,
P=0.003) showed significant positive correlations with 24-h systolic blood
pressure (BP) as well as with mean BP, (r=0.626, P<0.001) and (r=0.340, P=0.007),
respectively. A significant positive correlation between myocardin and 24-h pulse
pressure (r=0.467, P<0.001) was also observed. Myocardin (r=-0.606, P<0.001) and 
GATA4 (r=-0.453, P<0.001) transcript levels also showed significant negative
correlations with the mean 24-h dipping status. Additionally, myocardin (r=0.341,
P=0.007), GATA4 (r=0.337, P=0.007) and Nkx2.5 (r=0.325, P=0.010) transcript
levels showed significant positive correlations with left ventricular mass index.
CONCLUSION: Myocardin and GATA4 transcript levels correlate significantly with
24-h ABPM parameters, rendering them potential candidate biomarkers in
hypertension. Early cardiac gene transcript levels in PBMCs of hypertensive
patients are associated with left ventricular mass and may reflect activation of 
the hypertrophic response gene network in these patients.

PMID: 21157370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:928326. doi: 10.1155/2011/928326. Epub 2010 Nov
29.

Roles and targets of class I and IIa histone deacetylases in cardiac hypertrophy.

Kee HJ(1), Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea.

Cardiac hypertrophy occurs in association with heart diseases and ultimately
results in cardiac dysfunction and heart failure. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
are post-translational modifying enzymes that can deacetylate histones and
non-histone proteins. Research with HDAC inhibitors has provided evidence that
the class I HDACs are pro-hypertrophic. Among the class I HDACs, HDAC2 is
activated by hypertrophic stresses in association with the induction of heat
shock protein 70. Activated HDAC2 triggers hypertrophy by inhibiting the signal
cascades of either Krüppel like factor 4 (KLF4) or inositol
polyphosphate-5-phosphatase f (Inpp5f). Thus, modulators of HDAC2 enzymes, such
as selective HDAC inhibitors, are considered to be an important target for heart 
diseases, especially for preventing cardiac hypertrophy. In contrast, class IIa
HDACs have been shown to repress cardiac hypertrophy by inhibiting
cardiac-specific transcription factors such as myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), 
GATA4, and NFAT in the heart. Studies of class IIa HDACs have shown that the
underlying mechanism is regulated by nucleo-cytoplasm shuttling in response to a 
variety of stress signals. In this review, we focus on the class I and IIa HDACs 
that play critical roles in mediating cardiac hypertrophy and discuss the
non-histone targets of HDACs in heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2997602
PMID: 21151616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):393-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.007. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

The primitive endoderm lineage of the mouse blastocyst: sequential transcription 
factor activation and regulation of differentiation by Sox17.

Artus J(1), Piliszek A, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Cells of the primitive endoderm (PrE) and the pluripotent epiblast (EPI), the two
lineages specified within the inner cell mass (ICM) of the mouse blastocyst stage
embryo, are segregated into adjacent tissue layers by the end of the
preimplantation period. The PrE layer which emerges as a polarized epithelium
adjacent to the blastocoel, with a basement membrane separating it from the EPI, 
has two derivatives, the visceral and parietal endoderm. In this study we have
investigated the localization of two transcriptional regulators of the SOX
family, SOX17 and SOX7, within the PrE and its derivatives. We noted that SOX17
was first detected in a salt-and-pepper distribution within the ICM, subsequently
becoming restricted to the nascent PrE epithelium. This dynamic distribution of
SOX17 resembled the localization of GATA6 and GATA4, two other PrE
lineage-specific transcription factors. By contrast, SOX7 was only detected in
PrE cells positioned in contact with the blastocoel, raising the possibility that
these cells are molecularly distinct. Our observations support a model of
sequential GATA6 > SOX17 > GATA4 > SOX7 transcription factor activation within
the PrE lineage, perhaps correlating with the consecutive periods of cell lineage
'naïvete', commitment and sorting. Furthermore our data suggest that
co-expression of SOX17 and SOX7 within sorted PrE cells could account for the
absence of a detectable phenotype of Sox17 mutant blastocysts. However, analysis 
of implantation-delayed blastocysts, revealed a role for SOX17 in the maintenance
of PrE epithelial integrity, with the absence of SOX17 leading to premature
delamination and migration of parietal endoderm.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3461954
PMID: 21146513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. FEBS J. 2011 Jan;278(2):282-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07945.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

The mouse Muc5b mucin gene is transcriptionally regulated by thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and GATA-6 transcription factors.

Jonckheere N(1), Velghe A, Ducourouble MP, Copin MC, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U837, Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille, France.
nicolas.jonckheere@inserm.fr

MUC5B is one of the major mucin genes expressed in the respiratory tract.
Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that MUC5B is expressed in
human lung adenocarcinomas and during lung morphogenesis. Moreover, in human lung
adenocarcinoma tissues, a converse correlation between MUC5B and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression, a lung-specific transcription factor, 
has been established. However, the molecular mechanisms that govern the
regulation of MUC5B expression in the lung are largely unknown. In order to
better understand the biological role of MUC5B in lung pathophysiology, we report
the characterization of the promoter region of the mouse Muc5b mucin gene. The
promoter is flanked by a TATA box (TACATAA) identical to that in the human gene. 
Human and murine promoters share 67.5% similarity over the first 170 nucleotides.
By RT-PCR, co-transfection studies and gel-shift assays, we show that Muc5b
promoter activity is completely inhibited by TTF-1, whereas factors of the GATA
family (GATA-4/GATA-5/GATA-6) are activators. Together, these results
demonstrate, for the first time, that Muc5b is a target gene of transcription
factors (TTF-1, GATA-6) involved in lung differentiation programs during
development and carcinogenesis, and identify TTF-1 as a strong repressor of
Muc5b. The characterization of the structural and functional features of the
Muc5b mucin gene will provide us with a strong base to develop studies in murine 
models aimed at the identification of its biological role in lung
pathophysiology.

Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS. No claim to original French governments works.

PMID: 21126317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genetica. 2010 Dec;138(11-12):1231-40. doi: 10.1007/s10709-010-9522-4. Epub 2010 
Nov 26.

Mutations of the GATA4 and NKX2.5 genes in Chinese pediatric patients with
non-familial congenital heart disease.

Peng T(1), Wang L, Zhou SF, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)The Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, 419 Fangxie Road,
200011 Shanghai, China.

A number of mutations in GATA4 and NKX2.5 have been identified to be causative
for a subset of familial congenital heart defects (CHDs) and a small number of
sporadic CHDs. In this study, we evaluated common GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in
135 Chinese pediatric patients with non-familial congenital heart defects. Two
novel mutations in the coding region of GATA4 were identified, namely, 487C >T
(Pro163Ser) in exon 1 in a child with tetralogy of Fallot and 1220C >A
(Pro407Gln) in exon 6 in a pediatric patient with outlet membranous ventricular
septal defect. We also found 848C >A (Pro283Gln) in exon 2 of the NKX2.5 gene in 
a pediatric patient with ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus and 
aortic isthmus stenosis. None of the mutations was detected in healthy control
subjects (n = 114). This study suggests that GATA4 and NKX2.5 missense mutations 
may be associated with congenital heart defects in pediatric Chinese patients.
Further clinical studies with large samples are warranted.

PMID: 21110066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Feb 15;81(4):518-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.11.012. Epub
2010 Nov 23.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK 1/2- and p38-GATA4 pathways mediate the Ang
II-induced activation of FGF2 gene in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.

Tang W(1), Wei Y, Le K, Li Z, Bao Y, Gao J, Zhang F, Cheng S, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510006, PR China.

Several genes, including fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), are up-regulated in
the hypertrophic heart. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced activation of FGF2 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
are largely unknown. The purpose of this study was to determine the signaling
cascades underlying the Ang II-induced transcriptional activation of FGF2 in
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot
showed that Ang II upregulates FGF2 expression and that these effects were
attenuated by U0126 or SB203580, but not by SP600125. Deletion analyses revealed 
that the region between -845 and -666 is essential for Ang II-induced FGF2
promoter activity. The existence of an atypical GATA4-binding motif, located at
position -752, was identified using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). 
Using both EMSA and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses, we also showed
that Ang II increases binding of GATA4 to DNA, and that this effect is attenuated
in the presence of U0126 or SB203580, but not in the presence of SP600125. GATA4 
siRNA significantly reduced Ang II-induced FGF2 mRNA levels. Together, these
results indicate that binding of GATA4 to DNA is increased by Ang II via
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) and p38 kinase, which
increases FGF2 gene expression in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21108934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jan;240(1):211-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22493.

Cell autonomous requirement of endocardial Smad4 during atrioventricular cushion 
development in mouse embryos.

Song L(1), Zhao M, Wu B, Zhou B, Wang Q, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Atrioventricular (AV) cushions are the precursors of AV septum and valves. In
this study, we examined roles of Smad4 during AV cushion development using a
conditional gene inactivation approach. We found that endothelial/endocardial
inactivation of Smad4 led to the hypocellular AV cushion defect and that both
reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis contributed to the defect.
Expression of multiple genes critical for cushion development was down-regulated 
in mutant embryos. In collagen gel assays, the number of mesenchymal cells formed
is significantly reduced in mutant AV explants compared to that in control
explants, suggesting that the reduction of cushion mesenchyme formation in
mutants is unlikely secondary to their gross vasculature abnormalities. Using a
previously developed immortal endocardial cell line, we showed that Smad4 is
required for BMP signaling- stimulated upregulation of Tbx20 and Gata4.
Therefore, our data collectively support the cell-autonomous requirement of
endocardial Smad4 in regulating AV cushion development.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3020975
PMID: 21089072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011 Jan;300(1):R140-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00853.2009. Epub 2010 Nov 17.

Key roles of endothelin-1 and p38 MAPK in the regulation of atrial stretch
response.

Kerkelä R(1), Ilves M, Pikkarainen S, Tokola H, Ronkainen VP, Majalahti T,
Leppäluoto J, Vuolteenaho O, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Oulu, Finland. Risto.Kerkela@oulu.fi

Mechanisms regulating stretch response in the left ventricle are investigated in 
detail but not well understood in atrial myocardium. Hypertrophic growth of
atrial myocardium contributes to the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation. In this
study, we sought to elucidate mechanisms of stretch-induced activation of key
signaling pathways and hypertrophy-associated genes in rat atria. Stretching of
isolated atria induced a rapid increase in phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK
and induced a p38 MAPK-dependent increase in DNA binding activity of
transcription factors Elk-1 and GATA-4. Inhibition of the ERK pathway had no
effect on the cardiac transcription factors studied. Stretch-induced increase in 
atrial contractile function was substantially enhanced by inhibition of p38 MAPK.
p38 MAPK also regulated stretch-induced increase in c-fos, ß-myosin heavy chain, 
B-type natriuretic peptide mRNA levels, and atrial natriuretic peptide secretion 
in isolated atria. Various autocrine/paracrine factors are known to mediate the
stretch response in the left ventricle. Stretching of isolated atria resulted in 
a robust increase in endothelin-1 (ET-1) mRNA levels, while apelin and
adrenomedullin signaling cascades were downregulated. Administration of mixed
ET(A/B) receptor antagonist bosentan attenuated the stretch-induced activation of
GATA-4 in isolated atria, whereas ANG II receptor type-1 antagonist CV-11974 had 
no effect. Moreover, analysis of RNA from intact atrial and ventricular
myocardium revealed significantly higher mRNA levels of ET(A) receptor and ET
converting enzyme-1 in atrial compared with ventricular myocardium. In
conclusion, our findings identify the local ET-1 system and p38 MAPK as key
regulators of load-induced hypertrophic response in isolated rat atria.

PMID: 21084678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):97-104. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq361. Epub 2010 Nov
16.

Mechanism of anthracycline-mediated down-regulation of GATA4 in the heart.

Park AM(1), Nagase H, Liu L, Vinod Kumar S, Szwergold N, Wong CM, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.

AIMS: Anthracyclines such as daunorubicin (DNR) and doxorubicin are effective
cancer chemotherapeutic agents, but can induce cardiotoxicity. GATA4 has been
shown to serve as a survival factor of cardiac muscle cells, and anthracyclines
promote apoptosis in part by down-regulating GATA4. The present study
investigated the mechanism of anthracycline action to down-regulate GATA4.
METHODS AND RESULTS: DNR inhibited the transcriptional activity exhibited by the 
250 bp conserved region immediately upstream from the transcriptional start site 
of the Gata4 gene. Mapping this region identified that the CCAAT-binding
factor/nuclear factor-Y (CBF/NF-Y) binding to the CCAAT box was inhibited by DNR 
in HL-1 cardiac muscle cells and in perfused isolated mouse hearts. The DNR
action on the Gata4 promoter was found to be dependent on p53, since DNR promoted
nuclear binding of p53 to CBF/NF-Y and pifithrin-a (a p53 inhibitor) attenuated
DNR down-regulation of GATA4.
CONCLUSION: Anthracycline down-regulation of GATA4 is mediated by the inhibition 
of Gata4 gene transcription via a novel mechanism that involves the p53-dependent
inhibition of CBF/NF-Y binding to the CCAAT box within the Gata4 promoter.

PMCID: PMC3058732
PMID: 21084315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Epigenetics. 2011 Mar;6(3):388-94. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Downregulation of microRNA-29c is associated with hypermethylation of
tumor-related genes and disease outcome in cutaneous melanoma.

Nguyen T(1), Kuo C, Nicholl MB, Sim MS, Turner RR, Morton DL, Hoon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Saint John's
Health Center, Santa Monica, CA, USA.

Hypermethylation of the promoter region of tumor-related genes (TRGs) has been
shown to silence gene expression during melanoma progression, whereas
microRNA-29(miR-29) has been found to downregulate DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A 
and DNMT3B which were shown as essential to the methylation of TRGs. We
hypothesized that the expression level of miR-29 is associated to TRG methylation
status and may have prognostic utility in melanoma. AJCC stage I-IV cutaneous
melanoma paraffin-embedded archival tissue (PEAT) specimens (n=149) were
assessed. Expression of miR-29 isoforms a, b, and c were analyzed by
reverse-transcription quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction(RT-qPCR). 
Expression of DNMT3A and DNMT3B was assessed by immunohistochemistry(IHC) on
defined clinically annotated tissue microarrays (TMA) of AJCC stage III melanoma 
lymph node metastases. Promoter region CpG island methylation status of RASSF1A, 
TFPI-2, RAR-ß, SOCS, GATA4 and genomic repeat sequence MINT17 and MINT31 were
previously evaluated in melanoma tissues. Only miR-29c isoform expression was
correlated to advancing AJCC stages in melanoma. miR-29c expression was
significantly downregulated in AJCC stage IV melanoma tumors compared to primary 
melanomas. Hypermethylation status of TRGs and non-coding MINT loci in different 
stages of melanoma showed an inverse association with miR-29c expression.
Overall, an increase in miR-29c expression inversely correlated to both DNMT3A
and DNMT3B protein expression in melanomas. Expression of DNMT3B and miR-29c were
significantly (p=0.004 and p=0.002, respectively) associated with overall
survival(OS) in AJCC stage III melanoma patients by multivariate analysis. The
studies demonstrated that both miR-29c and DNMT3B have significant roles in
melanoma progression, and may be useful epigenetic biomarkers for disease
outcome.

PMCID: PMC3063331
PMID: 21081840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cytotherapy. 2011 Apr;13(4):407-18. doi: 10.3109/14653249.2010.529892. Epub 2010 
Nov 15.

Gene expression profiles following intracoronary injection of mesenchymal stromal
cells using a porcine model of chronic myocardial infarction.

Barallobre-Barreiro J(1), de Ilárduya OM, Moscoso I, Calviño-Santos R, Aldama G, 
Centeno A, López-Pelaez E, Doménech N.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación, INIBIC-CHU A Coruña, Spain.

BACKGROUND AIMS: We evaluated the therapeutic potential of injection of in vitro 
differentiated bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) using a swine model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Myocardial infarction was induced by coronary occlusion.
Three groups (n = 5 each) were analyzed: one group received an injection of 17.8 
± 9.3 × 10(6) 5-azacytidine-treated allogeneic MSC 1 month after infarction; a
placebo group received an injection of medium; and controls were kept untreated. 
After 4 weeks, heart samples were taken from three infarcted areas,
interventricular septa, ventricles and atria. Gene expression profiles of genes
related to contractility (Serca2a), fibrosis (Col1a1), cardiomyogenesis (Mef2c,
Gata4 and Nkx2.5) and mobilization of stem cells (Sdf1, Cxcr4 and c-kit) were
compared by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Gene expression profiles varied
in different heart areas. Thus Serca2a expression was reduced in infarcted groups
in all heart regions except for the left ventricles, where Col1a1 was
overexpressed. The expression of genes related to cardiomyogenesis decreased in
the infarcted zones and left atria compared with healthy hearts. Interestingly,
increased expression of Cxcr4 was detected in infarcted regions of MSC-treated
pigs compared with the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Infarction induced changes in expression of genes involved in
various biologic processes. Genes involved in cardiomyogenesis were downregulated
in the left atrium. The intracoronary injection of MSC resulted in localized
changes in the expression of Cxcr4.

PMID: 21077732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Hypertension. 2010 Dec;56(6):1145-51. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.160515.
Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Pulmonary hypertension-induced GATA4 activation in the right ventricle.

Park AM(1), Wong CM, Jelinkova L, Liu L, Nagase H, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The major cause of death among pulmonary hypertension patients is right heart
failure, but the biology of right heart is not well understood. Previous studies 
showed that mechanisms of the activation of GATA4, a major regulator of cardiac
hypertrophy, in response to pressure overload are different between left and
right ventricles. In the left ventricle, aortic constriction triggers GATA4
activation via posttranslational modifications without influencing GATA4
expression, while pulmonary artery banding enhances GATA4 expression in the right
ventricle. We found that GATA4 expression can also be increased in the right
ventricle of rats treated with chronic hypoxia to induce pulmonary hypertension
and investigated the mechanism of increased GATA4 expression. Examination of
Gata4 promoter revealed that CCAAT box plays an important role in gene
activation, and hypoxic pulmonary hypertension promoted the binding of
CCAAT-binding factor/nuclear factor-Y (CBF/NF-Y) to CCAAT box in the right
ventricle. We found that CBF/NF-Y forms a complex with annexin A1, which inhibits
DNA binding activity. In response to hypoxic pulmonary hypertension, annexin A1
gets degraded, resulting in CBF/NF-Y-dependent activation of Gata4 gene
transcription. The right ventricle contains a higher level of CBF/NF-Y compared
to the left ventricle, and this may allow for efficient activation in response to
annexin A1 degradation. Signaling via iron-catalyzed protein oxidation mediates
hypoxic pulmonary hypertension-induced annexin A1 degradation, Gata4 gene
transcription, and right ventricular hypertrophy. These results establish a right
heart-specific signaling mechanism in response to pressure overload, which
involves metal-catalyzed carbonylation and degradation of annexin A1 that
liberates CBF/NF-Y to activate Gata4 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC4157308
PMID: 21059997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;38(8):724-7.

[Novel GATA4 mutations identified in patients with congenital atrial septal
defects].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XY(1), Yang YQ, Ma J, Lin XP, Zheng JH, Bai K, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Tongji Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai
200065, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the genetic defects in patients with congenital atrial
septal defects (ASD).
METHODS: The clinical data and blood samples from 180 unrelated subjects with
congenital ASD were collected and evaluated. Two hundred healthy individuals
served as controls. The coding exons and the flanking introns of GATA4 gene were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced using the di-deoxynucleotide
chain termination approach. The acquired sequences were aligned with the
sequences publicized in GenBank by the aid of programme BLAST to identify the
sequence variations. Clustal W software was applied for analysis of the
conservation of altered amino acids.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations were identified in 2 out
of 180 ASD patients. Namely, the triplet substitutions of GTC for GGC at codon 21
and TCG for CCG at codon 87 were detected, predicting the conversions of glycine 
into valine at amino acid residue 21 (G21V) and proline into serine at amino acid
residue 87 (P87S). None of the two mutations were detected in 200 healthy
controls. Across-species alignment of GATA4 encoded protein sequences displayed
that the mutated amino acids were highly conserved evolutionarily. Additionally, 
a single nucleotide polymorphism c.99G>T was observed. However, the polymorphic
frequency distribution in ASD cases was similar with that in healthy controls
(for genotype GT, <U+03C7>(2) = 0.7556, P = 0.3847; for allele T, <U+03C7>(2) = 0.7235, P =
0.3950).
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel mutations of GATA4 gene are identified in two unrelated
ASD patients. This finding provides new insight into the molecular etiology
responsible for ASD.

PMID: 21055141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell Transplant. 2011;20(5):619-35. doi: 10.3727/096368910X536563. Epub 2010 Nov 
5.

Characterization and functionality of proliferative human Sertoli cells.

Chui K(1), Trivedi A, Cheng CY, Cherbavaz DB, Dazin PF, Huynh AL, Mitchell JB,
Rabinovich GA, Noble-Haeusslein LJ, John CM.

Author information: 
(1)MandalMed, Inc., San Francisco, CA 94107, USA.

It has long been thought that mammalian Sertoli cells are terminally
differentiated and nondividing postpuberty. For most previous in vitro studies
immature rodent testes have been the source of Sertoli cells and these have shown
little proliferative ability when cultured. We have isolated and characterized
Sertoli cells from human cadaveric testes from seven donors ranging from 12 to 36
years of age. The cells proliferated readily in vitro under the optimized
conditions used with a doubling time of approximately 4 days. Nuclear
5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation confirmed that dividing cells
represented the majority of the population. Classical Sertoli cell
ultrastructural features, lipid droplet accumulation, and immunoexpression of
GATA-4, Sox9, and the FSH receptor (FSHr) were observed by electron and
fluorescence microscopy, respectively. Flow cytometry revealed the expression of 
GATA-4 and Sox9 by more than 99% of the cells, and abundant expression of a
number of markers indicative of multipotent mesenchymal cells. Low detection of
endogenous alkaline phosphatase activity after passaging showed that few
peritubular myoid cells were present. GATA-4 and SOX9 expression were confirmed
by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), along with
expression of stem cell factor (SCF), glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF), and bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4). Tight junctions were formed by
Sertoli cells plated on transwell inserts coated with fibronectin as revealed by 
increased transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) and polarized secretion of 
the immunoregulatory protein, galectin-1. These primary Sertoli cell populations 
could be expanded dramatically in vitro and could be cryopreserved. The results
show that functional human Sertoli cells can be propagated in vitro from
testicular cells isolated from adult testis. The proliferative human Sertoli
cells should have important applications in studying infertility, reproductive
toxicology, testicular cancer, and spermatogenesis, and due to their unique
biological properties potentially could be useful in cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC4096632
PMID: 21054948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 15;111(6):1619-28. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22895.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase in endothelin-1-induced cardiac differentiation 
of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Chen M(1), Lin YQ, Xie SL, Wang JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Endothelin-1(ET-1) is a potent vasoconstrictor involved in the development of
cardiovascular diseases and is an important regulator of heart development.
However, the role of ET-1 in cardiac differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells (mESCs) and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood.
In the present study, we showed that ET-1 significantly up-regulated gene
expression of the cardiac specific transcriptional factors Nkx2.5, GATA4, and
conduction system specific marker CX40, with no affect on the gene expression of 
a-MHC and ß-MHC in cardiac differentiation of mESCs. The percentage of beating
embryoid bodies (EB) and the Troponin T (TnT) positive area in total EBs was
unchanged following ET-1 treatment, while the percentage of spindle cells that
stained positively with TnT was increased in the presence of ET-1. Further
investigation indicated that the percentage of beating EBs and the TnT positive
area were decreased by the extracellular signal-related kinases (ERK)-1/2
inhibitor U0126 and the p38 inhibitor SB203580, but not by the Jun amino-terminal
kinases (JNK) inhibitor SP600125. Inhibition of ERK1/2, p38, and JNK pathways
also blocked the up-regulation of Nkx2.5 and GATA4 by ET-1, however only
inhibition of the ERK1/2 pathway had negatively effects on the increase in CX40
expression in response to ET-1. ET-1 induced an increase in the percentage of
spindle cells was also inhibited by U0126. Our results suggest that ET-1 plays a 
significant role in the cardiac differentiation of mESCs, especially in those
cells committed to the conduction system, with the ERK1/2 pathway playing a
critical role in this process.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21053276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1508-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.162966. Epub 2010 
Nov 4.

ZFP260 is an inducer of cardiac hypertrophy and a nuclear mediator of
endothelin-1 signaling.

Komati H(1), Maharsy W, Beauregard J, Hayek S, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and Differentiation, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario
K1N 6N5, Canada.

Pressure and volume overload induce hypertrophic growth of postnatal
cardiomyocytes and genetic reprogramming characterized by reactivation of a
subset of fetal genes. Despite intense efforts, the nuclear effectors of
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy remain incompletely defined. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) plays 
an important role in cardiomyocyte growth and is involved in mediating the
neurohormonal effects of mechanical stress. Here, we show that the
phenylephrine-induced complex-1 (PEX1), also known as zinc finger transcription
factor ZFP260, is essential for cardiomyocyte response to ET-1 as evidenced in
cardiomyocytes with PEX1 knockdown. We found that ET-1 enhances PEX1
transcriptional activity via a PKC-dependent pathway which phosphorylates the
protein and further potentiates its synergy with GATA4. Consistent with a role
for PEX1 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, overexpression of PEX1 is sufficient to
induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in vitro and in vivo. Importantly, transgenic
mice with inducible PEX1 expression in the adult heart develop cardiac
hypertrophy with preserved heart function. Together, the results identify a novel
nuclear effector of ET-1 signaling and suggest that PEX1 may be a regulator of
the early stages of cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3020759
PMID: 21051538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Stem Cells Int. 2010 May 11;2010:602068. doi: 10.4061/2010/602068.

Alteration of Differentiation Potentials by Modulating GATA Transcription Factors
in Murine Embryonic Stem Cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Smedberg JL, Rula M, Nicolas E, Yeung AT, Adamo RF, Frolov A, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 1550 NW 10th Avenue (M877),
Miami, FL 33156, USA.

Background. Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro by
aggregation and/or retinoic acid (RA) treatment. The principal differentiation
lineage in vitro is extraembryonic primitive endoderm. Dab2, Laminin, GATA4,
GATA5, and GATA6 are expressed in embryonic primitive endoderm and play critical 
roles in its lineage commitment. Results. We found that in the absence of GATA4
or GATA5, RA-induced primitive endoderm differentiation of ES cells was reduced. 
GATA4 (-/-) ES cells express higher level of GATA5, GATA6, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 alpha marker of visceral endoderm lineage. GATA5 (-/-) ES cells express 
higher level of alpha fetoprotein marker of early liver development. GATA6 (-/-) 
ES cells express higher level of GATA5 as well as mesoderm and cardiomyocyte
markers which are collagen III alpha-1 and tropomyosin1 alpha. Thus, deletion of 
GATA6 precluded endoderm differentiation but promoted mesoderm lineages.
Conclusions. GATA4, GATA5, and GATA6 each convey a unique gene expression pattern
and influences ES cell differentiation. We showed that ES cells can be directed
to avoid differentiating into primitive endoderm and to adopt unique lineages in 
vitro by modulating GATA factors. The finding offers a potential approach to
produce desirable cell types from ES cells, useful for regenerative cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2956456
PMID: 21048850  [PubMed]


283. J Hypertens. 2011 Jan;29(1):62-9. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283406927.

Discovery and replication of novel blood pressure genetic loci in the Women's
Genome Health Study.

Ho JE(1), Levy D, Rose L, Johnson AD, Ridker PM, Chasman DI.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2011 Jan;29(1):32.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association meta-analyses have recently identified
multiple loci associated with blood pressure. We sought to validate previously
identified blood pressure loci by replication in a single large homogeneous
population-based cohort and to identify new genome-wide significant loci using
both conventional and expression-guided approaches.
METHODS: We examined the associations of 18 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with genome-wide significance (P < 5.0 × 10<U+207B>8, 'primary'), and 13
suggestive SNPs (5.0 × 10<U+207B>8 < P < 5.6 × 10<U+207B>5, 'secondary'), all from previously
established genome-wide association studies, with self-reported blood pressure in
23 019 women from the Women's Genome Health Study. We then targeted for
replication 12 gene expression-associated SNPs (eSNPs) that were also previously 
associated with blood pressure phenotypes.
RESULTS: Using these replication strategies, we found confirmatory evidence for
13/18 primary SNPs, 3/13 secondary SNPs, and 4/12 eSNPs in the Women's Genome
Health Study. Meta-analysis combining the Women's Genome Health Study results
with prior study results revealed one previously unrecognized blood pressure
locus with genome-wide significance: a BLK-GATA4-adjacent region (P = 3.2 ×
10<U+207B>8).
CONCLUSION: In this analysis, conventional and eSNP-guided strategies were
complementary and illustrate two ways for extending initial genome-wide
association results for discovery of new genes involved in human disease. Using
this strategy, we report a newly identified blood pressure locus, BLK-GATA4, that
may further understanding of the complex genetic pathways regulating blood
pressure.

PMCID: PMC3005130
PMID: 21045733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Life Sci. 2010 Dec 18;87(23-26):707-14. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.10.009. Epub 2010
Oct 26.

Inhibition of p300-HAT results in a reduced histone acetylation and
down-regulation of gene expression in cardiac myocytes.

Sun H(1), Yang X, Zhu J, Lv T, Chen Y, Chen G, Zhong L, Li Y, Huang X, Huang G,
Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China.

AIMS: Histone acetylation plays an important role in cardiogenesis, but the
underlying mechanism is unclear. In this study, we investigated the relationship 
between histone hypo-acetylation and the expression of cardiac-specific genes to 
explore the underlying mechanisms.
MAIN METHODS: Cardiac-specific genes that physically interacted with p300 protein
in mouse hearts were analyzed using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. 
The cultured mouse neonatal cardiac myocytes were treated with curcumin with
different concentrations and durations. The changes of histone acetyltransferase 
(HAT) activities, histone acetylation, cardiac-specific genes expression, and
structure of chromatin were assessed by ELISA, Western blotting, quantitative
RT-PCR, and ChIP assays, respectively.
KEY FINDINGS: Results from the ChIP assay showed that GATA4, Nkx2.5, and Mef2c
physically interacted with p300 protein. After treatment with 30 µM curcumin for 
24h, the HAT activities of cardiac myocytes were inhibited significantly. And the
acetylation of whole histone H3 was reduced by 0.3983-fold compared to control
groups (P<0.05). Accordingly, the expression of cardiac-specific genes, GATA4,
Nkx2.5, and Mef2c, were significantly down-regulated. Acetylation of histone H3
bound with promoter regions of these genes was significantly reduced.
SIGNIFICANCE: p300 interacts with cardiac-specific genes, GATA4, Nkx2.5 and
Mef2c, and inhibition of p300-HAT by curcumin down-regulates their expression
through the inhibition of histone H3 acetylation in the promoter regions. This
finding indicates that p300-HAT mediated histone H3 acetylation plays an
important role in the regulation of cardiac gene expression, which is a novel
mechanism of epigenetic regulation in the heart during the development and in
case of some congenital heart diseases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21034749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Circ Res. 2010 Oct 29;107(9):1042-3. doi: 10.1161/RES.0b013e3181ffeac0.

A reliable recipe for heart cells?

Williams R.

Deepak Srivastavas group at the Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
University of California San Francisco, reported in the August 6 issue of the
journal Cell that to make heart muscle cells, all you need are three factors and 
some fibroblasts. But is it really that easy?

PMID: 21030720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Sep;15(9):1963-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01193.x.

Gata4 and Sp1 regulate expression of the erythropoietin receptor in
cardiomyocytes.

Salisch Sv(1), Klar M, Thurisch B, Bungert J, Dame C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Experimental studies indicate significant cardioprotective effects of recombinant
erythropoietin (Epo) by binding to the Epo receptor (EpoR) and by inducing
various molecular mechanisms, including activation of Gata4, a transcription
factor that induces anti-apoptotic genes. However, specific molecular mechanisms 
of EpoR regulation in cardiomyocytes are unknown. We identified a 774 bp
regulatory domain in the EpoR 5' flanking region by reporter gene assays in
murine HL-1 cardiomyocytes. The binding sites for Gata and Sp transcription
factors both significantly contributed to EpoR promoter activity. DNA-binding
studies (EMSA and ChIP assays) identified Gata4 and Sp1 as EpoR promoter-binding 
proteins in HL1 cardiomyocytes. Although Sp1 alone stimulates EpoR only slightly,
forced expression of Gata4 significantly induced EpoR mRNA expression. In
addition, knockdown of Gata4 (but also of Sp1) resulted in a significant decrease
of EpoR transcript levels in HL-1 cardiomyocytes. Cumulative in vitro data
suggest that function of the Sp1 site is essential for the Gata4-mediated
transcription. In vivo, analysis of transgenic mice expressing an inducible
small-hairpin RNA against Gata4 confirmed suppression of EpoR expression in the
heart. Treating mice with high-dose doxorubicin not only resulted in Gata4
protein depletion, but also down-regulated EpoR, followed by up-regulation of
EpoR transcripts when Gata4 levels recovered. In conclusion, we identified Gata4 
as novel regulator of EpoR transcription in cardiomyocytes. In models of cardiac 
injury, down-regulation of Gata4 or Sp1 may limit the accessibility of the EpoR
for binding of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESA). Thereby our data
underline the essential role of Gata4 in mediating cardioprotective effects.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3918051
PMID: 21029371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jan;102(1):267-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01750.x. Epub
2010 Oct 26.

APAF-1 is related to an undifferentiated state in the testicular germ cell tumor 
pathway.

Behjati R(1), Kawai K, Inadome Y, Kano J, Akaza H, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (APAF-1) is a key regulator gene of
apoptosis, located downstream from p53. Loss of APAF-1 expression is associated
with chemorefractory malignant melanoma and neuronal cell differentiation. In
order to make clear the function of APAF-1 in the carcinogenesis of germ cell
tumors, we evaluated the expression levels of APAF-1 and several apoptosis and
differentiation markers by immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded samples from 43 cases of testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) and 
six specimens of normal testis tissue. Expression of cleaved caspase-3, Oct-3/4, 
and Ki-67 were also examined by immunohistochemistry to evaluate apoptotic
reactivity, tumor differentiation, and proliferation activity, respectively.
APAF-1 was downregulated in two TGCT cell lines by siRNA transfection, and
subsequent expression of the Ki-67 and Oct-3/4 genes and differentiation markers 
of three embryonic germ layers including keratin16 (KRT16) for ectoderm, vimentin
(VIM) for mesoderm and GATA4 for endoderm were then tested. No significant
relationship was found between APAF-1 expression and apoptotic activity in TGCTs.
Expression of APAF-1, Oct-3/4, and Ki-67 was significantly higher in seminomas
than in non-seminomas. In TGCTs, higher APAF-1 expression was correlated with
higher proliferation (high Ki-67) and a lower degree of differentiation (high
Oct-3/4). Interestingly, the expression of APAF-1 gradually decreased in
accordance with tumor differentiation (seminoma and embryonal carcinoma >
teratoma). Downregulation of APAF-1 in TGCT cell lines resulted in a decrease of 
Ki-67 and Oct-3/4 and an increase of VIM and KRT16 gene expression. These data
show that higher expression of APAF-1 is related to an undifferentiated state in 
the TGCT pathway.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 20977544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19356-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0914888107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

An endocardial pathway involving Tbx5, Gata4, and Nos3 required for atrial septum
formation.

Nadeau M(1), Georges RO, Laforest B, Yamak A, Lefebvre C, Beauregard J, Paradis
P, Bruneau BG, Andelfinger G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Cardiac Growth and Differentiation and Molecular Biology
Program, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

In humans, septal defects are among the most prevalent congenital heart diseases,
but their cellular and molecular origins are not fully understood. We report that
transcription factor Tbx5 is present in a subpopulation of endocardial cells and 
that its deletion therein results in fully penetrant, dose-dependent atrial
septal defects in mice. Increased apoptosis of endocardial cells lacking Tbx5, as
well as neighboring TBX5-positive myocardial cells of the atrial septum through
activation of endocardial NOS (Nos3), is the underlying mechanism of disease.
Compound Tbx5 and Nos3 haploinsufficiency in mice worsens the cardiac phenotype. 
The data identify a pathway for endocardial cell survival and unravel a
cell-autonomous role for Tbx5 therein. The finding that Nos3, a gene regulated by
many congenital heart disease risk factors including stress and diabetes,
interacts genetically with Tbx5 provides a molecular framework to understand
gene-environment interaction in the setting of human birth defects.

PMCID: PMC2984205
PMID: 20974940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Circ Heart Fail. 2011 Jan;4(1):79-88. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.957969.
Epub 2010 Oct 22.

Ginseng inhibits cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and heart failure via NHE-1 inhibition
and attenuation of calcineurin activation.

Guo J(1), Gan XT, Haist JV, Rajapurohitam V, Zeidan A, Faruq NS, Karmazyn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Ginseng is a medicinal plant used widely in Asia that has gained
popularity in the West during the past decade. Increasing evidence suggests a
therapeutic role for ginseng in the cardiovascular system. The pharmacological
properties of ginseng are mainly attributed to ginsenosides, the principal
bioactive constituents in ginseng. The present study was carried out to determine
whether ginseng exerts a direct antihypertrophic effect in cultured
cardiomyocytes and whether it modifies the heart failure process in vivo.
Moreover, we determined the potential underlying mechanisms for these actions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Experiments were performed on cultured neonatal rat
ventricular myocytes as well as adult rats subjected to coronary artery ligation 
(CAL). Treatment of cardiomyocytes with the a(1) adrenoceptor agonist
phenylephrine (PE) for 24 hours produced a marked hypertrophic effect as
evidenced by significantly increased cell surface area and ANP gene expression.
These effects were attenuated by ginseng in a concentration-dependent manner with
a complete inhibition of hypertrophy at a concentration of 10 µg/mL.
Phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy was associated with increased gene and protein 
expression of the Na(+)-H(+) exchanger 1 (NHE-1), increased NHE-1 activity,
increased intracellular concentrations of Na(+) and Ca(2+), enhanced calcineurin 
activity, increased translocation of NFAT3 into nuclei, and GATA-4 activation,
all of which were significantly inhibited by ginseng. Upregulation of these
systems was also evident in rats subjected to 4 weeks of CAL. However, animals
treated with ginseng demonstrated markedly reduced hemodynamic and hypertrophic
responses, which were accompanied by attenuation of upregulation of NHE-1 and
calcineurin activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results demonstrate a robust antihypertrophic
and antiremodeling effect of ginseng, which is mediated by inhibition of
NHE-1-dependent calcineurin activation.

PMID: 20971938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biol Reprod. 2011 Feb;84(2):342-50. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.086900. Epub 2010
Oct 13.

Sertoli cell behaviors in developing testis cords and postnatal seminiferous
tubules of the mouse.

Nel-Themaat L(1), Jang CW, Stewart MD, Akiyama H, Viger RS, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, 77005, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2011 Feb;84(2):201-4.

Sertoli cells are the primary structural component of the fetal testis cords and 
postnatal seminiferous tubules. Live imaging technologies facilitate the
visualization of cell morphologies and behaviors through developmental processes.
A transgenic mouse line was generated using a fragment of the rat Gata4 gene to
direct the expression of a dual-color fluorescent protein reporter in fetal and
adult Sertoli cells. The reporter encoded a red fluorescent protein, monomeric
Cherry (mCherry), fused to histone 2B and enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) fused to a glycosylphosphatidylinositol sequence, with a self-cleaving 2A 
polypeptide separating the two fusion proteins. After translation, the red and
green fluorescent proteins translocated to the nucleus and plasma membrane,
respectively, of Sertoli cells. Transgene expression in testes was first detected
by fluorescent microscopy around Embryonic Day 12.0. Sertoli cell division and
migration were visualized during testis cord formation in organ culture.
Initially, the Sertoli cells had mesenchyme-like morphologies and behaviors, but 
later, the cells migrated to the periphery of the testis cords to become
epithelialized. In postnatal seminiferous tubules, Sertoli nuclei were evenly
spaced when viewed from the external surface of tubules, and Sertoli cytoplasm
and membranes were associated with germ cells basally in a rosette pattern. This 
mouse line was bred to previously described transgenic mouse lines expressing
EGFP in Sertoli cytoplasm or a nuclear cyan fluorescent protein (Cerulean) and
mCherry in plasma membranes of germ cells. This revealed the physical
relationship between Sertoli and germ cells in developing testis cords and
provided a novel perspective on Sertoli cell development.

PMCID: PMC3071268
PMID: 20944081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Differentiation. 2011 Jan;81(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.09.182. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

Intestinal lineage commitment of embryonic stem cells.

Cao L(1), Gibson JD, Miyamoto S, Sail V, Verma R, Rosenberg DW, Nelson CE,
Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 91 North 
Eagleville Road, Unit 3125 Storrs, CT 06269-3125, USA.

Generating lineage-committed intestinal stem cells from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) could provide a tractable experimental system for understanding intestinal
differentiation pathways and may ultimately provide cells for regenerating
damaged intestinal tissue. We tested a two-step differentiation procedure in
which ESCs were first cultured with activin A to favor formation of definitive
endoderm, and then treated with fibroblast-conditioned medium with or without
Wnt3A. The definitive endoderm expressed a number of genes associated with
gut-tube development through mouse embryonic day 8.5 (Sox17, Foxa2, and Gata4
expressed and Id2 silent). The intestinal stem cell marker Lgr5 gene was also
activated in the endodermal cells, whereas the Msi1, Ephb2, and Dcamkl1
intestinal stem cell markers were not. Exposure of the endoderm to
fibroblast-conditioned medium with Wnt3A resulted in the activation of Id2, the
remaining intestinal stem cell markers and the later gut markers Cdx2, Fabp2, and
Muc2. Interestingly, genes associated with distal gut-associated mesoderm (Foxf2,
Hlx, and Hoxd8) were also simulated by Wnt3A. The two-step differentiation
protocol generated gut bodies with crypt-like structures that included regions of
Lgr5-expressing proliferating cells and regions of cell differentiation. These
gut bodies also had a smooth muscle component and some underwent peristaltic
movement. The ability of the definitive endoderm to differentiate into intestinal
epithelium was supported by the vivo engraftment of these cells into mouse
colonic mucosa. These findings demonstrate that definitive endoderm derived from 
ESCs can carry out intestinal cell differentiation pathways and may provide cells
to restore damaged intestinal tissue.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Biol. 2010 Dec 15;348(2):190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.022. Epub 2010
Oct 7.

Individual blastomeres of 16- and 32-cell mouse embryos are able to develop into 
foetuses and mice.

Tarkowski AK(1), Suwinska A, Czolowska R, Ozdzenski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, 
Poland. akt@biol.uw.edu.pl

Cell and developmental studies have clarified how, by the time of implantation,
the mouse embryo forms three primary cell lineages: epiblast (EPI), primitive
endoderm (PE), and trophectoderm (TE). However, it still remains unknown when
cells allocated to these three lineages become determined in their developmental 
fate. To address this question, we studied the developmental potential of single 
blastomeres derived from 16- and 32-cell stage embryos and supported by carrier, 
tetraploid blastomeres. We were able to generate singletons, identical twins,
triplets, and quadruplets from individual inner and outer cells of 16-cell
embryos and, sporadically, foetuses from single cells of 32-cell embryos. The use
of embryos constitutively expressing GFP as the donors of single diploid
blastomeres enabled us to identify their cell progeny in the constructed 2n<U+2194>4n
blastocysts. We showed that the descendants of donor blastomeres were able to
locate themselves in all three first cell lineages, i.e., epiblast, primitive
endoderm, and trophectoderm. In addition, the application of Cdx2 and Gata4
markers for trophectoderm and primitive endoderm, respectively, showed that the
expression of these two genes in the descendants of donor blastomeres was either 
down- or up-regulated, depending on the cell lineage they happened to occupy.
Thus, our results demonstrate that up to the early blastocysts stage, the destiny
of at least some blastomeres, although they have begun to express markers of
different lineage, is still labile.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20932967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;27(5):512-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2010.05.008.

[A novel GATA4 mutation leading to congenital ventricular septal defect].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang YQ(1), Tang YQ, Liu XY, Lin XP, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, P.R. China. yiqingyang169@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To identify the GATA4 gene mutation of congenital ventricular septal
defect (VSD) and study the molecular mechanism of a novel mutation.
METHODS: The clinical data and blood samples from 185 unrelated subjects with
congenital VSD were collected and evaluated together with 200 healthy
individuals. The coding exons and the flanking intron regions of the GATA4 gene
were amplified by PCR and sequenced using the di-deoxynucleotide chain
termination approach. The GATA4 gene was cloned and the corresponding mutant was 
acquired by site directed mutagenesis. The recombinant plasmid expressing GATA4
and the reporter vector expressing enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP)
driven by the promoter of atrial natrium peptide (ANP) gene were transfected into
HeLa cells with Lipofectamine. The effect of mutated GATA4 gene on the
transcriptional activity of encoded transcriptional factor was analyzed by
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutation, c.191G>A was identified in
1 VSD patient. The mutation leads to glycine to glutamic acid change at amino
acid residue 64 (G64E) in the GATA4 protein. Functional analysis showed that
GATA4 G64E mutation decreased the transcriptional activity of GATA4
transcriptional factor.
CONCLUSION: A novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutation, G64E, was identified in
1 VSD patient. The mutation might cause VSD by impairing the transcriptional
activity of GATA4 transcriptional factor.

PMID: 20931527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dev Dyn. 2011 Mar;240(3):566-76. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22447. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Ectopic expression of GATA6 bypasses requirement for Grb2 in primitive endoderm
formation.

Wang Y, Smedberg JL, Cai KQ, Capo-Chichi DC, Xu XX.

Gene knockouts in mice have showed that Grb2 and GATA6 are essential for the
formation of primitive endoderm in blastocysts. Here, we confirmed that implanted
Grb2-null blastocysts lack primitive or extraembryonic endoderm cells either at
E4.5 or E5.5 stages. We analyzed the relationship between Grb2 and GATA6 in the
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells to primitive endoderm in embryoid
body models. Upon transfection with GATA6 expression vector, Grb2-null ES cells
underwent endoderm differentiation as indicated by the expression of the
extraembryonic endoderm markers Dab2 and GATA4. Transfection of GATA4 expression 
vector also had the same differentiation potency. When GATA6- or
GATA4-transfected Grb2-null ES cells were allowed to aggregate, fragments of an
endoderm layer formed on the surface of the spheroids. The results suggest that
GATA6 is downstream of Grb2 in the inductive signaling pathway and the expression
of GATA6 is sufficient to compensate for the defects caused by Grb2 deficiency in
the development of the primitive and extraembryonic endoderm.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3299199
PMID: 20925113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39401-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.103705. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

Induction of interleukin-6 expression by bone morphogenetic protein-6 in
macrophages requires both SMAD and p38 signaling pathways.

Lee GT(1), Kwon SJ, Lee JH, Jeon SS, Jang KT, Choi HY, Lee HM, Kim WJ, Kim SJ,
Kim IY.

Author information: 
(1)Dean and Betty Gallo Prostate Cancer Center and Section of Urologic Oncology, 
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, the Cancer Institute of New Jersey,
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903, USA.

Unlike the prototype transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß), bone morphogenetic
protein-6 (BMP-6) activates macrophages. Here, we report that BMP-6 induces the
expression of IL-6 in macrophages. Using overexpression and knockdown
experiments, we demonstrate that BMP receptor type II and activin-like kinase-2
are necessary for IL-6 induction by BMP-6. At the intracellular level, both Smad 
and p38 signaling pathways are required for the induction of IL-6. The cross-talk
between the two pathways occurs at the level of transcription factor GATA4 and
Smad 1/4. These results, taken together, demonstrate a novel BMP-6 signaling
mechanism in which both the Smad and non-Smad pathways directly interact to
activate the transcription of a target gene.

PMCID: PMC2998138
PMID: 20889504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9287-97. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2664. Epub 
2010 Sep 30.

Nox2 NADPH oxidase promotes pathologic cardiac remodeling associated with
Doxorubicin chemotherapy.

Zhao Y(1), McLaughlin D, Robinson E, Harvey AP, Hookham MB, Shah AM, McDermott
BJ, Grieve DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vision and Vascular Science, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast,
United Kingdom.

Doxorubicin is a highly effective cancer treatment whose use is severely limited 
by dose-dependent cardiotoxicity. It is well established that doxorubicin
increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. In this study, we
investigated contributions to doxorubicin cardiotoxicity from Nox2 NADPH oxidase,
an important ROS source in cardiac cells, which is known to modulate several key 
processes underlying the myocardial response to injury. Nox2-deficient mice
(Nox2-/-) and wild-type (WT) controls were injected with doxorubicin (12 mg/kg)
or vehicle and studied 8 weeks later. Echocardiography indicated that
doxorubicin-induced contractile dysfunction was attenuated in Nox2-/- versus WT
mice (fractional shortening: 29.5±1.4 versus 25.7±1.0%; P<0.05). Similarly, in
vivo pressure-volume analysis revealed that systolic and diastolic function was
preserved in doxorubicin-treated Nox2-/- versus WT mice (ejection fraction:
52.6±2.5 versus 28.5±2.3%, LVdP/dtmin: -8,379±416 versus -5,198±527 mmHg s(-1);
end-diastolic pressure-volume relation: 0.051±0.009 versus 0.114±0.012; P<0.001).
Furthermore, in response to doxorubicin, Nox2-/- mice exhibited less myocardial
atrophy, cardiomyocyte apoptosis, and interstitial fibrosis, together with
reduced increases in profibrotic gene expression (procollagen IIIaI, transforming
growth factor-ß3, and connective tissue growth factor) and matrix
metalloproteinase-9 activity, versus WT controls. These alterations were
associated with beneficial changes in NADPH oxidase activity,
oxidative/nitrosative stress, and inflammatory cell infiltration. We found that
adverse effects of doxorubicin were attenuated by acute or chronic treatment with
the AT1 receptor antagonist losartan, which is commonly used to reduce blood
pressure. Our findings suggest that ROS specifically derived from Nox2 NADPH
oxidase make a substantial contribution to several key processes underlying
development of cardiac contractile dysfunction and remodeling associated with
doxorubicin chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2984551
PMID: 20884632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Oct;222(2):113-20.

Cardiac stem cells differentiate into sinus node-like cells.

Zhang J(1), Huang C, Wu P, Yang J, Song T, Chen Y, Fan X, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital and Cardiovascular Research
Institute of Wuhan University, 238 Jiefang Road, Wuchang, Wuhan, People's
Republic of China.

The advent of stem cell therapy brings about the hope to restore the loss of
cardiac pacemaker cells. However, it is largely unknown whether cardiac stem
cells are able to differentiate into pacemaker cells. The purpose of this study
was to determine whether the heart of large juvenile mammals contains cardiac
stem cells (CSCs), which are suitable as seed cells for restoration of cardiac
pacemaker cell. The c-kit(+) CSCs were isolated from one-month-old mongrel dogs. 
CSCs that we sorted were self-renewing, and they could proliferate by clonal
expansion. CSCs could differentiate into cardiac muscle, smooth muscle and
endothelial cells at rates of 10.5 ± 4.2%, 13.5 ± 5.1% and 12.9 ± 3.5%,
respectively, at week 4, as judged by the expression of respective
differentiation markers: cardiac troponin I, smooth muscle actin, and CD31. At
week 8, the differentiation rates were further increased to 23.2 ± 3.6%, 25.9 ±
6.6% and 28.3 ± 6.1% (P < 0.05 for each marker). Some of cells derived from CSCs 
could express cardiac transcription factor GATA-4 after week 2 and express
pacing-related genes, including hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated 2 (HCN2) and HCN4 after week 4. Importantly, a fraction of CSCs 
demonstrated the presence of inward currents that indicate the expression of
inward current channels. In conclusion, c-kit(+) CSCs may differentiate into
cardiac muscle cell and sinus node-like cells, suggesting that CSCs would be
useful as seed cells in treating sinus bradycardiac disorders or exploring the
mechanism of pacemaker activity.

PMID: 20877167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2010;284:113-79. doi: 10.1016/S1937-6448(10)84003-1.

What causes a broken heart--molecular insights into heart failure.

Barry SP(1), Townsend PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James's Hospital, Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 8, Ireland.

Our understanding of the molecular processes which regulate cardiac function has 
grown immeasurably in recent years. Even with the advent of ß-blockers,
angiotensin inhibitors and calcium modulating agents, heart failure (HF) still
remains a seriously debilitating and life-threatening condition. Here, we review 
the molecular changes which occur in the heart in response to increased load and 
the pathways which control cardiac hypertrophy, calcium homeostasis, and immune
activation during HF. These can occur as a result of genetic mutation in the case
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) or as a
result of ischemic or hypertensive heart disease. In the majority of cases,
calcineurin and CaMK respond to dysregulated calcium signaling and adrenergic
drive is increased, each of which has a role to play in controlling blood
pressure, heart rate, and left ventricular function. Many major pathways for
pathological remodeling converge on a set of transcriptional regulators such as
myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), nuclear factors of activated T cells (NFAT),
and GATA4 and these are opposed by the action of the natriuretic peptides ANP and
BNP. Epigenetic modification has emerged in recent years as a major influence
cardiac physiology and histone acetyl transferases (HATs) and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are now known to both induce and antagonize hypertrophic
growth. The newly emerging roles of microRNAs in regulating left ventricular
dysfunction and fibrosis also has great potential for novel therapeutic
intervention. Finally, we discuss the role of the immune system in mediating left
ventricular dysfunction and fibrosis and ways this can be targeted in the setting
of viral myocarditis.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20875630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Sep;15(9):1865-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01182.x.

GATA4 regulates ANF expression synergistically with Sp1 in a cardiac hypertrophy 
model.

Hu X(1), Li T, Zhang C, Liu Y, Xu M, Wang W, Jia Z, Ma K, Zhang Y, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University, Haidian District, Beijing, China.

Cardiac hypertrophy in response to multiple stimuli has important physiological
and pathological significances. GATA4 serves as a nuclear integrator of several
signalling pathways during cardiac hypertrophy. Sp1 and Sp3 are also reported to 
be involved in this process. However, the mechanism by which GATA4 acts as a
mediator, integrating these ubiquitously expressed transcriptional factors, is
poorly understood. We found that the expression of GATA4 and Sp1 was up-regulated
in the myocardium of a pressure overload hypertrophy rat model, as well in
phenylephrine-induced (PE-induced) hypertrophic growth of neonatal
cardiomyocytes. GST pull-down assays demonstrated that GATA4 could interact with 
Sp1 in vitro. Therefore, we proposed that GATA4 cooperates with Sp1 in regulating
ANF expression, as its reactivation is closely linked with hypertrophy. Further
studies demonstrated that GATA4 could activate the ANF promoter synergistically
with Sp1 through direct interaction. In contrast, Sp3 exhibited antagonistic
function, and overexpression of Sp3 repressed the transcriptional synergy between
Sp1 and GATA4. We also found that Sp1 alone could activate the ANF promoter in
cardiomyocytes, whereas Sp3 exerted negative effects on ANF expression.
Bioinformatics analysis revealed novel Sp-binding sites on the ANF promoter. The 
recruitment of GATA4 and Sp1 on the ANF promoter was enhanced during
phenylephrine-mediated hypertrophy, whereas the recruitment of Sp3 was reduced.
The phosphorylation of GATA4 by ERK1/2 kinase could enhance the affinity between 
GATA4 and Sp1. Thus, our findings revealed the critical interaction of GATA4 and 
Sp1 in modulating ANF expression, indicating their involvement in cardiac
hypertrophy.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3918043
PMID: 20874724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Dec;14(6):797-802. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0028.
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

GATA4 mutations in 357 unrelated patients with congenital heart malformation.

Butler TL(1), Esposito G, Blue GM, Cole AD, Costa MW, Waddell LB, Walizada G,
Sholler GF, Kirk EP, Feneley M, Harvey RP, Winlaw DS.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre for Children, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead,
Australia.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) represents one of the most common birth defects,
but the genetic causes remain largely unknown. Mutations in GATA4, encoding a
zinc finger transcription factor with a pivotal role in heart development, have
been associated with CHD in several familial cases and a small subset of sporadic
patients. To estimate the pathogenetic role of GATA4 in CHD, we screened for
mutations in 357 unrelated patients with different congenital heart
malformations. In addition to nine synonymous changes, we identified two known
(A411V and D425N) and two novel putative mutations (G69D and P163R) in five
patients with atrial or ventricular septal defects that were not seen in control 
subjects. The four mutations did not show altered GATA4 transcriptional activity 
in synergy with the transcription factors NKX2-5 and TBX20. Our data expand the
spectrum of mutations associated with cardiac septal defects but do not support
GATA4 mutations as a common cause of CHD.

PMID: 20874241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):H1772-81. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00557.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 24.

Paracrine factors released by GATA-4 overexpressed mesenchymal stem cells
increase angiogenesis and cell survival.

Li H(1), Zuo S, He Z, Yang Y, Pasha Z, Wang Y, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

Transplanted mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) release soluble factors that contribute
to cardiac repair and vascular regeneration. We hypothesized that overexpression 
of GATA-4 enhances the MSC secretome, thereby increasing cell survival and
promoting postinfarction cardiac angiogenesis. MSCs harvested from male rat bone 
marrow were transduced with GATA-4 (MSC(GATA-4)) using the murine stem cell virus
retroviral expression system; control cells were either nontransduced (MSC(bas)) 
or transduced with empty vector (MSC(Null)). Compared with these control cells,
MSC(GATA-4) were shown by immunofluorescence, real-time PCR, and Western blotting
to have higher expression of GATA-4. An increased expression of angiogenic
factors in MSC(GATA-4) and higher MSC resistance against hypoxia were observed.
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) treated with MSC(GATA-4)
conditioned medium exhibited increased formation of capillary-like structures and
promoted migration, compared with HUVECs treated with MSC(Null) conditioned
medium. MSC(GATA-4) were injected into the peri-infarct region in an acute
myocardial infarction model in Sprague-Dawley rats developed by ligation of the
left anterior descending coronary artery. Survival of MSC(GATA-4), determined by 
Sry expression, was increased at 4 days postengraftment. MSC(GATA-4)-treated
animals showed significantly improved cardiac function as assessed by
echocardiography. Furthermore, fluorescent microsphere and histological studies
revealed increased blood flow and blood vessel density and reduced infarction
size in MSC(GATA-4)-treated animals. We conclude that GATA-4 overexpression in
MSCs increased both MSC survival and angiogenic potential in ischemic myocardium 
and may therefore represent a novel and efficient therapeutic approach for
postinfarct remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3006287
PMID: 20870802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Dec 15;153(3):277-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2010.08.052. Epub
2010 Sep 25.

Generation of functional cardiomyocytes from mouse induced pluripotent stem
cells.

So KH(1), Han YJ, Park HY, Kim JG, Sung DJ, Bae YM, Yang BC, Park SB, Chang SK,
Kim EY, Park SP.

Author information: 
(1)Mirae Biotech, Seoul 143-854, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells allow derivation of autologous
differentiated cells for cell therapy. The purpose of this study was to compare
the cardiac differentiation potential of mouse iPS cells with embryonic stem (ES)
cells and demonstrate that they could produce functional cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: iPS cells were prepared from mouse embryonic fibroblasts by lentiviral
mediated expression of four transcription factors (Oct4/Sox2/Klf4/C-myc). To
induce cardiac cell differentiation, iPS-S-6 or D3-ES cells were induced to form 
embryoid bodies (EBs) using a two-medium culture protocol, then plated onto
gelatin-coated plates and maintained in DMEM.
RESULTS: Following classification of the generation periods of contracting EBs
into early (d8-d11), middle (d12-d15) and late (d16-20), iPS cells in the early
period exhibited characteristics similar to ES cells. In iPS cells from the
middle period group, the ratio of contracting EBs was significantly increased
compared to ES cells, and the difference persisted in cells from the late period 
group (p<0.05). The percentage of contracting EBs formed from iPS and ES cells
were 44.8% and 33.3%, respectively. In addition, iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes 
exhibited mRNA expression of cardiac mesoderm markers such as GATA4 and NKX2.5,
and cardiomyocyte markers such as a1s, a1c, a-MHC, ß-MHC, Cx40, TnI, TnT, ANF and
Hey2. Single cardiomyocytes exhibited typical cross-striated myofibrillar
organization, and electrophysiological studies revealed functional
cardiac-specific voltage-gated Na(+), Ca(2+) and K(+) channels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that functional cardiomyocytes can be
generated from iPS cells, and suggest that these cells may be useful for the
treatment of cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20870305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Diabet Med. 2010 Oct;27(10):1195-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.03046.x.

Genetic investigation in an Italian child with an unusual association of atrial
septal defect, attributable to a new familial GATA4 gene mutation, and neonatal
diabetes due to pancreatic agenesis.

D'Amato E(1), Giacopelli F, Giannattasio A, D'Annunzio G, Bocciardi R, Musso M,
Lorini R, Ravazzolo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Genoa, IRCCS G. Gaslini, Italy.
edamato@village.it

AIMS: Permanent neonatal diabetes is a rare condition affecting 1 in
300,000-400,000 live births; only in 60% of cases it is possible to identify the 
genetic defect. The condition of pancreatic agenesis is rarer still. Only two
genes are known to determine this phenotype: PDX-1 and PTF1A. Congenital heart
defects are among the most common developmental anomalies, affecting 1% of
newborns, and the GATA4 gene is less frequently involved in these disorders. An
Italian child with pancreatic agenesis and an atrial septal defect was
genetically investigated to elucidate whether the association of the two
pathologies was casual, or represented a new pancreatic/cardiac syndrome.
METHODS: A panel of pancreas development genes, including GCK, Kir6.2, PTF1A,
PDX-1, HNF-1A, NgN3, SOX17, SOX7, SOX9, INS, HNF1-B and SUR1 plus the GATA4 gene,
were screened for characterization of pancreatic agenesis and cardiac defect.
RESULTS: Screening for genes causing permanent neonatal diabetes was negative. A 
novel mutation in GATA4 (c1512C>T) was detected and functional characterization
confirmed a reduced activity of the protein. In the family members, the GATA4
mutation co-segregates with a cardiac phenotype, but not with pancreatic
agenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first report of pancretic agenesis with an
associated cardiac defect and a mutation in the GATA4 gene. We could not
establish that the GATA4 mutation was causative for pancreatic agenesis and
further genetic investigation to detect the genetic cause of the pancreas
agenesis was unsuccessful. We conclude that, the two pathologies are attributable
to two independent events.

© 2010 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2010 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 20854389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 3;5(9):e12559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012559.

Dedifferentiation and proliferation of mammalian cardiomyocytes.

Zhang Y(1), Li TS, Lee ST, Wawrowsky KA, Cheng K, Galang G, Malliaras K, Abraham 
MR, Wang C, Marbán E.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: It has long been thought that mammalian cardiomyocytes are
terminally-differentiated and unable to proliferate. However, myocytes in more
primitive animals such as zebrafish are able to dedifferentiate and proliferate
to regenerate amputated cardiac muscle.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we test the hypothesis that mature mammalian
cardiomyocytes retain substantial cellular plasticity, including the ability to
dedifferentiate, proliferate, and acquire progenitor cell phenotypes. Two
complementary methods were used: 1) cardiomyocyte purification from rat hearts,
and 2) genetic fate mapping in cardiac explants from bi-transgenic mice.
Cardiomyocytes isolated from rodent hearts were purified by multiple
centrifugation and Percoll gradient separation steps, and the purity verified by 
immunostaining and RT-PCR. Within days in culture, purified cardiomyocytes lost
their characteristic electrophysiological properties and striations, flattened
and began to divide, as confirmed by proliferation markers and BrdU
incorporation. Many dedifferentiated cardiomyocytes went on to express the stem
cell antigen c-kit, and the early cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and Nkx2.5.
Underlying these changes, inhibitory cell cycle molecules were suppressed in
myocyte-derived cells (MDCs), while microRNAs known to orchestrate proliferation 
and pluripotency increased dramatically. Some, but not all, MDCs self-organized
into spheres and re-differentiated into myocytes and endothelial cells in vitro. 
Cell fate tracking of cardiomyocytes from 4-OH-Tamoxifen-treated
double-transgenic MerCreMer/ZEG mouse hearts revealed that green fluorescent
protein (GFP) continues to be expressed in dedifferentiated cardiomyocytes,
two-thirds of which were also c-kit(+).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Contradicting the prevailing view that they are
terminally-differentiated, postnatal mammalian cardiomyocytes are instead capable
of substantial plasticity. Dedifferentiation of myocytes facilitates
proliferation and confers a degree of stemness, including the expression of c-kit
and the capacity for multipotency.

PMCID: PMC2933247
PMID: 20838637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec;345(1-2):309-16. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0586-3. Epub 
2010 Sep 12.

A role for Gcn5 in cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Li L(1), Zhu J, Tian J, Liu X, Feng C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, No. 1, Xi-An Men
St., West District, 100034, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
lilyweiwuran@163.com

MSCs possess the capacity of self-renewal and potential of differentiation into
various kinds of specialized tissue cells including myocardiocytes. From
self-renewing to oriented differentiation, chromatin is remodeled into heritable 
states that allow activation or maintain the repression of regulatory genes,
which means specific genes in self-renewing switched off and specific genes in
oriented differentiation activated (Bernstein et al. Cell 125:315-326, 2006).
These epigenetic states are established and controlled largely by specific
patterns of histone posttranslational modifications, in particular, histone
acetylation (Li Nat Rev Genet 3:662-673, 2002). In cardiomyocyte differentiation 
of rat MSCs, we focused on Gcn5, which linked a known transcriptional coactivator
with catalytic histone acetyltransferase activity (Brownell et al. Cell
84:843-851, 1996). To clarify participatory in vivo role of Gcn5, using an RNA
interference (RNAi) strategy employing shRNA to specifically knockdown Gcn5
expression in MSCs, we found that HAT activity altered dynamically depended on
the inhibition of Gcn5 during MSCs differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay showed the increased binding of acetyl histone H3 to the early
cardiomyocyte-specific genes GATA4 and NKx2.5 promoters in cardiomyocyte
differentiation of MSCs by 5-azacytidine inducing, whereas the decreased binding 
with lower Gcn5 expression. Cell ultrastructure analysis revealed that MSCs
induced by 5-azacytidine possess morphological characteristics of cardiomyocyte
cells. The shape of MSCs transfected by Gcn5 RNAi was similar to normal MSCs, but
the chromatin showed heavy electron-density and a hard-packed structure. This
intermediate state of chromatin may be an inactive part of MSCs differentiation. 
These results demonstrate that Gcn5, possessing acetyltransferase activity, is
involved in regulating chromatin configuration around GATA4 and NKx2.5 in
cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat MSCs by changing the level of histone
acetylation. HAT activity depending on Gcn5 is important in differentiation of
MSCs into cardiomyocytes as a consequence of the remodeling of the chromatin
configuration caused by modification of histone H3.

PMID: 20835911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Cell. 2010 Sep 14;19(3):450-9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.08.012.

Hopx and Hdac2 interact to modulate Gata4 acetylation and embryonic cardiac
myocyte proliferation.

Trivedi CM(1), Zhu W, Wang Q, Jia C, Kee HJ, Li L, Hannenhalli S, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Regulation of chromatin structure via histone modification has recently received 
intense attention. Here, we demonstrate that the chromatin-modifying enzyme
histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) functions with a small homeodomain factor, Hopx, to
mediate deacetylation of Gata4, which is expressed by cardiac progenitor cells
and plays critical roles in the regulation of cardiogenesis. In the absence of
Hopx and Hdac2 in mouse embryos, Gata4 hyperacetylation is associated with a
marked increase in cardiac myocyte proliferation, upregulation of Gata4 target
genes, and perinatal lethality. Hdac2 physically interacts with Gata4, and this
interaction is stabilized by Hopx. The ability of Gata4 to transactivate cell
cycle genes is impaired by Hopx/Hdac2-mediated deacetylation, and this effect is 
abrogated by loss of Hdac2-Gata4 interaction. These results suggest that Gata4 is
a nonhistone target of Hdac2-mediated deacetylation and that Hdac2, Hopx, and
Gata4 coordinately regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2947937
PMID: 20833366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep 10;87(3):424-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.009.

Dominant mutations in RP1L1 are responsible for occult macular dystrophy.

Akahori M(1), Tsunoda K, Miyake Y, Fukuda Y, Ishiura H, Tsuji S, Usui T, Hatase
T, Nakamura M, Ohde H, Itabashi T, Okamoto H, Takada Y, Iwata T.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Sensory Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo
Medical Center, Meguro-ku, Japan.

Occult macular dystrophy (OMD) is an inherited macular dystrophy characterized by
progressive loss of macular function but normal ophthalmoscopic appearance.
Typical OMD is characterized by a central cone dysfunction leading to a loss of
vision despite normal ophthalmoscopic appearance, normal fluorescein angiography,
and normal full-field electroretinogram (ERGs), but the amplitudes of the focal
macular ERGs and multifocal ERGs are significantly reduced at the central retina.
Linkage analysis of two OMD families was performed by the SNP High Throughput
Linkage analysis system (SNP HiTLink), localizing the disease locus to chromosome
8p22-p23. Among the 128 genes in the linkage region, 22 genes were expressed in
the retina, and four candidate genes were selected. No mutations were found in
the first three candidate genes, methionine sulfoxide reductase A (MSRA), GATA
binding 4 (GATA4), and pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1). However, amino acid
substitution of p.Arg45Trp in retinitis pigmentosa 1-like 1 (RP1L1) was found in 
three OMD families and p.Trp960Arg in a remaining OMD family. These two mutations
were detected in all affected individuals but in none of the 876 controls.
Immunohistochemistry of RP1L1 in the retina section of cynomolgus monkey revealed
expression in the rod and cone photoreceptor, supporting a role of RP1L1 in the
photoreceptors that, when disrupted by mutation, leads to OMD. Identification of 
RP1L1 mutations as causative for OMD has potentially broader implications for
understanding the differential cone photoreceptor functions in the fovea and the 
peripheral retina.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2933341
PMID: 20826268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2010 Dec;10(4):268-74. doi: 10.1007/s12012-010-9081-z.

Ethanol and its metabolites induce histone lysine 9 acetylation and an alteration
of the expression of heart development-related genes in cardiac progenitor cells.

Zhong L(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Chen G, Sun H, Yang X, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, 136 Zhong Shan Er Road, Yu Zhong District, 400014 Chongqing, People's
Republic of China.

Alcohol exposure during pregnancy may cause congenital heart disease (CHD), but
the underlying mechanisms are not clear. Recent evidence suggests that ethanol
and its metabolites can selectively increase histone H3 acetylation at lysine 9
(H3AcK9) residue in rat hepatocytes. This may be a mechanism by which ethanol
alters gene expression. The goal of current study is to investigate the effect of
ethanol and its metabolites on H3AcK9 acetylation and the mRNA expression of
heart development-related genes (GATA4, Mef2c, and Tbx5) in cardiac progenitor
cells. We used mitochondrial activity (MTT) assay to assess the viability of
cardiac progenitor cells. Western blotting and real-time PCR were employed to
determine H3AcK9 acetylation and gene expression. Low levels of ethanol (50 mM), 
acetaldehyde (4 mM), and acetate (4 mM) had no effect on cell proliferation.
However, high concentrations of ethanol (200 mM), acetaldehyde (12 mM), and
acetate (16 mM) reduced cell viability by 30%, respectively (P < 0.05). Low
levels of ethanol and acetate increased the acetylation of H3 lysine 9 by 2.4-
and 2.2-fold, respectively (P < 0.05), but did not significantly change the
expression of the heart development-related genes. High concentrations of ethanol
and acetate increased H3 lysine 9 acetylation by 5.3- and 5.6-fold, respectively 
(P < 0.05). Moreover, high levels of ethanol and acetate significantly augmented 
the expression of GATA4 and Mef2c. Conversely, acetaldehyde (4 or 12 mM) had
little effect on H3 lysine 9 acetylation or the expression of the heart
development-related genes. Our studies demonstrate that high levels of ethanol or
its metabolites induce H3AcK9 acetylation and impair cardiac progenitor cells.
The altered histone H3 acetylation at lysine 9 has an important impact on the
expression of the heart development-related genes, which may be one of the
mechanisms underlying the alcohol-induced CHD.

PMID: 20811785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Clin Genet. 2011 Aug;80(2):184-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01523.x. Epub
2010 Aug 2.

New mutations in ZFPM2/FOG2 gene in tetralogy of Fallot and double outlet right
ventricle.

De Luca A(1), Sarkozy A, Ferese R, Consoli F, Lepri F, Dentici ML, Vergara P, De 
Zorzi A, Versacci P, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)CSS-Mendel Institute, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Rome, Italy. a.deluca@css-mendel.it

Conotruncal defects (CTDs) represent 15-20% of all congenital heart defects.
Mutations in a number of genes have been associated with CTD in humans and animal
models. We investigated the occurrence and the prevalence of GATA4, NKX2.5,
ZFPM2/FOG2, GDF1, and ISLET1 gene mutations in a large cohort of individuals with
CTD, including tetralogy of Fallot with or without pulmonary atresia (TOF, 178
patients), double outlet right ventricle (DORV, 13 patients), and truncus
arteriosus (11 patients). Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography
(DHPLC) analysis followed by bidirectional sequencing disclosed no putative
pathogenic mutation in GATA4, ISLET1, and GDF1 genes. Two novel (Ile227Val,
Met544Ile) and one previously reported (Glu30Gly) possibly pathogenic missense
variants were identified in the ZFPM2/FOG2 gene in 3 sporadic patients of 202
(1.5%) with CTD, including 1 of 178 (0.6%) with TOF and 2 of 13 (15.4%) with
DORV. Mutation analysis also detected one known missense change (Arg25Cys) in
NKX2.5 gene in two (1.1%) sporadic patients with TOF. These sequence alterations 
were found to be absent in 500 population-matched controls. In conclusion, the
present results (i) indicate and confirm that mutations in the GATA4, GDF1, and
ISLET1 genes are not major determinants in the pathogenesis of TOF, (ii) provide 
supportive evidence of an association between ZFPM2/FOG2 gene and TOF/DORV, and
(iii) provide additional examples of the possible contribution of the Arg25Cys
change in the NKX2.5 to a small number of TOF cases.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20807224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Indian J Med Sci. 2010 Sep;64(9):402-7.

The mechanism underlying the differentiation of human umbilical cord-derived
mesenchymal stem cells into myocardial cells induced by 5-azacytidine.

Ruan ZB(1), Zhu L, Yin YG, Chen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Taizhou People's Hospital, Taizhou-225300, P.R.
China. ruanzhongbao@medmail.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the differentiation 
of human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUCMSCs) into myocardial 
cells induced by 5-azacytidine (5-aza), and to explore the expression and
significance of DLL4-Notch signaling in this process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: hUCMSCs were isolated and purified from the umbilical
cords of normal or cesarean term deliveries under sterile conditions. After
treatment with 5-aza for 24 h, hUCMSCs was continued to culture, the expression
of GATA4 and NKx2.5 at 4 weeks after induction, DLL4 and Notch1 mRNA at 1d, 3d,
5d, 7d after induction were detected. The expression of cardiac troponin I (cTnI)
after 4 weeks was determined by immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: hUCMSCs treated with 5-aza were stained positively for cTnI 4 weeks
after induction. The expression of Notch1 and DLL4 mRNA in the 5-aza-induced
group was stable and significantly higher than that in the control group (mean Ct
value for the Notch1 gene: 0.51 ± 0.21 in the 5-aza-induced group vs. 7.85 ± 0.35
in the control group; mean Ct value for the DLL4 gene: 1.60 ± 0.49 in the
5-aza-induced group vs. 12.42 ± 0.73 in the control group). Similar results were 
observed for Nkx2.5 and GATA4 genes. The expressions of Nkx2.5 and GATA4 mRNA in 
the 5-aza group were 4.72 ± 0.58 and 3.76 ± 0.06 times higher than that in the
control group, respectively, with statistical significance.
CONCLUSIONS: hUCMSCs can be differentiated into myocardial cells by 5-aza
induction in vitro. 5-Aza may affect this process by regulating the expression of
GATA4 and Nkx2.5 genes. The DLL4-Notch signal pathway may be involved in this
process.

PMID: 23006419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biol Reprod. 2010 Dec;83(6):1015-26. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085969. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

GATA depletion impacts insulin-like growth factor 1 mRNA and protein levels in
luteinizing porcine granulosa cells.

LaVoie HA(1), Kordus RJ, Nguyen JB, Barth JL, Hui YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of South Carolina School of
Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA. holly.lavoie@uscmed.sc.edu

GATA4 and GATA6 are zinc-finger transcription factors that regulate specific
genes involved in steroidogenesis. Using RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
reduction of GATA4 and/or GATA6 with microarray analysis, we aimed to identify
novel GATA target genes in luteinizing porcine granulosa cells under vehicle- and
cAMP-treated conditions. Microarray analysis identified IGF1 mRNA to be cAMP- and
GATA-responsive, and real-time PCR demonstrated that the cAMP-induced increase in
IGF1 mRNA was reduced under conditions of GATA6 depletion and GATA4 plus GATA6
depletion, but not GATA4 depletion. Insulin-like growth factor 1 protein levels
in media were also decreased by GATA6 or GATA4 plus GATA6 reduction. IGFBP2 and
IGFBP4 mRNAs were increased and IGFBP5 mRNA decreased with vehicle and cAMP
treatment under GATA4 plus GATA6 RNAi conditions. GATA6 reduction alone increased
basal IGFBP4 and decreased IGFBP5 with both vehicle and cAMP, and GATA4 reduction
alone lowered cAMP IGFBP5 levels with cAMP. No changes in IGFBP3 mRNA were
observed with GATA reduction relative to the control RNAi condition. Levels of
insulin-like growth factor binding proteins 2-5 in media as assessed by Western
ligand blotting were not altered by GATA reduction. Electromobility gel shift
assays with two GATA-containing oligonucleotides of the IGF1 5'-regulatory region
showed GATA4 and GATA6 could bind the more proximal GATA-B site. These studies
indicate that although GATA4 and GATA6 can bind the porcine IGF1 5'-region, GATA6
is functionally most important for cAMP-stimulated mRNA levels. Using microarray 
analysis, we identified other mRNAs that were altered by GATA-reduced conditions,
including ALDH1, DIO2, and EDNRB. Our findings further support GATA as a
coordinator of endocrine/paracrine/autocrine signals in the ovary.

PMCID: PMC2994327
PMID: 20739664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Vis Exp. 2010 Aug 11;(42). pii: 2020. doi: 10.3791/2020.

A reverse genetic approach to test functional redundancy during embryogenesis.

Rikin A(1), Rosenfeld GE, McCartin K, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University,
USA.

Gene function during embryogenesis is typically defined by loss-of-function
experiments, for example by targeted mutagenesis (knockout) in the mouse. In the 
zebrafish model, effective reverse genetic techniques have been developed using
microinjection of gene-specific antisense morpholinos. Morpholinos target an mRNA
through specific base-pairing and block gene function transiently by inhibiting
translation or splicing for several days during embryogenesis (knockdown).
However, in vertebrates such as mouse or zebrafish, some gene functions can be
obscured by these approaches due to the presence of another gene that compensates
for the loss. This is especially true for gene families containing sister genes
that are co-expressed in the same developing tissues. In zebrafish, functional
compensation can be tested in a relatively high-throughput manner, by
co-injection of morpholinos that target knockdown of both genes simultaneously.
Likewise, using morpholinos, a genetic interaction between any two genes can be
demonstrated by knockdown of both genes together at sub-threshold levels. For
example, morpholinos can be titrated such that neither individual knockdown
generates a phenotype. If, under these conditions, co-injection of both
morpholinos causes a phenotype, a genetic interaction is shown. Here we
demonstrate how to show functional redundancy in the context of two related GATA 
transcription factors. GATA factors are essential for specification of cardiac
progenitors, but this is revealed only by the loss of both Gata5 and Gata6. We
show how to carry out microinjection experiments, validate the morpholinos, and
evaluate the compensated phenotype for cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3156006
PMID: 20736915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Aug 21;16(31):3919-27.

Mapping of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine.

Lehner F(1), Kulik U, Klempnauer J, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse, Hannover, Germany.

AIM: To investigate the gene expression pattern of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6
(HNF6) and other liver-enriched transcription factors in various segments of the 
human intestine to better understand the differentiation of the gut epithelium.
METHODS: Samples of healthy duodenum and jejunum were obtained from patients with
pancreatic cancer whereas ileum and colon was obtained from patients undergoing
right or left hemicolectomy or (recto)sigmoid or rectal resection. All surgical
specimens were subjected to histopathology. Excised tissue was shock-frozen and
analyzed for gene expression of liver-enriched transcription factors by
semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain and compared to the human
colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2. Protein expression of major liver-enriched
transcription factors was determined by Western blotting while the DNA binding of
HNF6 was investigated by electromobility shift assays.
RESULTS: The gene expression patterning of liver-enriched transcription factors
differed in the various segments of the human intestine with HNF6 gene expression
being most abundant in the duodenum (P < 0.05) whereas expression of the zinc
finger protein GATA4 and of the HNF6 target gene ALDH3A1 was most abundant in the
jejunum (P < 0.05). Likewise, expression of FOXA2 and the splice variants 2 and 4
of HNF4alpha were most abundantly expressed in the jejunum (P < 0.05).
Essentially, expression of transcription factors declined from the duodenum
towards the colon with the most abundant expression in the jejunum and less in
the ileum. The expression of HNF6 and of genes targeted by this factor, i.e.
neurogenin 3 (NGN3) was most abundant in the jejunum followed by the ileum and
the colon while DNA binding activity of HNF4alpha and of NGN3 was confirmed by
electromobility shift assays to an optimized probe. Furthermore, Western blotting
provided evidence of the expression of several liver-enriched transcription
factors in cultures of colon epithelial cells, albeit at different levels.
CONCLUSION: We describe significant local and segmental differences in the
expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine which
impact epithelial cell biology of the gut.

PMCID: PMC2923766
PMID: 20712053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Theriogenology. 2010 Oct 15;74(7):1221-32. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.05.025. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Spermatogonia-specific proteins expressed in prepubertal buffalo (Bubalus
bubalis) testis and their utilization for isolation and in vitro cultivation of
spermatogonia.

Goel S(1), Reddy N, Mandal S, Fujihara M, Kim SM, Imai H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for the Conservation of Endangered Species, Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Uppal Road,
Hyderabad, 500 007, India. sandeep@ccmb.res.in

Buffalo is an economically important livestock species in Asia. Little is known
about male germ line technology owing to lack of sufficient understanding
regarding expression of germ- and somatic-cell specific-proteins in the testis.
In this study, we identified UCHL-1 (PGP 9.5) and lectin- Dolichos biflorus
agglutinin (DBA) as specific markers for spermatogonia in buffalo testis.
Expression of germ-cell and pluripotency-specific proteins such as DDX4 (VASA)
and POU5F1 (OCT3/4) were also present in spermatogonia. Interestingly, the
expression of somatic cell-specific proteins such as VIMENTIN and GATA4 were also
detected in germ cells. Using two-step enzymatic digestion followed by
differential plating and Percoll density-gradient centrifugation, an
approximately 55% spermatogonia-enriched cell population could be obtained from
the prepubertal buffalo testis. Isolated spermatogonia could survive and
proliferate in vitro in DMEM/F12 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum in the 
absence of any specific growth factors for a week. Cultured spermatogonia showed 
DBA affinity and expressed DDX4 and POU5F1. These results may help to establish a
long-term culture system for buffalo spermatogonia.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20708247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Nov;49(5):841-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.08.007. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

Synergistic effects of the GATA-4-mediated miR-144/451 cluster in protection
against simulated ischemia/reperfusion-induced cardiomyocyte death.

Zhang X(1), Wang X, Zhu H, Zhu C, Wang Y, Pu WT, Jegga AG, Fan GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0575, USA.

Among the identified microRNAs (miRs) thus far, ~50% of mammalian miRs are
clustered in the genome and transcribed as polycistronic primary transcripts.
However, whether clustered miRs mediate non-redundant and cooperative functions
remains poorly understood. In this study, we first identified activation of the
promoter of miR-144/451 by GATA-4, a critical transcription factor in the heart. 
Next, we observed that ectopic expression of miR-144 and -451 individually
augmented cardiomyocyte survival, which was further improved by overexpression of
miR-144/451, compared to control cells in response to simulated
ischemia/reperfusion. In contrast, knockdown of endogenous miR-144 and -451
revealed opposite effects. Using luciferase reporter assay and western blot
analysis, we also validated that both miR-144 and miR-451 target CUG triplet
repeat-binding protein 2 (CUGBP2), a ubiquitously expressed RNA-binding protein, 
known to interact with COX-2 3'UTR and inhibit its translation. Accordingly,
protein levels of CUGBP2 were greatly reduced and COX-2 activity was markedly
increased in miR-144-, miR-451-, and miR-144/451-overexpressing cardiomyocytes,
compared to GFP cells. Furthermore, inhibition of COX-2 activity by either NS-398
or DUP-697 partially offset protective effects of the miR-144/451 cluster.
Together, these data indicate that both partners of the miR-144/451 cluster
confer protection against simulated I/R-induced cardiomyocyte death via targeting
CUGBP2-COX-2 pathway, at least in part. Thus, both miR-144 and miR-451 may
represent new therapeutic agents for the treatment of ischemic heart disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2949485
PMID: 20708014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Circ Res. 2010 Oct 15;107(8):1032-40. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.220764. Epub
2010 Aug 12.

The transcription factor GATA-6 regulates pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

van Berlo JH(1), Elrod JW, van den Hoogenhof MM, York AJ, Aronow BJ, Duncan SA,
Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

RATIONALE: The transcriptional code that programs maladaptive cardiac hypertrophy
involves the zinc finger-containing DNA binding factor GATA-4. The highly related
transcription factor GATA-6 is also expressed in the adult heart, although its
role in controlling the hypertrophic program is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of GATA-6 in cardiac hypertrophy and
homeostasis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we performed a cardiomyocyte-specific conditional gene
targeting approach for Gata6, as well as a transgenic approach to overexpress
GATA-6 in the mouse heart. Deletion of Gata6-loxP with Nkx2.5-cre produced late
embryonic lethality with heart defects, whereas deletion with ß-myosin heavy
chain-cre (ßMHC-cre) produced viable adults with >95% loss of GATA-6 protein in
the heart. These latter mice were subjected to pressure overload-induced
hypertrophy for 2 and 6 weeks, which showed a significant reduction in cardiac
hypertrophy similar to that observed Gata4 heart-specific deleted mice.
Gata6-deleted mice subjected to pressure overload also developed heart failure,
whereas control mice maintained proper cardiac function. Gata6-deleted mice also 
developed less cardiac hypertrophy following 2 weeks of angiotensin
II/phenylephrine infusion. Controlled GATA-6 overexpression in the heart induced 
hypertrophy with aging and predisposed to greater hypertrophy with pressure
overload stimulation. Combinatorial deletion of Gata4 and Gata6 from the adult
heart resulted in dilated cardiomyopathy and lethality by 16 weeks of age.
Mechanistically, deletion of Gata6 from the heart resulted in fundamental changes
in the levels of key regulatory genes and myocyte differentiation-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that GATA-6 is both necessary and sufficient 
for regulating the cardiac hypertrophic response and differentiated gene
expression, both alone and in coordination with GATA-4.

PMCID: PMC2967029
PMID: 20705924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;346(2):346-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.032. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

Direct transcriptional regulation of Gata4 during early endoderm specification is
controlled by FoxA2 binding to an intronic enhancer.

Rojas A(1), Schachterle W, Xu SM, Martín F, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa-CIBERDEM,
Sevilla, Spain. anabel.rojas@cabimer.es

The embryonic endoderm is a multipotent progenitor cell population that gives
rise to the epithelia of the digestive and respiratory tracts, the liver and the 
pancreas. Among the transcription factors that have been shown to be important
for endoderm development and gut morphogenesis is GATA4. Despite the important
role of GATA4 in endoderm development, its transcriptional regulation is not well
understood. In this study, we identified an intronic enhancer from the mouse
Gata4 gene that directs expression to the definitive endoderm in the early
embryo. The activity of this enhancer is initially broad in all endodermal
progenitors, as demonstrated by fate mapping analysis using the Cre/loxP system, 
but becomes restricted to the dorsal foregut and midgut, and associated organs
such as dorsal pancreas and stomach. The function of the intronic Gata4 enhancer 
is dependent upon a conserved Forkhead transcription factor-binding site, which
is bound by recombinant FoxA2 in vitro. These studies identify Gata4 as a direct 
transcriptional target of FoxA2 in the hierarchy of the transcriptional
regulatory network that controls the development of the definitive endoderm.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2945415
PMID: 20692247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell. 2010 Aug 6;142(3):375-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.07.002.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes by defined
factors.

Ieda M(1), Fu JD, Delgado-Olguin P, Vedantham V, Hayashi Y, Bruneau BG,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. ieda@cpnet.med.keio.ac.jp

Comment in
    Regen Med. 2011 Jan;6(1):31-4.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Aug 6;7(2):139-41.

The reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) raises
the possibility that a somatic cell could be reprogrammed to an alternative
differentiated fate without first becoming a stem/progenitor cell. A large pool
of fibroblasts exists in the postnatal heart, yet no single "master regulator" of
direct cardiac reprogramming has been identified. Here, we report that a
combination of three developmental transcription factors (i.e., Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5) rapidly and efficiently reprogrammed postnatal cardiac or dermal
fibroblasts directly into differentiated cardiomyocyte-like cells. Induced
cardiomyocytes expressed cardiac-specific markers, had a global gene expression
profile similar to cardiomyocytes, and contracted spontaneously. Fibroblasts
transplanted into mouse hearts one day after transduction of the three factors
also differentiated into cardiomyocyte-like cells. We believe these findings
demonstrate that functional cardiomyocytes can be directly reprogrammed from
differentiated somatic cells by defined factors. Reprogramming of endogenous or
explanted fibroblasts might provide a source of cardiomyocytes for regenerative
approaches.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919844
PMID: 20691899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Jan;17(1-2):45-58. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0124. Epub
2010 Oct 7.

Transplantation of marrow-derived cardiac stem cells carried in fibrin improves
cardiac function after myocardial infarction.

Guo HD(1), Wang HJ, Tan YZ, Wu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology and Embryology, Shanghai Medical School of
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The high death rate of the transplanted stem cells in the infarcted heart and the
low efficiency of differentiation toward cardiomyocytes influence the outcome of 
stem cell transplantation for treatment of myocardial infarction (MI). Fibrin
glue (FG) has been extensively used as a cell implantation matrix to increase
cell survival. However, mechanisms of the effects of FG for stem cell
transplantation to improve cardiac function are unclear. We have isolated
c-kit+/Sca-1+ marrow-derived cardiac stem cells (MCSCs) from rat bone marrow; the
cells expressed weakly early cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5, GATA-4, Mef2C, 
and Tbx5. Effects of FG on survival, proliferation, and migration of MCSCs were
examined in vitro. Cytoprotective effects of FG were assessed by exposure of
MCSCs to anoxia. Efficacy of MCSC transplantation in FG was evaluated in the
female rat MI model. The MCSCs survived well and proliferated in FG, and they may
migrate out from the edge of FG in the wound and nature state. Acridine
orange/ethidium bromide staining and lactate dehydrogenase analysis showed that
MCSCs in FG were more resistant to anoxia as compared with MCSCs alone. In a rat 
MI model, cardiac function was improved and scar area was obviously reduced in
group of MCSCs in FG compared with group of MCSCs and FG alone, respectively. Y
chromosome fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that there were more
survived MCSCs in group of MCSCs in FG than those in group of MCSCs alone, and
most Y chromosome positive cells expressed cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and
connexin-43 (Cx-43). Cx-43 was located between Y chromosome positive cells and
recipient cardiomyocytes. Microvessel density in the peri-infarct regions and
infarct regions significantly increased in group of MCSCs in FG. These results
suggest that FG provide a suitable microenvironment for survival and
proliferation of MCSCs and protect cells from apoptosis and necrosis caused by
anoxia. MCSCs could differentiate into cardiomyocytes after being transplanted in
the border of the infarcted myocardium and form connections with native
cardiomyocytes. FG is helpful for MCSC transplantation to repair myocardium and
improve cardiac function through promoting the survival, migration, and
cardiomyogenic differentiation of MCSCs and inducing angiogenesis.

PMID: 20673001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Apr;20(4):681-93. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0151. Epub 2010 Sep 
13.

Central role for disabled-2 in mesenchymal stem cardiac protein expression and
functional consequences after engraftment in acute myocardial infarction.

Mayorga ME(1), Dong F, Sundararaman S, Huang Y, Jiang Y, Howe PH, Penn MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Adult mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been shown to spontaneously express
cardiac proteins (CP) in vitro and to improve cardiac function after
transplantation into experimentally induced acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
However, if these effects are the result of MSC cardiac differentiation or a mere
cooperative cellular interaction is a matter of active debate. Additionally, the 
molecular mechanisms involved in CP expression by adult stem cells in vitro and
its possible benefit for cardiac regeneration and improved function remain
unclear. Here we show that although MSCs effectively engraft in AMI tissue, this 
engraftment leads to downregulation of CP expression in the implanted MSCs. We
also found that pretransplantation cardiac specification of MSCs by exposure of
the cells to transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-ß1) led to sustained MSC CP
expression without altering engraftment efficiency. This increase in CP
expression was associated with greater improvement in cardiac function 1 and 4
weeks after AMI with TGF-ß1-pretreated MSCs. We discovered that the
TGF-ß1-enhanced cardiac potential of MSCs was mediated by downregulation of
disabled-2 (Dab2) expression, suggesting an inverse correlation between Dab2
levels and CP expression/cardiac functional improvement after MSC engraftment.
Our investigations further demonstrate that loss of Dab2 expression was
sufficient to induce MSC CP expression and improve cardiac function after MSC
engraftment after AMI. In summary, we define a novel role for the TGF-ß1 receptor
adaptor protein Dab2 as a regulator of CP expression in MSCs and its potential as
a molecular target for the enhancement of stem cell cardiac specification for
transplantation therapies.

PMID: 20666606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jan;226(1):248-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22336.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 forms a complex with GATA4 and is involved in the
differentiation of mouse ES cells into cardiomyocytes.

Kaichi S(1), Takaya T, Morimoto T, Sunagawa Y, Kawamura T, Ono K, Shimatsu A,
Baba S, Heike T, Nakahata T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

The treatment of ES cells with trichostatin A (TSA), an HDAC inhibitor, induces
the acetylation of GATA4 as well as histones, and facilitates their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Recently, we demonstrated that
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a core component of positive elongation
factor-b, is a novel GATA4-binding partner. The present study examined whether
Cdk9 forms a complex with GATA4 in mouse ES cells and is involved in their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Mouse ES cells and Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells, in
which green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed under the control of the
cardiac-specific Nkx2.5 promoter, were induced to differentiate on feeder-free
gelatin-coated plates. Immunoprecipitation/Western blotting in nuclear extracts
from mouse ES cells demonstrated that Cdk9 as well as cyclin T1 interact with
GATA4 during myocardial differentiation. TSA treatment increased
Nkx2.5/GFP-positive cells and endogenous mRNA levels of Nkx2.5 and atrial
natriuretic factor. To determine the role of Cdk9 in myocardial cell
differentiation, we examined the effects of a dominant-negative form of Cdk9
(DN-Cdk9), which loses its kinase activity, and a Cdk9 kinase inhibitor,
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole (DRB) on TSA-induced myocardial cell
differentiation. The introduction of the DN-Cdk9 inhibited TSA-induced increase
in GFP expression in Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells. The administration of DRB into ES cells
significantly inhibited TSA-induced increase of endogenous Nkx2.5 mRNA levels in 
ES cells as well as GFP expression in Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells. These findings
demonstrate that Cdk9 is involved in the differentiation of mouse ES cells into
cardiomyocytes by interacting with GATA4.

PMID: 20665673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Sep;26(3):365-72.

GATA-4 promotes the differentiation of P19 cells into cardiac myocytes.

Hu DL(1), Chen FK, Liu YQ, Sheng YH, Yang R, Kong XQ, Cao KJ, Gu HT, Qian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, PR China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of GATA-4 on the
differentiation of P19 cells into cardiomyocytes and to examine the relationship 
between GATA-4 and cardiomyocytes. We constructed vectors to overexpress and
silence GATA-4. These vectors, as well as empty ones were transfected into P19
cells. Subsequently, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blot analysis were performed. The morphology of P19 cells during
differentiation was observed using an inverted microscope. Total RNA was
extracted from P19 cells. We used real-time PCR to evaluate the expression levels
of 6 genes: GATA-4, GATA-6, transthyretin (TTR), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), Nkx2.5,
and alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC). The gene expression pattern of these 6 
genes is graphically shown for each group. The GATA-4 mRNA level in cells
overexpressing GATA-4 was notably higher than that in the controls, whereas the
levels in the controls were notably higher than those in the GATA-4-silenced P19 
cells. The cell lines overexpressing GATA-4 expressed higher levels of Nkx2.5 and
alpha-MHC than the controls. However, the controls expressed higher levels of
AFP, GATA-6 and TTR than the cells overexpressing GATA-4. The RNAi group
expressed lower levels of TTR, Nkx2.5, and alpha-MHC than the controls, but there
were no differences in the RNAi group and the controls with regard to the
expression levels of AFP and GATA-6. The gene expression pattern in the cells
overexpressing GATA-4 was biased toward the Nkx2.5 and alpha-MHC. On the other
hand, the gene expression pattern in GATA-4-silenced cells and the controls was
biased toward the TTR and AFP. The overexpression of GATA-4 enhances the
differentiation of P19 cells into cardiac myocytes, whereas its down-regulation
suppresses this trend.

PMID: 20664952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Nov 11;411(21-22):1741-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.021.
Epub 2010 Jul 24.

A novel mutation of GATA4 in a familial atrial septal defect.

Chen Y(1), Mao J, Sun Y, Zhang Q, Cheng HB, Yan WH, Choy KW, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproduction and Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province 215002, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have identified that mutations in a few genes,
including T-BOX5, NKX2-5, EVC and GATA4, are associated with atrial septal defect
(ASD).
METHODS: A family of three generations with 4 members who were affected with ASD 
was investigated. To exclude the presence of any sub-microscopic chromosomal
imbalance, high-resolution 1M array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) was performed. SNaPShot was used to certify the specificity of the finding
mutation in the other family members. The coding region of GATA4 and NKX2-5 genes
was screened by sequencing in another 30 cases including 10 cases of ventricular 
septal defect (VSD), 10 cases of atrial septal defect (ASD), 8 cases of VSD
combined with ASD and 2 cases of atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD).
RESULTS: No pathogenic copy number variant was detected by aCGH in the four
affected family members with ASD. A novel non-synonymous variant, c.839C>T
(T280M) in GATA4, was identified and segregated with all the ASD patients within 
this Chinese family. Such mutation was absent in other family members or present 
among sporadic CHD patients. In addition, we identified a non-synonymous variant 
in the NKX2-5 gene (P257A) associated with one congenital heart disease patient
with VSD. Both mutations were not identified among healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: T280M mutation of GATA4 is suggested to be associated with ASD in
this Chinese family.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20659440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2010 May;38(5):429-34.

[Genetic screening for novel GATA4 mutations associated with congenital atrial
septal defect].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Li XM, Xin YF, Wang LJ, Xu WJ, Hu DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongji University Affiliated East Hospital, Shanghai
200120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the gene GATA4 for novel mutations associated with
congenital atrial septal defect (ASD).
METHODS: The clinical data and peripheral venous blood specimen from 85 unrelated
subjects with congenital ASD were collected and analyzed in contrast to 200
healthy individuals. The coding exons and the exon/intron boundaries of GATA4
gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced using the
di-deoxynucleotide chain termination procedure. The obtained sequences were
aligned with those publicized in GenBank with the help of programme BLAST to
identify the sequence variations. The software Clustal W was applied to analysis 
of the conservation of altered amino acids.
RESULTS: Three novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations were identified in 3
of 85 ASD patients, respectively. Namely, the triplet substitutions of ATG for
GTG at codon 267, GCC for ACC at codon 354, and CAA for CCA at codon 407,
predicting the conversions of valine into methionine at amino acid residue 267
(V267M), threonine into alanine at amino acid residue 354 (T354A), and proline
into glutamine at amino acid residue 407 (P407Q), were identified. No mutation
was detected in 200 healthy controls. A cross-species alignment of GATA4 encoded 
protein sequences showed that the valine at amino acid residue 267 and proline at
amino acid residue 407 were completely conserved evolutionarily.
CONCLUSION: Three novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations were identified in 
patients with congenital ASD, which reveals new molecular etiology responsible
for ASD, and contributes to the early prophylaxis and therapy for ASD.

PMID: 20654103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 13;5(7):e11513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011513.

All-trans retinoic acid directs urothelial specification of murine embryonic stem
cells via GATA4/6 signaling mechanisms.

Mauney JR(1), Ramachandran A, Yu RN, Daley GQ, Adam RM, Estrada CR.

Author information: 
(1)Urological Diseases Research Center, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The urinary bladder and associated tract are lined by the urothelium, a
transitional epithelium that acts as a specialized permeability barrier that
protects the underlying tissue from urine via expression of a highly specific
group of proteins known as the uroplakins (UP). To date, our understanding of the
developmental processes responsible for urothelial differentiation has been
hampered due to the lack of suitable models. In this study, we describe a novel
in vitro cell culture system for derivation of urothelial cells from murine
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) following cultivation on collagen matrices in the
presence all trans retinoic acid (RA). Upon stimulation with micromolar
concentrations of RA, ESCs significantly downregulated the pluripotency factor
OCT-4 but markedly upregulated UP1A, UP1B, UP2, UP3A, and UP3B mRNA levels in
comparison to naïve ESCs and spontaneously differentiating controls. Pan-UP
protein expression was associated with both p63- and cytokeratin 20-positive
cells in discrete aggregating populations of ESCs following 9 and 14 days of RA
stimulation. Analysis of endodermal transcription factors such as GATA4 and GATA6
revealed significant upregulation and nuclear enrichment in RA-treated UP2-GFP+
populations. GATA4-/- and GATA6-/- transgenic ESC lines revealed substantial
attenuation of RA-mediated UP expression in comparison to wild type controls. In 
addition, EMSA analysis revealed that RA treatment induced formation of
transcriptional complexes containing GATA4/6 on both UP1B and UP2 promoter
fragments containing putative GATA factor binding sites. Collectively, these data
suggest that RA mediates ESC specification toward a urothelial lineage via
GATA4/6-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC2903484
PMID: 20644631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 13;399(1):42-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.031. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Transplantation of marrow-derived cardiac stem cells carried in designer
self-assembling peptide nanofibers improves cardiac function after myocardial
infarction.

Guo HD(1), Cui GH, Wang HJ, Tan YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology and Embryology, Shanghai Medical School of
Fudan University, China.

Progress in stem cell transplantation for the treatment of myocardial infarction 
is hampered by the poor retention and survival of the implanted cells. To enhance
cell survival and differentiation and thereby improve the efficiency of stem cell
therapy, we constructed a novel self-assembling peptide by attaching an RGDSP
cell-adhesion motif to the self-assembling peptide RADA16.
c-kit(pos)/Nkx2.5(low)/GATA4(low) marrow-derived cardiac stem cells (MCSCs),
which have a specific potential to differentiate into cardiomyocytes, were
isolated from rat bone marrow. The cytoprotective effects of RGDSP scaffolds were
assessed by exposure of MCSCs to anoxia in vitro. The efficacy of transplanting
MCSCs in RGDSP scaffolds was evaluated in a female rat MI model. The designer
self-assembling peptide self-assembled into RGDSP nanofiber scaffolds under
physiological conditions. RGDSP scaffolds were beneficial for the growth of MCSCs
and protected them from apoptosis and necrosis caused by anoxia. In a rat MI
model, cardiac function was improved and collagen deposition was markedly reduced
in the group receiving MCSCs in RGDSP scaffolds compared with groups receiving
MCSCs alone, RGDSP scaffolds alone or MCSCs in RADA16 scaffolds. There were more 
surviving MCSCs in the group receiving MCSCs in RGDSP scaffolds than in the
groups receiving MCSCs alone or MCSCs in RADA16 scaffolds. Most of the Y
chromosome-positive cells expressed cardiac troponin T and connexin43 (Cx-43).
These results suggest that RGDSP scaffolds provide a suitable microenvironment
for the survival and differentiation of MCSCs. RGDSP scaffolds enhanced the
efficacy of MCSC transplantation to repair myocardium and improve cardiac
function.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):662-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.84. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

A novel GATA6 mutation in patients with tetralogy of Fallot or atrial septal
defect.

Lin X(1), Huo Z, Liu X, Zhang Y, Li L, Zhao H, Yan B, Liu Y, Yang Y, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, PR China.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):637-8.

GATA6 is a member of the GATA family of transcription factors, and its expression
and functions overlap with those of GATA4 during heart development. Mutations in 
GATA4 have been related to human congenital heart diseases (CHDs) in several
studies, whereas mutations in GATA6 have only recently been reported in patients 
with persistent truncus arteriosus. Animal experiments have revealed critical
roles for GATA6 in the development of the myocardium and cardiac morphogenesis,
thereby highlighting the potential involvement of GATA6 defects in the
pathogenesis of CHDs. Here, we screened the GATA6 in 270 individuals with
sporadic CHDs by direct sequencing. After identification of the mutation, a
luciferase reporter assay and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
were performed to detect functional changes in the mutant transcription factor.
The same heterozygous missense mutation (Ser184Asn) was identified in three
patients, including one with tetralogy of Fallot and two with atrial septal
defects. This mutation was not found in 500 unrelated ethnically matched healthy 
subjects. Direct sequencing of this region in the parents of these three patients
revealed the same mutation in one of the parents for each patient, and one of the
parent carriers presented with a bicuspid aortic valve. Biological analysis
revealed clearly decreased transcriptional activity of GATA6 Ser184Asn in vitro. 
All these data suggest that GATA6 Ser184Asn is a novel mutation associated with
CHDs and has an important role in disease pathogenesis.

PMID: 20631719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jan;226(1):94-102. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22309.

Peritoneal dialysate effluent during peritonitis induces human cardiomyocyte
apoptosis by regulating the expression of GATA-4 and Bcl-2 families.

Wang HH(1), Li PC, Huang HJ, Lee TY, Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Cardiovascular event and infection are leading causes of death from peritoneal
dialysis (PD). This study examined in vitro cellular mechanism for cardiotoxicity
induced by PD-related peritonitis. Cultured human cardiomyocytes were treated
with PD effluent (PDE) during peritonitis (PPDE), and effects of PPDE on cultured
cardiomyocytes in terms of apoptosis, with expression its related genes assessed.
Results showed PPDE treatment of cardiomyocyte leading to onset of apoptosis, as 
confirmed by phosphatidylserine exposure plus DNA fragmentation and damage. This 
apoptosis is mediated by reduced Bcl-2/Bax and Bcl-x(L)/Bax ratios, as well as
reduced expression of GATA-4, an important cardiomyocyte survival factor, at the 
level of transcription. These changes activated pro-apoptotic pathways. PPDE
treatment also inhibited ERK signals, contributing to cardiotoxicity. Our
findings revealed that PPDE contains potent pro-apoptotic factors that regulate
expression of GATA-4 and Bcl-2 families, inducing cultured cardiomyocyte
apoptosis. This pinpoints a key role of apoptosis in PD-associated cardiovascular
events, along with a potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 20625998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Exp Hematol. 2010 Nov;38(11):1105-14. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.06.013. Epub
2010 Jul 29.

Assessment of human MAPCs for stem cell transplantation and cardiac regeneration 
after myocardial infarction in SCID mice.

Dimomeletis I(1), Deindl E, Zaruba M, Groebner M, Zahler S, Laslo SM, David R,
Kostin S, Deutsch MA, Assmann G, Mueller-Hoecker J, Feuring-Buske M, Franz WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Klinikum Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical studies suggest that transplantation of total bone marrow
(BM) after myocardial infarction (MI) is feasible and potentially effective.
However, focusing on a defined BM-derived stem cell type may enable a more
specific and optimized treatment. Multilineage differentiation potential makes
BM-derived multipotent adult progenitor cells (MAPCs) a promising stem cell pool 
for regenerative purposes. We analyzed the cardioregenerative potential of human 
MAPCs in a murine model of myocardial infarction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human MAPCs were selected by negative depletion of
CD45(+)/glycophorin(+) BM cells and plated on fibronectin-coated dishes. In
vitro, stem cells were analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. In vivo, we transplanted human MAPCs (5 × 10(5)) by intramyocardial
injection after MI in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) beige mice. Six and 
30 days after the surgical procedure, pressure-volume relationships were
investigated in vivo. Heart tissues were analyzed immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction experiments on early
human MAPC passages evidenced an expression of Oct-4, a stem cell marker
indicating pluripotency. In later passages, cardiac markers (Nkx2.5, GATA4,
MLC-2v, MLC-2a, ANP, cTnT, cTnI,) and smooth muscle cell markers (SMA, SM22a)
were expressed. Transplantation of human MAPCs into the ischemic border zone
after MI resulted in an improved cardiac function at day 6 (ejection fraction,
26% vs 20%) and day 30 (ejection fraction, 30% vs 23%). Confirmation of human
MAPC marker vimentin in immunohistochemistry demonstrated that human MAPC
integrated in the peri-infarct region. The proliferation marker Ki67 was absent
in immunohistochemistry and teratoma formation was not found, indicating no
tumorous potential of transplanted human MAPCs in the tumor-sensitive SCID model.
CONCLUSIONS: Transplantation of human MAPCs after MI ameliorates myocardial
function, which may be explained by trophic effects of human MAPCs. Lack of
evidence of tumorous potential in the tumor-sensitive SCID model indicates that
human MAPCs may deliver an effective and safe stem cell pool for potential
treatment of ischemic heart disease.

Copyright © 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20621157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G652-60. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00221.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Intestinal adaptation after ileal interposition surgery increases bile acid
recycling and protects against obesity-related comorbidities.

Kohli R(1), Kirby M, Setchell KD, Jha P, Klustaitis K, Woollett LA, Pfluger PT,
Balistreri WF, Tso P, Jandacek RJ, Woods SC, Heubi JE, Tschoep MH, D'Alessio DA, 
Shroyer NF, Seeley RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio, USA. rohit.kohli@cchmc.org

Surgical interposition of distal ileum into the proximal jejunum is a bariatric
procedure that improves the metabolic syndrome. Changes in intestinal and hepatic
physiology after ileal interposition (transposition) surgery (IIS) are not well
understood. Our aim was to elucidate the adaptation of the interposed ileum,
which we hypothesized, would lead to early bile acid reabsorption in the
interposed ileum, thus short circuiting enterohepatic bile acid recycling to more
proximal bowel segments. Rats with diet-induced obesity were randomized to IIS,
with 10 cm of ileum repositioned distal to the duodenum, or sham surgery. A
subgroup of sham rats was pair-fed to IIS rats. Physiological parameters were
measured until 6 wk postsurgery. IIS rats ate less and lost more weight for the
first 2 wk postsurgery. At study completion, body weights were not different, but
IIS rats had reversed components of the metabolic syndrome. The interposed ileal 
segment adapted to a more jejunum-like villi length, mucosal surface area, and
GATA4/ILBP mRNA. The interposed segment retained capacity for bile acid
reabsorption and anorectic hormone secretion with the presence of ASBT and
glucagon-like-peptide-1-positive cells in the villi. IIS rats had reduced primary
bile acid levels in the proximal intestinal tract and higher primary bile acid
levels in the serum, suggesting an early and efficient reabsorption of primary
bile acids. IIS rats also had increased taurine and glycine-conjugated serum bile
acids and reduced fecal bile acid loss. There was decreased hepatic Cyp27A1 mRNA 
with no changes in hepatic FXR, SHP, or NTCP expression. IIS protects against the
metabolic syndrome through short-circuiting enterohepatic bile acid recycling.
There is early reabsorption of primary bile acids despite selective
"jejunization" of the interposed ileal segment. Changes in serum bile acids or
bile acid enterohepatic recycling may mediate the metabolic benefits seen after
bariatric surgery.

PMCID: PMC2950688
PMID: 20595624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Nov 1;182(9):1098-104. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201002-0222OC. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Wood smoke exposure and gene promoter methylation are associated with increased
risk for COPD in smokers.

Sood A(1), Petersen H, Blanchette CM, Meek P, Picchi MA, Belinsky SA, Tesfaigzi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

RATIONALE: Wood smoke-associated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
common in women in developing countries but has not been adequately described in 
developed countries.
OBJECTIVES: Our objective was to determine whether wood smoke exposure was a risk
factor for COPD in a population of smokers in the United States and whether
aberrant gene promoter methylation in sputum may modify this association.
METHODS: For this cross-sectional study, 1,827 subjects were drawn from the
Lovelace Smokers' Cohort, a predominantly female cohort of smokers. Wood smoke
exposure was self-reported. Postbronchodilator spirometry was obtained, and COPD 
outcomes studied included percent predicted FEV1, airflow obstruction, and
chronic bronchitis. Effect modification of wood smoke exposure with current
cigarette smoke, ethnicity, sex, and promoter methylation of lung cancer-related 
genes in sputum on COPD outcomes were separately explored. Multivariable logistic
and poisson regression models were used for binary and rate-based outcomes,
respectively.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Self-reported wood smoke exposure was
independently associated with a lower percent predicted FEV1 (point estimate [±
SE] -0.03 ± 0.01) and a higher prevalence of airflow obstruction and chronic
bronchitis (odds ratio, 1.96; 95% confidence interval, 1.52-2.52 and 1.64 (95%
confidence interval, 1.31-2.06, respectively). These associations were stronger
among current cigarette smokers, non-Hispanic whites, and men. Wood smoke
exposure interacted in a multiplicative manner with aberrant promoter methylation
of the p16 or GATA4 genes on lower percent predicted FEV1.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies identify a novel link between wood smoke exposure and 
gene promoter methylation that synergistically increases the risk for reduced
lung function in cigarette smokers.

PMCID: PMC3001253
PMID: 20595226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Dis Markers. 2010;28(5):287-92. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2010-0703.

Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis of GATA4 gene copy
number variations in patients with isolated congenital heart disease.

Guida V(1), Lepri F, Vijzelaar R, De Zorzi A, Versacci P, Digilio MC, Marino B,
De Luca A, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Rome,
Italy.

GATA4 mutations are found in patients with different isolated congenital heart
defects (CHDs), mostly cardiac septal defects and tetralogy of Fallot. In
addition, GATA4 is supposed to be the responsible gene for the CHDs in the
chromosomal 8p23 deletion syndrome, which is recognized as a malformation
syndrome with clinical symptoms of facial anomalies, microcephaly, mental
retardation, and congenital heart defects. Thus far, no study has been carried
out to investigate the role of GATA4 copy number variations (CNVs) in
non-syndromic CHDs. To explore the possible occurrence of GATA4 gene CNVs in
isolated CHDs, we analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) a cohort of 161 non-syndromic patients with cardiac anomalies previously
associated with GATA4 gene mutations. The patients were mutation-negative for
GATA4, NKX2.5, and FOG2 genes after screening with denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography. MLPA analysis revealed that normalized MLPA signals were
all found within the normal range values for all exons in all patients, excluding
a major contribution of GATA4 gene CNVs in CHD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3833239
PMID: 20592452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell Transplant. 2010;19(11):1397-412. doi: 10.3727/096368910X513955. Epub 2010
Jun 29.

Cardiac cell generation from encapsulated embryonic stem cells in static and
scalable culture systems.

Jing D(1), Parikh A, Tzanakakis ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA.

Heart diseases are major causes of morbidity and mortality linked to extensive
loss of cardiac cells. Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) give rise to
cardiomyocyte-like cells, which may be used in heart cell replacement therapies. 
Most cardiogenic differentiation protocols involve the culture of ESCs as
embryoid bodies (EBs). Stirred-suspension bioreactor cultures of ESC aggregates
may be employed for scaling up the production of cardiomyocyte progeny but the
wide range of EB sizes and the unknown effects of the hydrodynamic environment on
differentiating EBs are some of the major challenges in tightly controlling the
differentiation outcome. Here, we explored the cardiogenic potential of mouse
ESCs (mESCs) and human ESCs (hESCs) encapsulated in poly-L-lysine (pLL)-coated
alginate capsules. Liquefaction of the capsule core led to the formation of
single ESC aggregates within each bead and their average size depended on the
concentration of seeded ESCs. Encapsulated mESCs were directed along
cardiomyogenic lineages in dishes under serum-free conditions with the addition
of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4). Human ESCs in pLL-layered liquid core
(LC) alginate beads were also differentiated towards heart cells in
serum-containing media. Besides the robust cell proliferation, higher fractions
of cells expressing cardiac markers were detected in ESCs encapsulated in LC than
in solid beads. Furthermore, we demonstrated for the first time that ESCs
encapsulated in pLL-layered LC alginate beads can be coaxed towards heart cells
in stirred-suspension bioreactors. Encapsulated ESCs yielded higher fractions of 
Nkx2.5- and GATA4-positive cells in the bioreactor compared to dish cultures.
Differentiated cells formed beating foci that responded to chronotropic agents in
an organotypic manner. Our findings warrant further development and
implementation of microencapsulation technologies in conjunction with bioreactor 
cultivation to enable the production of stem cell-derived cardiac cells
appropriate for clinical therapies and applications.

PMCID: PMC3023918
PMID: 20587137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Pharmacogenomics J. 2011 Oct;11(5):368-74. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2010.51. Epub 2010
Jun 29.

Involvement of the atrial natriuretic peptide transcription factor GATA4 in
alcohol dependence, relapse risk and treatment response to acamprosate.

Kiefer F(1), Witt SH, Frank J, Richter A, Treutlein J, Lemenager T, Nöthen MM,
Cichon S, Batra A, Berner M, Wodarz N, Zimmermann US, Spanagel R, Wiedemann K,
Smolka MN, Heinz A, Rietschel M, Mann K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Addictive Behavior and Addiction Medicine, Central Institute of 
Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany. falk.kiefer@zi-mannheim.de

In alcoholism, both relapse to alcohol drinking and treatment response are
suggested to be genetically modulated. This study set out to determine whether
the top 15 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of a recent genome-wide
association (GWA) and follow-up study of alcohol dependence are associated with
relapse behavior and pharmacological treatment response in 374 alcohol-dependent 
subjects who underwent a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 
acamprosate, naltrexone or placebo. The single nucleotide polymorphism,
rs13273672, an intronic SNP in the gene for GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4), was
associated with relapse within the 90-day medical treatment period (P<0.01).
Subsequent pharmacogenetic analyses showed that this association was mainly based
on patients treated with acamprosate (P<0.01). In line with the observation that 
natriuretic peptide promoters are modulated by GATA4, a significant gene dose
effect on the variance of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) plasma concentration
in the different GATA4 genotypes (P<0.01) was found. Hence, genetic variations in
GATA4 might influence relapse and treatment response to acamprosate in
alcohol-dependent patients via modulation of ANP plasma levels. These results
could help to identify those alcohol-dependent patients who may be at an
increased risk of relapse and who may better respond to treatment with
acamprosate.

PMID: 20585342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Gut. 2010 Jul;59(7):888-95. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.204990.

Conditional Gata4 deletion in mice induces bile acid absorption in the proximal
small intestine.

Beuling E(1), Kerkhof IM, Nicksa GA, Giuffrida MJ, Haywood J, aan de Kerk DJ,
Piaseckyj CM, Pu WT, Buchmiller TL, Dawson PA, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)GI/Cell Biology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The transcription factor GATA4 is expressed throughout most 
of the small intestine except distal ileum, and restricts expression of the
apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT), the rate-limiting
intestinal bile acid transporter, to distal ileum. The hypothesis was tested that
reduction of GATA4 activity in mouse small intestine results in an induction of
bile acid transport in proximal small intestine sufficient to restore bile acid
absorption and homeostasis after ileocaecal resection (ICR).
METHODS: Bile acid homeostasis was characterised in non-surgical, sham or ICR
mice using two recombinant Gata4 models in which Asbt expression is induced to
different levels.
RESULTS: Reduction of intestinal GATA4 activity resulted in an induction of ASBT 
expression, bile acid absorption and expression of bile acid-responsive genes in 
proximal small intestine, and a reduction of luminal bile acids in distal small
intestine. While faecal bile acid excretion and bile acid pool size remained
unchanged, the bile acid pool became more hydrophilic due to a relative increase 
in tauro-beta-muricholate absorption. Furthermore, proximal induction of Asbt in 
both Gata4 mutant models corrected ICR-associated bile acid malabsorption,
reversing the decrease in bile acid pool size and increase in faecal bile acid
excretion and hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduction of intestinal GATA4 activity induces bile acid absorption 
in proximal small intestine without inducing major changes in bile acid
homeostasis. This induction is sufficient to correct bile acid malabsorption
caused by ICR in mice.

PMCID: PMC2981798
PMID: 20581237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Hepatology. 2010 Jul;52(1):313-26. doi: 10.1002/hep.23618.

Liver sinusoidal endothelium: a microenvironment-dependent differentiation
program in rat including the novel junctional protein liver endothelial
differentiation-associated protein-1.

Géraud C(1), Schledzewski K, Demory A, Klein D, Kaus M, Peyre F, Sticht C,
Evdokimov K, Lu S, Schmieder A, Goerdt S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Medical
Center and Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
cyrill.geraud@umm.de

Liver sinusoidal endothelium (LSEC) is a prime example of organ-specific
microvascular differentiation and functions. Disease-associated capillarization
of LSEC in vivo and dedifferentiation of LSEC in vitro indicate the importance of
the hepatic microenvironment. To identify the LSEC-specific molecular
differentiation program in the rat we used a two-sided gene expression profiling 
approach comparing LSEC freshly isolated ex vivo with both lung microvascular
endothelial cells (LMEC) and with LSEC cultured for 42 hours. The LSEC signature 
consisted of 48 genes both down-regulated in LMEC and in LSEC upon culture (fold 
change >7 in at least one comparison); quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction confirmation of these genes included numerous family
members and signaling pathway-associated molecules. The LSEC differentiation
program comprised distinct sets of growth (Wnt2, Fzd4, 5, 9, Wls, vascular
endothelial growth factors [VEGFR] 1, 2, 3, Nrp2) and transcription factors
(Gata4, Lmo3, Tcfec, Maf) as well as endocytosis-related (Stabilin-1/2, Lyve1,
and Ehd3) and cytoskeleton-associated molecules (Rnd3/RhoE). Specific gene
induction in cultured LSEC versus freshly isolated LSEC as well as LMEC (Esm-1,
Aatf) and up-regulation of gene expression to LMEC levels (CXCR4, Apelin)
confirmed true transdifferentiation of LSEC in vitro. In addition, our analysis
identified a novel 26-kDa single-pass transmembrane protein, liver endothelial
differentiation-associated protein (Leda)-1, that was selectively expressed in
all liver endothelial cells and preferentially localized to the abluminal cell
surface. Upon forced overexpression in MDCK cells, Leda-1 was sorted
basolaterally to E-cadherin-positive adherens junctions, suggesting functional
involvement in cell adhesion and polarity.CONCLUSION: Comparative microvascular
analysis in rat identified a hepatic microenvironment-dependent LSEC-specific
differentiation program including the novel junctional molecule Leda-1.

PMID: 20578158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Circ Res. 2010 Jun 25;106(12):1789-90. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.222216.

Deciphering the signals specifying the proepicardium.

Svensson EC.

PMCID: PMC2895491
PMID: 20576940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G643-51. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00515.2009. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Inactivation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4{alpha} mediates alcohol-induced
downregulation of intestinal tight junction proteins.

Zhong W(1), Zhao Y, McClain CJ, Kang YJ, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of Louisville School of Medicine, KY 40292, USA.

Chronic alcohol exposure has been shown to increase the gut permeability in the
distal intestine, in part, through induction of zinc deficiency. The present
study evaluated the molecular mechanisms whereby zinc deficiency mediates
alcohol-induced intestinal barrier dysfunction. Examination of zinc finger
transcription factors in the gastrointestinal tract of mice revealed a prominent 
distribution of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha). HNF-4alpha
exclusively localizes in the epithelial nuclei and exhibited an increased
abundance in mRNA and protein levels in the distal intestine. Chronic alcohol
exposure to mice repressed the HNF-4alpha gene expression in the ileum and
reduced the protein level and DNA binding activity of HNF-4alpha in all of the
intestinal segments with the most remarkable changes in the ileum. Chronic
alcohol exposure also decreased the mRNA levels of tight junction proteins,
particularly in the ileum. Caco-2 cell culture studies were conducted to
determine the role of HNF-4alpha in regulation of the epithelial tight junction
and barrier function. Knockdown of HNF-4alpha in Caco-2 cells decreased the mRNA 
and protein levels of tight junction proteins in association with disruption of
the epithelial barrier. Alcohol treatment inactivated HNF-4alpha, which was
prevented by N-acetyl-cysteine or zinc. The link between zinc and HNF-4alpha
function was confirmed by zinc deprivation, which inhibited HNF-4alpha DNA
binding activity. These results indicate that inactivation of HNF-4alpha due to
oxidative stress and zinc deficiency is likely a novel mechanism contributing to 
the deleterious effects of alcohol on the tight junctions and the intestinal
barrier function.

PMCID: PMC2950677
PMID: 20576917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Med Chem. 2010 Jul 22;53(14):5197-212. doi: 10.1021/jm100217a.

(Bis)urea and (bis)thiourea inhibitors of lysine-specific demethylase 1 as
epigenetic modulators.

Sharma SK(1), Wu Y, Steinbergs N, Crowley ML, Hanson AS, Casero RA, Woster PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack
Avenue, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

The recently discovered enzyme lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) plays an
important role in the epigenetic control of gene expression, and aberrant gene
silencing secondary to LSD1 overexpression is thought to contribute to the
development of cancer. We recently reported a series of (bis)guanidines and
(bis)biguanides that are potent inhibitors of LSD1 and induce the re-expression
of aberrantly silenced tumor suppressor genes in tumor cells in vitro. We now
report a series of isosteric ureas and thioureas that are also potent inhibitors 
of LSD1. These compounds induce increases in methylation at the histone 3 lysine 
4 (H3K4) chromatin mark, a specific target of LSD1, in Calu-6 lung carcinoma
cells. In addition, these analogues increase cellular levels of secreted
frizzle-related protein (SFRP) 2 and transcription factor GATA4. These compounds 
represent an important new series of epigenetic modulators with the potential for
use as antitumor agents.

PMCID: PMC2920492
PMID: 20568780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 17;5(6):e11167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011167.

BMP-2/6 heterodimer is more effective than BMP-2 or BMP-6 homodimers as inductor 
of differentiation of human embryonic stem cells.

Valera E(1), Isaacs MJ, Kawakami Y, Izpisúa Belmonte JC, Choe S.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling pathways are involved in
differentiation of stem cells into diverse cell types, and thus BMPs can be used 
as main guidance molecules for in vitro differentiation of human stem cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have analyzed the ability for inducing
differentiation of the heterodimer BMP-2/BMP-6 (BMP-2/6) compared to the
homodimers BMP-2 or BMP-6, using human embryonic stem (hES) cells H9 as model
system. When incubated in a medium with high concentration of basic fibroblastic 
growth factor (FGF2), 100 ng/ml of human recombinant BMPs induced morphological
changes and differentiation of hES cells in 24 to 48 hours. After 5 days,
expression of differentiation markers was induced and quantified by quantitative 
PCR (qPCR) and flow cytometry. BMP-2/6 exhibited stronger activity for the
induction of the expression of trophectodermal (CDX2) and endodermal (SOX17,
GATA4, AFP) markers than BMP-2 or BMP-6 homodimers. BMP-2/6 also induced the
expression of BMPR2 gene more effectively than BMP-2 or BMP-6 when used at the
same concentration and time. Moreover, the percentage of cells expressing the
surface endodermal marker CXCR4 was also increased for the heterodimer when
compared to both homodimers. BMP-2/6 was a more potent activator of
Smad-dependent (SMAD1/5) and Smad-independent signaling (mitogen-activated
protein kinases ERK and p38) than BMP-2 and BMP-6, and the activation of these
pathways might play a role in its increased potency for inducing hES cell
differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, we conclude that BMP-2/6 is more potent than
BMP-2 or BMP-6 for inducing differentiation of hES cells, and it can be used as a
more powerful substitute of these BMPs in in vitro differentiation guidance.

PMCID: PMC2887366
PMID: 20567515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2010 Feb;3(1):61-5. doi: 10.1007/s12265-009-9144-3. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Cardiac transcription factors driven lineage-specification of adult stem cells.

Armiñán A(1), Gandía C, García-Verdugo JM, Lledó E, Mullor JL, Montero JA,
Sepúlveda P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain.

Differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSC) into the
cardiac lineage has been assayed using different approaches such as coculture
with cardiac or embryonic cells, treatment with factors, or by seeding cells in
organotypic cultures. In most cases, differentiation was evaluated in terms of
expression of cardiac-specific markers at protein or molecular level,
electrophysiological properties, and formation of sarcomers in differentiated
cells. As observed in embryonic stem cells and cardiac progenitors,
differentiation of MSC towards the cardiac lineage was preceded by translocation 
of NKX2.5 and GATA4 transcription factors to the nucleus. Here, we induce
differentiation of hBMSC towards the cardiac lineage using coculture with
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Although important ultrastructural changes occurred 
during the course of differentiation, sarcomerogenesis was not fully achieved
even after long periods of time. Nevertheless, we show that the main cardiac
markers, NKX2.5 and GATA4, translocate to the nucleus in a process characteristic
of cardiac specification.

PMID: 20560034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jul 28;17(3):709-17. doi: 10.1677/ERC-10-0041. Print
2010 Sep.

GATA4 protects granulosa cell tumors from TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

Kyrönlahti A(1), Kauppinen M, Lind E, Unkila-Kallio L, Butzow R, Klefström J,
Wilson DB, Anttonen M, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, PO Box 22 Stenbäckinkatu 11,
00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Disturbances in granulosa cell apoptosis have been implicated in the pathogenesis
of human granulosa cell tumors (GCTs). Tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a potent cytokine that induces apoptosis in 
a variety of malignancies without toxic effects on benign cells. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the expression and functionality of the TRAIL receptors 
DR4 and DR5 in human GCTs. Additionally, we examined the role of GATA4, a
transcription factor expressed in normal and malignant granulosa cells, in
TRAIL-induced GCT apoptosis. For this purpose, a tissue microarray of 80 primary 
and 12 recurrent GCTs was subjected to immunohistochemistry for DR4 and DR5, and 
freshly isolated primary GCT cultures were utilized to evaluate the functional
effects of TRAIL on GCT cells. To clarify the role of GATA4 in the regulation of 
TRAIL-induced apoptosis, a human GCT-derived cell line (KGN) was transduced with 
lentiviral vectors expressing small hairpin RNAs targeting GATA4 or transfected
with adenovirus expressing either wild-type or dominant negative mutant GATA4. We
found that receptors DR4 and DR5 are expressed in a vast majority of GCTs as well
as in primary GCT cultures, and that TRAIL induces apoptosis in the primary GCT
cultures. Moreover, we showed that overexpressing GATA4 protects GCTs from
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in vitro, whereas disrupting GATA4 function induces
apoptosis and potentiates the apoptotic effect of TRAIL administration. Our
results demonstrate that the TRAIL pathway is functional in GCT cells, and
suggest that transcription factor GATA4 may function as a survival factor in this
ovarian malignancy.

PMID: 20554787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Sep 1;334(3):1023-30. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.170191.
Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Long-acting phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor tadalafil attenuates
doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy without interfering with chemotherapeutic
effect.

Koka S(1), Das A, Zhu SG, Durrant D, Xi L, Kukreja RC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Doxorubicin (DOX) is one of the most effective anticancer drugs. However, its
cardiotoxicity remains a clinical concern that severely restricts its therapeutic
usage. We designed this study to investigate whether tadalafil, a long-acting
phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitor, protects against DOX-induced
cardiotoxicity. We also sought to delineate the cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying tadalafil-induced cardioprotection. Male CF-1 outbred mice were
randomized into three groups (n = 15-24/group) to receive either saline (0.2 ml
i.p.), DOX (15 mg/kg, given by a single intraperitoneal injection), or tadalafil 
(4 mg/kg p.o. daily for 9 days) plus DOX. Left ventricular function was
subsequently assessed by transthoracic echocardiography and Millar conductance
catheter. Cardiac contractile function was impaired by DOX, and it was
significantly improved by cotreatment with tadalafil. Tadalafil attenuated
DOX-induced apoptosis and depletion of prosurvival proteins, including Bcl-2 and 
GATA-4, in myocardium. Cardiac oxidative stress was attenuated and antioxidant
capacity was enhanced by tadalafil possibly via up-regulation of mitochondrial
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). Moreover, the tadalafil-treated group demonstrated 
increased cardiac cGMP level and protein kinase G (PKG) activity. Tadalafil did
not interfere with the efficacy of DOX in killing human osteosarcoma cells in
vitro or its antitumor effect in vivo in tumor xenograft model. We conclude that 
tadalafil improved left ventricular function and prevented cardiomyocyte
apoptosis in DOX-induced cardiomyopathy through mechanisms involving
up-regulation of cGMP, PKG activity, and MnSOD level without interfering with the
chemotherapeutic benefits of DOX.

PMCID: PMC2939673
PMID: 20543097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;24(2):163-86. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2009.12.002.

Control of sex development.

Biason-Lauber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Diabetology, University Children's Hospital,
Steinwiesstrasse 75, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland. Anna.Lauber@kispi.uzh.ch

The process of sexual differentiation is central for reproduction of almost all
metazoan, and therefore, for maintenance of practically all multicellular
organisms. In sex development, we can distinguish two different processes, sex
determination, that is the developmental decision that directs the
undifferentiated embryo into a sexually dimorphic individual. In mammals, sex
determination equals gonadal development. The second process known as sex
differentiation takes place once the sex determination decision has been made
through factors produced by the gonads that determine the development of the
phenotypic sex. Most of the knowledge on the factors involved in sexual
development came from animal models and from studies of cases in whom the genetic
or the gonadal sex does not match the phenotypical sex, that is, patients
affected by disorders of sex development (DSDs). Generally speaking, factors
influencing sex determination are transcriptional regulators, whereas factors
important for sex differentiation are secreted hormones and their receptors. This
review focuses on these factors and whenever possible, references regarding the
'prismatic' clinical cases are given.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20541146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Sep;16(9):2901-13. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2009.0722.

Hypoxic culture maintains self-renewal and enhances embryoid body formation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Chen HF(1), Kuo HC, Lin SP, Chien CL, Chiang MS, Ho HN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine and the Hospital, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Hypoxic environment is theoretically more physiological for the growth of human
embryonic stem (hES) cells. It has been reported that hypoxic culture maintained 
better undifferentiation of hES cells, but the effects on differentiation are
less well established. The hES cells were thus cultured and compared in hypoxia
(2% oxygen [O2]) and normoxia (21% O2). The data showed that the undifferentiated
state of hES cells was maintained more favorably in hypoxia during prolonged
culture. Most tested genes belonging to FGF, TGF-beta/GMP, and Wnt signaling
pathways were enriched in undifferentiated hES cells and downregulated upon
differentiation, accompanied with differential expression of FGFR1, FGFR2, and
FRAT2 between hypoxia and normoxia. Higher P-Smad2/3 level was identified in
hypoxia, favoring the maintenance of hES cells in undifferentiation. Bisulfite
sequencing showed similar imprinting status between different O2 tensions at H19 
differentially methylated region (DMR) and KvDMR loci. Embryoid body formation
was enhanced in hypoxia accompanied with suppressed Sox17, Desmin, Gata4,
Brachyury, and Cdx2 expression. We concluded that hypoxia improved self-renewal
of hES cells through modulation of major signaling pathways and was also more
efficient for differentiation to embryoid bodies, though they might present with 
suppressed expression of some lineage-specific genes across all the three
embryonic germ layers and trophectoderm.

PMID: 20533883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 30;285(31):23639-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.101063. Epub
2010 Jun 3.

Stat3 directly controls the expression of Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 and is
essential for cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6 cells.

Snyder M(1), Huang XY, Zhang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The transcription factor Stat3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 
3) mediates many physiological processes, including embryogenesis, stem cell
self-renewal, and postnatal survival. In response to gp130 receptor activation,
Stat3 becomes phosphorylated by the receptor-associated Janus kinase, forms
dimers, and enters the nucleus where it binds to Stat3 target genes and regulates
their expression. In this report, we demonstrate that Stat3 binds directly to the
promoters and regulates the expression of three genes that are essential for
cardiac differentiation: Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4. We further demonstrate that
Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 expression is dependent on Stat3 in response to ligand
treatment and during ligand-independent differentiation of P19CL6 cells into
cardiomyocytes. Finally, we show that Stat3 is necessary for the differentiation 
of P19CL6 cells into beating cardiomyocytes. All together, these results
demonstrate that Stat3 is required for the differentiation of cardiomyocytes
through direct transcriptional regulation of Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4.

PMCID: PMC2911296
PMID: 20522556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Oct 1;88(1):130-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq178. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

Functional analysis of novel TBX5 T-box mutations associated with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Boogerd CJ(1), Dooijes D, Ilgun A, Mathijssen IB, Hordijk R, van de Laar IM, Rump
P, Veenstra-Knol HE, Moorman AF, Barnett P, Postma AV.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jan 1;89(1):253. Mathijssen, Inge B [added].

AIMS: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart/hand syndrome clinically characterized 
by upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in T-box transcription factor 
5 (TBX5) underlie this syndrome, the majority of which lead to premature stops.
In this study, we present our functional analyses of five (novel) missense TBX5
mutations identified in HOS patients, most of whom presented with severe cardiac 
malformations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Functional characterization of mutant proteins shows a
dramatic loss of DNA-binding capacity, as well as diminished binding to known
cardiac interaction partners NKX2-5 and GATA4. The disturbance of these
interactions leads to a loss of function, as measured by the reduced activation
of Nppa and FGF10 in rat heart derived cells, although with variable severity.
Two out of the five mutations are peculiar: one, p.H220del, is associated with
additional extra-cardiac defects, perhaps by interfering with other T-box
dependant pathways, and another, p.I106V, leads to limb defects only, which is
supported by its normal interaction with cardiac-specific interaction partners.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that these novel
missense mutations in TBX5 lead to functional haploinsufficiency and result in a 
reduced transcriptional activation of target genes, which is likely central to
the pathogenesis of HOS.

PMID: 20519243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010709.

A data integration approach to mapping OCT4 gene regulatory networks operative in
embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells.

Jung M(1), Peterson H, Chavez L, Kahlem P, Lehrach H, Vilo J, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics,
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. jung@molgen.mpg.de

It is essential to understand the network of transcription factors controlling
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and human embryonal carcinoma
cells (ECs) if we are to exploit these cells in regenerative medicine regimes.
Correlating gene expression levels after RNAi-based ablation of OCT4 function
with its downstream targets enables a better prediction of motif-specific driven 
expression modules pertinent for self-renewal and differentiation of embryonic
stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells.We initially identified putative
direct downstream targets of OCT4 by employing CHIP-on-chip analysis. A
comparison of three peak analysis programs revealed a refined list of OCT4
targets in the human EC cell line NCCIT, this list was then compared to
previously published OCT4 CHIP-on-chip datasets derived from both ES and EC
cells. We have verified an enriched POU-motif, discovered by a de novo approach, 
thus enabling us to define six distinct modules of OCT4 binding and regulation of
its target genes.A selection of these targets has been validated, like NANOG,
which harbours the evolutionarily conserved OCT4-SOX2 binding motif within its
proximal promoter. Other validated targets, which do not harbour the classical
HMG motif are USP44 and GADD45G, a key regulator of the cell cycle.
Over-expression of GADD45G in NCCIT cells resulted in an enrichment and
up-regulation of genes associated with the cell cycle (CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDK6 and
MAPK4) and developmental processes (BMP4, HAND1, EOMES, ID2, GATA4, GATA5, ISL1
and MSX1). A comparison of positively regulated OCT4 targets common to EC and ES 
cells identified genes such as NANOG, PHC1, USP44, SOX2, PHF17 and OCT4, thus
further confirming their universal role in maintaining self-renewal in both cell 
types. Finally we have created a user-friendly database
(http://biit.cs.ut.ee/escd/), integrating all OCT4 and stem cell related datasets
in both human and mouse ES and EC cells.In the current era of systems biology
driven research, we envisage that our integrated embryonic stem cell database
will prove beneficial to the booming field of ES, iPS and cancer research.

PMCID: PMC2873957
PMID: 20505756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2010;28(3):129-39. doi: 10.1159/000313331. Epub 2010 May 26.

Retinoid pathway and congenital diaphragmatic hernia: hypothesis from the
analysis of chromosomal abnormalities.

Goumy C(1), Gouas L, Marceau G, Coste K, Veronese L, Gallot D, Sapin V, Vago P,
Tchirkov A.

Author information: 
(1)University Clermont, UFR Médecine, Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, CHU
Clermont-Ferrand, France. cgoumy@chu-clermontferrand.fr

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Although there is strong evidence implicating genetic
factors in congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) pathogenesis, few causal genes
have been identified. Many studies suggest that early disruption of the retinoid 
signaling pathway during gestation may contribute to CDH etiology. Chromosome
abnormalities are detected in 10-20% of CDH cases. Chromosomal regions that are
involved in balanced translocations or are recurrently deleted or duplicated in
patients with CDH are of particular interest to researchers because they are more
likely to harbor genes that cause or predispose one to the development of CDH.
The aim of this review was to select chromosome loci which have been shown to be 
associated with CDH and to investigate if these loci contain candidate genes
involved in the retinoic signaling pathway.
DATA SOURCES: We have re-examined the known CDH-critical chromosomal loci and
searched in available databases, such as the UCSC Genome Browser and OMIM, to see
whether candidate genes related to the retinoid pathway were present within these
loci.
RESULTS: Twelve retinoid-related genes have been proposed as potential
candidates. Among them, COUP-TFII, FOG2 and GATA4 have already been well studied,
especially in animal models. We propose other candidates such as STRA6, LRAT,
CRBP1, CRBP2 and CRABP1 are directly implicated in retinoic acid metabolism.
CONCLUSION: The identification of CDH-related genes and pathways affecting a
normal diaphragm will contribute to the understanding of the pathophysiology of
this severe embryopathy and might help to facilitate prenatal management and
devise more individual treatment strategies. Further studies are necessary to
screen large cohorts of patients with CDH for microimbalances or de novo
mutations in these candidate genes. Moreover, functional analyses are needed to
establish their exact role in CDH etiology.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20501978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Oct;16(10):3111-7. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0036.

Cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat bone marrow multipotent progenitor cells is 
associated with downregulation of Oct-4 expression.

Lu T(1), Pelacho B, Hao H, Luo M, Zhu J, Verfaillie CM, Tian J, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University 
, Chongqing, PR China.

This study was to determine if bone marrow multipotent adult progenitor cells
(MAPCs) underwent cardiac specification and Oct-4 expression during their
cardiomyocyte differentiation in vitro. MAPCs were isolated from rat bone marrow,
treated with 5-azacytidine (5-aza, 1µM) for 24h, and cultured in a serum-free
medium for cardiac differentiation for up to 35 days. The cells started to
express early cardiac-specific genes Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 with a significant
increase in their mRNA level within 24h after 5-aza treatment. Western blotting
analysis and immunofluorescence staining revealed that the cardiac-specific
proteins connexin-43 and troponin I were expressed in the cells 7 days after
5-aza treatment. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that over 37% of the cells 
were positive for troponin I by 35 days of differentiation, although the cells
did not display spontaneous contraction. On the other hand, the undifferentiated 
MAPCs expressed a significant level of the stem-cell-specific marker Oct-4 that
was dramatically decreased in the cells shortly after the initiation of
cardiomyocyte differentiation as evaluated using real-time (RT)-polymerase chain 
reaction, Western blotting, immunofluorescence staining, and flow cytometry.
These data indicated that MAPCs were able to effectively differentiate into
cardiomyocyte-like cells after 5-aza induction in association with downregulation
of Oct-4 expression.

PMID: 20486789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):C1603-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00435.2009. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Limitations of conventional approaches to identify myocyte nuclei in histologic
sections of the heart.

Ang KL(1), Shenje LT, Reuter S, Soonpaa MH, Rubart M, Field LJ, Galiñanes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, UK.

Accurate nuclear identification is crucial for distinguishing the role of cardiac
myocytes in intrinsic and experimentally induced regenerative growth of the
myocardium. Conventional histologic analysis of myocyte nuclei relies on the
optical sectioning capabilities of confocal microscopy in conjunction with
immunofluorescent labeling of cytoplasmic proteins such as troponin T, and dyes
that bind to double-strand DNA to identify nuclei. Using heart sections from
transgenic mice in which the cardiomyocyte-restricted alpha-cardiac myosin heavy 
chain promoter targeted the expression of nuclear localized beta-galactosidase
reporter in >99% of myocytes, we systematically compared the fidelity of
conventional myocyte nuclear identification using confocal microscopy, with and
without the aid of a membrane marker. The values obtained with these assays were 
then compared with those obtained with anti-beta-galactosidase immune reactivity 
in the same samples. In addition, we also studied the accuracy of anti-GATA4
immunoreactivity for myocyte nuclear identification. Our results demonstrate
that, although these strategies are capable of identifying myocyte nuclei, the
level of interobserver agreement and margin of error can compromise accurate
identification of rare events, such as cardiomyocyte apoptosis and proliferation.
Thus these data indicate that morphometric approaches based on segmentation are
justified only if the margin of error for measuring the event in question has
been predetermined and deemed to be small and uniform. We also illustrate the
value of a transgene-based approach to overcome these intrinsic limitations of
identifying myocyte nuclei. This latter approach should prove quite useful when
measuring rare events.

PMCID: PMC2902296
PMID: 20457832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Mar 16;90(10):667-71.

[Novel GATA4 mutations identified in patients with congenital heart disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Hu DY, Li XM, Xin YF, Zhou H, Wang LJ, Wang LM, Xu WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongji University Affiliated East Hospital, Shanghai
200120, China. Juan.wang@tongji.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: To identify the novel genetic determinants in patients with congenital
heart disease (CHD).
METHODS: The clinical data and peripheral venous blood samples from 120 unrelated
individuals with idiopathic CHD were collected and evaluated compared to 100
unrelated healthy controls. The complete coding exons and the partial flanking
introns of GATA4 gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced
by di-deoxynucleotide chain termination. The generated sequences were aligned
with those retrieved from GenBank with the aid of programme BLAST to identify the
sequence variations. The software Clustal W was utilized to analyze the
conservation of altered amino acids.
RESULTS: Three novel heterozygous missense GATA4 mutations were identified in 3
of 120 CHD cases. Namely, the triplet substitutions of AGA for AGC at codon 90,
GAG for GAC at codon 95, and AAT for AAG at codon 329, predicting the conversions
of serine into arginine at amino acid residue 90 (S90R), aspartic acid into
glutamic acid at amino acid residue 95 (D95E) and lysine into asparagine at amino
acid residue 329 (K329N), were detected. None of these three mutations were
probed in 100 controls. A cross-species alignment of GATA4 encoded protein
sequences displayed that the lysine at amino acid residue 329 was completely
conserved evolutionarily. Additionally, a single nucleotide polymorphism c. 99G>T
was observed. However, the polymorphic frequency distribution in CHD patients was
not statistically different from that in controls (for genotypes, chi(2) =
0.2640, P = 0.6074; for alleles, chi(2) = 0.2514, P = 0.6161).
CONCLUSION: The idiopathic CHD has a marked heterogeneity and the mutated GATA4
gene may be responsible for CHD in a subset of patients.

PMID: 20450724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cell Transplant. 2010;19(8):949-58. doi: 10.3727/096368910X504450. Epub 2010 May 
4.

The apelin-APJ pathway exists in cardiomyogenic cells derived from mesenchymal
stem cells in vitro and in vivo.

Gao LR(1), Zhang NK, Bai J, Ding QA, Wang ZG, Zhu ZM, Fei YX, Yang Y, Xu RY, Chen
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Navy General Hospital, Beijing, China.
lianru@yahoo.com.cn

Our previous study demonstrated that apelin level increased significantly after
the treatment of intracoronary implantation of bone marrow mononuclear cells
(BMMCs), followed by the improvement of cardiac function in patients with severe 
ischemic heart failure. The present studies both in vivo and in vitro explored
whether mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow (BMSCs) activate the
apelin-APJ pathway when differentiating into cardiomyogenic cells. Isolated BMSCs
from rat femurs and tibias were cultured and expanded for three passages, labeled
with DAPI, and treated with 5-azacytidine (5-AZ). BMSCs labeled with ad-EGFP were
injected intramyocardially into the peri-infarct area of rat models with acute
myocardial infarction. Immunofluorescence staining exposed that CMGs expressed
apelin together with myogenic-specific proteins such as a-actin, troponin T,
GATA-4, and connexin-43 at 7 days after 5-AZ treatment or EGFP-BMSC injection.
RT-PCR revealed that mRNA in CMGs started to express apelin and APJ from day 7
and progressively increased until day 28. Cardiac function, as measured by
echocardiography in vivo, was significantly improved in parallel with the extent 
of apelin expression after BMSC transplantation. Our finding indicated that the
expression of the apelin-APJ pathway during differentiation of BMSCs into CMGs
may be an important mechanism in regulation of myocardial regeneration and
functional recovery after BMSC transplantation.

PMID: 20447346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 2;285(27):21175-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.112482. Epub 2010
May 3.

Smooth and cardiac muscle-selective knock-out of Kruppel-like factor 4 causes
postnatal death and growth retardation.

Yoshida T(1), Gan Q, Franke AS, Ho R, Zhang J, Chen YE, Hayashi M, Majesky MW,
Somlyo AV, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. tayoshida-npr@umin.ac.jp

Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4) is a transcription factor involved in
differentiation and proliferation in multiple tissues. We demonstrated previously
that tamoxifen-induced deletion of the Klf4 gene in mice accelerated neointimal
formation but delayed down-regulation of smooth muscle cell differentiation
markers in carotid arteries following injury. To further determine the role of
Klf4 in the cardiovascular system, we herein derived mice deficient for the Klf4 
gene in smooth and cardiac muscle using the SM22alpha promoter
(SM22alpha-CreKI(+)/Klf4(loxP/loxP) mice). SM22alpha-CreKI(+)/Klf4(loxP/loxP)
mice were born at the expected Mendelian ratio, but they gradually died after
birth. Although approximately 40% of SM22alpha-CreKI(+)/Klf4(loxP/loxP) mice
survived beyond postnatal day 28, they exhibited marked growth retardation. In
wild-type mice, Klf4 was expressed in the heart from late embryonic development
through adulthood, whereas it was not expressed in smooth muscle. No changes were
observed in morphology or expression of smooth muscle cell differentiation
markers in vessels of SM22alpha-CreKI(+)/Klf4(loxP/loxP) mice. Of interest,
cardiac output was significantly decreased in SM22alpha-CreKI(+)/Klf4(loxP/loxP) 
mice, as determined by magnetic resonance imaging. Moreover, a lack of Klf4 in
the heart resulted in the reduction in expression of multiple cardiac genes,
including Gata4. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays on the heart
revealed that Klf4 bound to the promoter region of the Gata4 gene. Results
provide novel evidence that Klf4 plays a key role in late fetal and/or postnatal 
cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC2898332
PMID: 20439457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):129-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.020. Epub 2010
May 12.

Nanog is required for primitive endoderm formation through a non-cell autonomous 
mechanism.

Messerschmidt DM(1), Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. daniel.m@imb.a-star.edu.sg

Early lineage segregation in mouse development results in two, either CDX2- or
OCT4/NANOG-positive, cell populations. CDX2-positive cells form the trophectoderm
(TE), OCT4/NANOG-positive cells the inner cell mass (ICM). In a second lineage
decision ICM cells segregate into Epiblast (EPI) and primitive endoderm (PE). EPI
and PE formation depend on the activity of the transcription factors Nanog and
Gata4/6. A role for Nanog, a crucial pluripotency factor, in preventing PE
differentiation has been proposed, as outgrowths of mutant ICMs result in PE, but
not EPI derivatives. We established Nanog-mutant mouse lines and analyzed EPI and
PE formation in vivo. Surprisingly, Gata4 expression in mutant ICM cells is
absent or strongly decreased, thus loss of Nanog does not result in precocious
endoderm differentiation. However, Nanog-deficient embryos retain the capacity to
form PE in chimeric embryos and, in contrast to recent reports, in blastocyst
outgrowths. Based on our findings we propose a non-cell autonomous requirement of
Nanog for proper PE formation in addition to its essential role in EPI
determination.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20435031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cardiovasc Ther. 2011 Dec;29(6):362-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2010.00152.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 23.

Cardiac natriuretic peptides: from basic discovery to clinical practice.

Hayek S(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Department of Biochemistry, 
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.

Discoveries of the cardiac natriuretic peptides ANP, BNP, and CNP along with
studies of their function and regulation in health and disease, have led to
breakthroughs in the understanding and clinical management of heart failure.
Analysis of the ANP and BNP promoters and patterns of expression uncovered a set 
of key regulators and pathways that converge onto these sensitive markers of
early myocyte differentiation and cardiac stress. Among the most studied are the 
transcription factors GATA4, TBX5, and NKX2-5, which are central to cardiac
development and mutations of which are associated with congenital heart disease. 
In clinical practice, plasma natriuretic peptides levels have been used as
quantitative biomarkers of heart failure and proved to be highly effective for
the diagnosis of heart failure, for risk-stratification of patients and guided
therapy, as well as for screening for subclinical cardiac stress. Emerging
studies are revealing the cardioprotective attributes of these peptides and may
offer new therapeutic venues for myocardial infarction and heart failure.
Clinical trials have documented the benefits and risks of the use of synthetic
ANP (Anaritide) and BNP (Nesiritide) for treating heart failure, renal failure,
and hypertension. This review summarizes the function and regulation of cardiac
natriuretic peptides and the translation of the basic biochemical discoveries
into clinical practice both at the diagnostic and therapeutic level.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20433683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):79-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.018. Epub 2010
Apr 27.

Klf6/copeb is required for hepatic outgrowth in zebrafish and for hepatocyte
specification in mouse ES cells.

Zhao X(1), Monson C, Gao C, Gouon-Evans V, Matsumoto N, Sadler KC, Friedman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver Diseases/Department of Medicine, Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Krüppel-like factor 6 (Klf6; copeb in zebrafish) is a zinc-finger transcription
factor and tumor suppressor gene. Klf6(-)(/)(-) mice have defects in
hematopoiesis and angiogenesis and do not form a liver. However, the vascular
abnormalities in Klf6(-/-) mice obfuscate its role in liver development since
these two processes are linked in mammals. We utilized zebrafish and mouse ES
cells to investigate the role of copeb in endoderm specification and
hepatogenesis separate from its function in angiogenesis. During zebrafish
development, copeb expression is enriched in digestive organs. Morpholino
knockdown of copeb blocks expansion of the liver, pancreas and intestine, but
does not affect their specification, differentiation or the vascularization of
the liver. Decreased hepatocyte proliferation in copeb morphants is accompanied
by upregulation of the cell cycle inhibitor, cdkn1a, a Copeb transcriptional
target. A cell autonomous role for Klf6 in endoderm and hepatic development was
investigated by manipulating Klf6 expression in mouse ES cells driven to
differentiate along the hepatic lineage. Expression of the endoderm markers
Hnf3beta, Gata4, Sox17, and CxCr4 is not induced in Klf6(-/-) cells but is
upregulated in ES cells over-expressing Klf6. Collectively, these findings
indicate that copeb/Klf6 is essential for the development of endoderm-derived
organs.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2909330
PMID: 20430021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):191-201. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.03.005.

SUMO-specific protease 2 is essential for suppression of polycomb group
protein-mediated gene silencing during embryonic development.

Kang X(1), Qi Y, Zuo Y, Wang Q, Zou Y, Schwartz RJ, Cheng J, Yeh ET.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cell Biology, The Key
Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):157-9.

SUMO-specific protease 2 (SENP2) has a broad de-SUMOylation activity in vitro.
However, the biological function of SENP2 is largely unknown. Here, we show that 
deletion of SENP2 gene in mouse causes defects in the embryonic heart and reduces
the expression of Gata4 and Gata6, which are essential for cardiac development.
SENP2 regulates transcription of Gata4 and Gata6 mainly through alteration of
occupancy of Pc2/CBX4, a polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) subunit, on its
promoters. We demonstrate that Pc2/CBX4 is a target of SENP2 in vivo and that
SUMOylation is essential for Pc2/CBX4-mediated PRC1 recruitment to methylated
histone 3 at K27 (H3K27me3). In SENP2 null embryos, SUMOylated Pc2/CBX4
accumulates and Pc2/CBX4 occupancy on the promoters of PcG target genes is
markedly increased, leading to repression of Gata4 and Gata6 transcription. Our
results reveal a critical role for de-SUMOylation in the regulation of PcG target
gene expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2879644
PMID: 20417598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Anat. 2010 Jan;216(1):92-107. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2009.01171.x.

Wnt/beta-catenin signalling regulates cardiomyogenesis via GATA transcription
factors.

Martin J(1), Afouda BA, Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Research Programme, Institute of Medical
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK.

A functioning heart muscle is required continuously throughout life. During
embryonic development the heart muscle tissue differentiates from mesoderm that
has heart-forming potential. Heart-forming potential in the embryonic mesoderm is
regulated by pro-cardiogenic transcription factors, such as members of the GATA
and NK-2 transcription factor families. Subsequent heart muscle differentiation
involves the expression of cytoskeletal proteins, including myosins and
troponins. Different Wnt signalling pathways have various functions in heart
development. So-called 'canonical' (Wnt/beta-catenin-mediated) signalling has a
conserved role in vertebrate heart development, regulating and restricting heart 
development and subsequent heart muscle differentiation. Here we investigated the
way in which Wnt/beta-catenin signalling functionally interacts with the GATA
family of pro-cardiogenic transcription factors to regulate subsequent heart
muscle differentiation. We used whole Xenopus embryos as an accessible
experimental model system for vertebrate heart development. Our experiments
confirmed that activation of Wnt signalling results in reduced gata gene
expression, as well as reduced gene expression of other pro-cardiogenic
transcription factors and heart muscle differentiation markers. Remarkably, we
discovered that when GATA function is experimentally restored, the expression of 
other pro-cardiogenic transcription factors and heart muscle differentiation
markers is rescued. These findings, obtained from whole-embryo experiments, show 
that Wnt signalling regulates heart development at the level of GATA factors,
confirming earlier results from tissue-culture experiments. Furthermore, our
rescue experiments in Xenopus embryos revealed differences in functional activity
between the various GATA transcription factors involved in heart development. We 
discovered that GATA4 is more efficient at reinstating the gene expression of
other pro-cardiogenic transcription factors, whereas GATA6 is more potent at
promoting the expression of genes associated with terminal heart muscle
differentiation. In conclusion, our findings show that the inhibition of heart
development by Wnt/beta-catenin signalling during organogenesis is mediated by
the loss of expression of GATA pro-cardiogenic transcription factors and reveal
functional differences between those GATA factors in heart development.

PMCID: PMC2807978
PMID: 20402826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010 Jun;12(6):541-8. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq057. Epub 2010 Apr
13.

Myocardial gene expression alterations in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.

Kontaraki JE(1), Parthenakis FI, Nyktari EG, Patrianakos AP, Vardas PE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, School of Medicine, University of Crete,
Crete, Greece. kontarak@med.uoc.gr

AIMS: To assess cardiac gene expression in peripheral blood cells of patients
with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM) and its relationship to
echocardiographic left ventricular (LV) function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A complete echocardiographic study and blood sampling were
performed in 65 consecutive stable IDCM patients with LV ejection fraction (LVEF)
31.76 +/- 10.07% and chronic mild to moderate heart failure (NYHA functional
class II to III) for > or =9 months. Blood samples from 19 healthy individuals
were included for comparison. Transcript levels of myocardin, GATA4, alpha- and
beta-myosin heavy chain (MHC), sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 2 (SERCA2), 
and phospholamban were determined by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Myocardin (24.88 +/- 4.93 vs. 3.98 +/-
1.12, P = 0.0048) and GATA4 (17.85 +/- 4.85 vs. 0.45 +/- 0.15, P = 0.0069 x
10(-5)) were upregulated in IDCM patients compared with controls, whereas SERCA2 
(5.11 +/- 0.42 vs. 8.93 +/- 1.07, P = 0.001) was downregulated. In IDCM patients,
myocardin (r = 0.279, P = 0.025), GATA4 (r = 0.314, P = 0.011), beta-MHC (r =
0.444, P=0.0002), and alpha-MHC (r = 0.272, P = 0.034) showed positive
correlations, whereas SERCA2 (r = -0.264, P = 0.034) exhibited a negative
correlation with LVEF. Patients with elevated LV filling pressures had lower
myocardin (15.06 +/- 3.10 vs. 43.12 +/- 12.03, P = 0.048), GATA4 (8.96 +/- 2.17
vs. 34.38 +/- 12.60, P = 0.026), beta-MHC (10.59 +/- 4.05 vs. 16.43 +/- 4.91, P =
0.013), and alpha-MHC (0.27 +/- 0.08 vs. 0.79 +/- 0.20, P = 0.033) and higher
SERCA2 (5.65 +/- 0.54 vs. 3.90 +/- 0.61, P = 0.037) levels. Patients with atrial 
fibrillation (AF) had higher SERCA2 levels compared with sinus rhythm patients
(6.75 +/- 0.84 vs. 4.54 +/- 0.45, P = 0.017).
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that cardiac gene expression alterations in
peripheral blood cells of IDCM patients may reflect alterations in LV function,
whereas the presence of AF may be associated with increased SERCA2 levels in
these patients.

PMID: 20388650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Genes Cells. 2010 May;15(5):439-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01394.x. Epub
2010 Apr 7.

Myogenic differentiation in atrium-derived adult cardiac pluripotent cells and
the transcriptional regulation of GATA4 and myogenin on ANP promoter.

Kamrul Hasan M(1), Komoike Y, Tsunesumi S, Nakao R, Nagao H, Matsuoka R,
Kawaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences (IREIIMS), Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawadacho, Shinjuku,
Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

We established cardiac pluripotent stem-like cells from the left atrium (LA-PCs) 
of adult rat hearts. These cells could differentiate not only into beating
myocytes but also into cells of other lineages, including adipocytes and
endothelial cells in the methylcellulose-based medium containing interleukin-3
(IL-3), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and stem cell factor (SCF). In particular, IL-3 and
SCF contributed to the differentiation into cardiac troponin I-positive cells.
Notably, small population of LA-PCs coexpressed GATA4 and myogenin, which are
markers specific to cardiomyocytes and skeletal myocytes, respectively, and could
differentiate into both cardiac and skeletal myocytes. Therefore, we investigated
the involvement of these two tissue-specific transcription factors in the cardiac
transcriptional activity. Coexpression of GATA4 and myogenin synergistically
activated GATA4-specific promoter of the atrial natriuretic peptide gene. This
combinatorial function was shown to be dependant on the GATA site, but
independent of the E-box. The results of chromatin immunoprecipitation and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggested that myogenin bound to GATA4 on
the GATA elements and the C-terminal Zn-finger domain of GATA4 and the N-terminal
region of myogenin were required for this synergistic activation of
transcription. Taken together, these two transcription factors could be involved 
in the myogenesis of LA-PCs.

PMID: 20384792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):H2082-92. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00747.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

The bHLH transcription factor CHF1/Hey2 regulates susceptibility to apoptosis and
heart failure after pressure overload.

Liu Y(1), Yu M, Wu L, Chin MT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Cardiac hypertrophy is a common response to hemodynamic stress in the heart and
can progress to heart failure. To investigate whether the transcription factor
cardiovascular basic helix-loop-helix factor 1/hairy/enhancer of split related
with YRPW motif 2 (CHF1/Hey2) influences the development of cardiac hypertrophy
and progression to heart failure under conditions of pressure overload, we
performed aortic constriction on 12-wk-old male wild-type (WT) and heterozygous
(HET) mice globally underexpressing CHF1/Hey2. After aortic banding, WT and HET
mice showed increased cardiac hypertrophy as measured by gravimetric analysis, as
expected. CHF1/Hey2 HET mice, however, demonstrated a greater increase in the
ventricular weight-to-body weight ratio compared with WT mice (P < 0.05).
Echocardiographic measurements showed a significantly decreased ejection fraction
compared with WT mice (P < 0.05). Histological examination of Masson
trichrome-stained heart tissue demonstrated extensive fibrosis in HET mice
compared with WT mice. TUNEL staining demonstrated increased apoptosis in HET
hearts (P < 0.05). Exposure of cultured neonatal myocytes from WT and HET mice to
H(2)O(2) and tunicamycin, known inducers of apoptosis that work through different
mechanisms, demonstrated significantly increased apoptosis in HET cells compared 
with WT cells (P < 0.05). Expression of Bid, a downstream activator of the
mitochondrial death pathway, was expressed in HET hearts at increased levels
after aortic banding. Expression of GATA4, a transcriptional activator of cardiac
hypertrophy, was also increased in HET hearts, as was phosphorylation of GATA4 at
Ser(105). Our findings demonstrate that CHF1/Hey2 expression levels influence
hypertrophy and the progression to heart failure in response to pressure overload
through modulation of apoptosis and GATA4 activity.

PMCID: PMC2886641
PMID: 20382855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(14):4635-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq230. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Identification and characterization of alternative promoters of zebrafish
Rtn-4/Nogo genes in cultured cells and zebrafish embryos.

Chen YC(1), Wu BK, Chu CY, Cheng CH, Han HW, Chen GD, Lee MT, Hwang PP, Kawakami 
K, Chang CC, Huang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

In mammals, the Nogo family consists of Nogo-A, Nogo-B and Nogo-C. However, there
are three Rtn-4/Nogo-related transcripts were identified in zebrafish. In
addition to the common C-terminal region, the N-terminal regions of
Rtn4-n/Nogo-C1, Rtn4-m/Nogo-C2 and Rtn4-l/Nogo-B, respectively, contain 9, 25 and
132 amino acid residues. In this study, we isolated the 5'-upstream region of
each gene from a BAC clone and demonstrated that the putative promoter regions,
P1-P3, are functional in cultured cells and zebrafish embryos. A transgenic
zebrafish Tg(Nogo-B:GFP) line was generated using P1 promoter region to drive
green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression through Tol2-mediated transgenesis.
This line recapitulates the endogenous expression pattern of Rtn4-l/Nogo-B mRNA
in the brain, brachial arches, eyes, muscle, liver and intestines. In contrast,
GFP expressions by P2 and P3 promoters were localized to skeletal muscles of
zebrafish embryos. Several GATA and E-box motifs are found in these promoter
regions. Using morpholino knockdown experiments, GATA4 and GATA6 were involved in
the control of P1 promoter activity in the liver and intestine, while Myf5 and
MyoD for the control of P1 and P3 promoter activities in muscles. These data
demonstrate that zebrafish Rtn4/Nogo transcripts might be generated by coupling
mechanisms of alternative first exons and alternative promoter usage.

PMCID: PMC2919723
PMID: 20378713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Jul-Aug;53(4):201-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.03.008. Epub 
2010 Apr 2.

Mutations in the cardiac transcription factor GATA4 in patients with lone atrial 
fibrillation.

Posch MG(1), Boldt LH, Polotzki M, Richter S, Rolf S, Perrot A, Dietz R, Ozcelik 
C, Haverkamp W.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC) at Max-Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Familial recurrence of atrial fibrillation (AF) is reported in up to 15% of
patients with lone AF. Recently, it was proposed that congenital defects in the
morphogenesis of the pulmonary vein myocardium are involved in genetic
pathogenesis of lone AF. GATA4 is a cardiac transcription factor essentially
involved in myocardial development. Mutations in GATA4 are associated with
congenital cardiac malformations. To investigate whether GATA4 mutations
represent a genetic origin for AF the coding region of GATA4 was sequenced in 96 
patients with lone AF. We found a GATA4 mutation (M247T) in a patient with
familial lone AF and atrial septal aneurysm without interatrial shunts. The
mutation affects a deeply conserved domain adjacent to the first zinc finger
domain of GATA4 and was not reported before. A second GATA4 mutation (A411V) was 
found in a female patient with sporadic lone AF. This variant was previously
reported in patients with cardiac septal defects. However, no anomalies of the
atrial or ventricular septa were noted in the AF patient harboring A411V. We
report for the first time that mutations in the cardiac transcription factor
GATA4 may represent a genetic origin of lone AF. The study proposes that lone AF 
may share a common genetic origin with congenital cardiac malformations.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Genet Mol Biol. 2010 Apr;33(2):232-6. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000051. Epub 
2010 Jun 1.

Novel mutations in the TBX5 gene in patients with Holt-Oram Syndrome.

Porto MP(1), Vergani N, Carvalho AC, Cernach MC, Brunoni D, Perez AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morfologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP
Brazil.

The Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by 
upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in the TBX5 gene cause HOS and
have also been associated with isolated heart and arm defects. Interactions
between the TBX5, GATA4 and NKX2.5 proteins have been reported in humans. We
screened the TBX5, GATA4, and NKX2.5 genes for mutations, by direct sequencing,
in 32 unrelated patients presenting classical (8) or atypical HOS (1), isolated
congenital heart defects (16) or isolated upper-limb malformations (7).
Pathogenic mutations in the TBX5 gene were found in four HOS patients, including 
two new mutations (c.374delG; c.678G > T) in typical patients, and the hotspot
mutation c.835C > T in two patients, one of them with an atypical HOS phenotype
involving lower-limb malformations. Two new mutations in the GATA4 gene were
found in association with isolated upper-limb malformations, but their clinical
significance remains to be established. A previously described possibly
pathogenic mutation in the NKX2.5 gene (c.73C > 7) was detected in a patient with
isolated heart malformations and also in his clinically normal father.

PMCID: PMC3036863
PMID: 21637475  [PubMed]


366. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010 Sep;140(3):684-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.01.013. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

A novel mutation in GATA4 gene associated with dominant inherited familial atrial
septal defect.

Chen Y(1), Han ZQ, Yan WD, Tang CZ, Xie JY, Chen H, Hu DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital,
Beijing, China. chenyu@pkuph.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart disease (CHD).
Although most cases are sporadic, familial cases have been reported. The
transcription factors NKX2.5 and GATA4 play important roles in the pathogenesis
of ASD. Mutations in either gene have been identified in familial cases of ASD.
Here, we examine a Chinese family with isolated ASD to find out whether there is 
any mutation in NKX2.5 or GATA4 accounting for the etiology.
METHODS: We identified kindred spanning 3 generations in which 8 of 31 (38%)
individuals had ASD. One hundred seventy unrelated individuals were included as
controls. Peripheral blood samples were collected and genomic DNA was extracted
from the leukocytes. NKX2.5 and GATA4 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) with specific primers. The sequences of PCR products were compared between 
affected members and unaffected members, as well as controls.
RESULTS: Direct sequencing of NKX2.5 from the genomic DNA of family members
failed to identify mutations, whereas sequencing of GATA4 identified an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 928 in exon 5 that predicted a methionine to valine
substitution at codon 310 (M310V) in the NLS region. All affected members and a
patriarch of the family who was recognized as a carrier exhibited this mutation, 
whereas the other unaffected family members or control individuals did not. This 
mutation has not been reported previously in either familial or sporadic cases of
CHD.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel M310V mutation in GATA4 gene that is located
in the NLS region and leads to hereditary ASD in a Chinese family. In this
family, we identified a carrier with incomplete penetrance and 8 patients with
variable expressivity. However, the mechanism by which this mutation contributes 
to the development of a congenital heart defect remains to be ascertained.

2010 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by Mosby, Inc. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 20347099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Fertil Steril. 2010 Nov;94(6):2347-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.02.036. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

OCT4 gonadal gene expression related to the presence of Y-chromosome sequences in
Turner syndrome.

Bianco B(1), Oliveira KC, Guedes AD, Barbosa CP, Lipay MV, Verreschi IT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Federal University of Sao
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

To show that in the dysgenetic gonads of 104 Turner syndrome patients no
significant difference was found regarding the expression of the genes DAX1,
FOG2, GATA4, OCT4, SF1, SRY, TSPY, WT1, and STRA8 compared with controls, except 
for genes OCT4, SRY, and TSPY in both gonads of a patient whose chromosomal
constitution was 45,X/45,X,add(15)(p11). The expression analysis of genes OCT4,
SRY, and TSPY in the dysgenetic gonads of Turner syndrome patients may allow
introducing modifications in the microenvironment that could contributed to a
malignant transformation process.

Copyright © 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20347080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Circ Res. 2010 Apr 30;106(8):1342-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.213132. Epub
2010 Mar 25.

Voltage-gated sodium channels are required for heart development in zebrafish.

Chopra SS(1), Stroud DM, Watanabe H, Bennett JS, Burns CG, Wells KS, Yang T,
Zhong TP, Roden DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 2215B
Garland Ave, 1275 MRBIV Light Hall, Nashville, TN 37232-0575, USA.

RATIONALE: Voltage-gated sodium channels initiate action potentials in excitable 
tissues. Mice in which Scn5A (the predominant sodium channel gene in heart) has
been knocked out die early in development with cardiac malformations by
mechanisms which have yet to be determined.
OBJECTIVE: Here we addressed this question by investigating the role of cardiac
sodium channels in zebrafish heart development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transcripts of the functionally-conserved Scn5a homologs
scn5Laa and scn5Lab were detected in the gastrulating zebrafish embryo and
subsequently in the embryonic myocardium. Antisense knockdown of either channel
resulted in marked cardiac chamber dysmorphogenesis and perturbed looping. These 
abnormalities were associated with decreased expression of the myocardial
precursor genes nkx2.5, gata4, and hand2 in anterior lateral mesoderm and
significant deficits in the production of cardiomyocyte progenitors. These early 
defects did not appear to result from altered membrane electrophysiology, as
prolonged pharmacological blockade of sodium current failed to phenocopy channel 
knockdown. Moreover, embryos grown in calcium channel blocker-containing medium
had hearts that did not beat but developed normally.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify a novel and possibly nonelectrogenic role
for cardiac sodium channels in heart development.

PMCID: PMC2869449
PMID: 20339120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Nature. 2010 Mar 25;464(7288):601-5. doi: 10.1038/nature08804.

Primary contribution to zebrafish heart regeneration by gata4(+) cardiomyocytes.

Kikuchi K(1), Holdway JE, Werdich AA, Anderson RM, Fang Y, Egnaczyk GF, Evans T, 
Macrae CA, Stainier DY, Poss KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2010 Sep 3;107(5):570-2.

Recent studies indicate that mammals, including humans, maintain some capacity to
renew cardiomyocytes throughout postnatal life. Yet, there is little or no
significant cardiac muscle regeneration after an injury such as acute myocardial 
infarction. By contrast, zebrafish efficiently regenerate lost cardiac muscle,
providing a model for understanding how natural heart regeneration may be blocked
or enhanced. In the absence of lineage-tracing technology applicable to adult
zebrafish, the cellular origins of newly regenerated cardiac muscle have remained
unclear. Using new genetic fate-mapping approaches, here we identify a population
of cardiomyocytes that become activated after resection of the ventricular apex
and contribute prominently to cardiac muscle regeneration. Through the use of a
transgenic reporter strain, we found that cardiomyocytes throughout the
subepicardial ventricular layer trigger expression of the embryonic cardiogenesis
gene gata4 within a week of trauma, before expression localizes to proliferating 
cardiomyocytes surrounding and within the injury site. Cre-recombinase-based
lineage-tracing of cells expressing gata4 before evident regeneration, or of
cells expressing the contractile gene cmlc2 before injury, each labelled most
cardiac muscle in the ensuing regenerate. By optical voltage mapping of surface
myocardium in whole ventricles, we found that electrical conduction is
re-established between existing and regenerated cardiomyocytes between 2 and 4
weeks post-injury. After injury and prolonged fibroblast growth factor receptor
inhibition to arrest cardiac regeneration and enable scar formation, experimental
release of the signalling block led to gata4 expression and morphological
improvement of the injured ventricular wall without loss of scar tissue. Our
results indicate that electrically coupled cardiac muscle regenerates after
resection injury, primarily through activation and expansion of cardiomyocyte
populations. These findings have implications for promoting regeneration of the
injured human heart.

PMCID: PMC3040215
PMID: 20336144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Mar 14;16(10):1201-8.

Methylation of GATA-4 and GATA-5 and development of sporadic gastric carcinomas.

Wen XZ(1), Akiyama Y, Pan KF, Liu ZJ, Lu ZM, Zhou J, Gu LK, Dong CX, Zhu BD, Ji
JF, You WC, Deng DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Etiology, Peking University School of Oncology and
Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Fucheng Road No. 52, Haidian District,
Beijing 100142, China.

AIM: To understand the implication of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation in gastric
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Methylation status of GATA-4 and GATA-5 CpG islands in human gastric
mucosa samples, including normal gastric biopsies from 45 outpatients, gastric
dysplasia [low-grade gastric intraepithelial neoplasia (GIN), n = 30; indefinite,
n = 77], and 80 paired sporadic gastric carcinomas (SGC) as well as the adjacent 
non-neoplastic gastric tissues was analyzed by methylation specific polymerase
chain reaction (MSP) and confirmed by denatured high performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC). Immunohistochemical staining was used to detect protein
expression. The correlation between GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation and
clinicopathological characteristics of patients including Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori) infection was analyzed.
RESULTS: GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was frequently observed in SGCs (53.8% and
61.3%, respectively) and their corresponding normal tissues (41.3% and 46.3%) by 
MSP. The result of MSP was consistent with that of DHPLC. Loss of both GATA-4 and
GATA-5 proteins was associated with their methylation in SGCs (P = 0.01).
Moreover, a high frequency of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was found in both
gastric low-grade GIN (57.1% and 69.0%) and indefinite for dysplasia (42.9% and
46.7%), respectively. However, GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was detected only in
4/32 (12.5%) and 3/39 (7.7%) of normal gastric biopsies. GATA-4 methylation in
both normal gastric mucosa and low-grade GIN was also significantly associated
with H. pylori infection (P = 0.023 and 0.027, two-sides).
CONCLUSION: Epigenetic inactivation of GATA-4 (and GATA-5) by methylation of CpG 
islands is an early frequent event during gastric carcinogenesis and is
significantly correlated with H. pylori infection.

PMCID: PMC2839171
PMID: 20222162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May-Jun;1799(5-6):429-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.02.004. Epub 2010 Mar 6.

Transcriptional upregulation of calcineurin Abeta by endothelin-1 is partially
mediated by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIdelta3 in rat
cardiomyocytes.

Lu YM(1), Shioda N, Yamamoto Y, Han F, Fukunaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aoba Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and calcineurin (CaN) are 
positive regulators of cardiac hypertrophy, but the nature of cross-talk between 
CaMKII and CaN signaling pathways in hypertrophic cardiomyocytes remains unclear.
Here we documented that CaMKIIdelta3 activation enhances transcription of the CaN
gene through activation of the CaN-Abeta subunit (CnAbeta) promoter in rat
cultured cardiomyocytes. Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that MEF2 forms a
complex with GATA4 following transfection of an active CaMKIIdelta3 (T278D)
mutant in neonatal cardiomyocytes. Inversely, transfection of a dominant negative
CaMKIIdelta3 mutant failed to promote a MEF2-GATA4 complex. Consistent with these
observations, immunocytochemistry indicated nuclear co-localization of MEF2 with 
GATA4 after hypertrophic agonist stimulation or CaMKIIdelta3 (T278D)
transfection. These data demonstrate that CaMKII can enhance CnAbeta promoter
activity by enhancing MEF2-GATA4 synergy, suggesting a novel mechanism for
CaMKII-mediated hypertrophic signaling, which contributes to induction and
development of the hypertrophic response through CaN activation.

PMID: 20215061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Life Sci. 2010 May 8;86(19-20):699-706. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.02.021. Epub 2010
Mar 4.

The transcription factor GATA-4 regulates cytochrome P4502C19 gene expression.

Mwinyi J(1), Hofmann Y, Pedersen RS, Nekvindová J, Cavaco I, Mkrtchian S,
Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Jessica.Mwinyi@ki.se

AIMS: Cytochrome P4502C19 (CYP2C19) is an important enzyme involved in the
metabolism of antiulcer drugs and antidepressants. However, despite the well
documented drug-dependent variability of CYP2C19 expression, the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of the enzyme remain unknown. In this study we
investigated whether the transcription factor family GATA is involved in the
regulation of CYP2C19 gene expression.
MAIN METHODS: We identified a novel putative GATA binding site at position
-165/-156 within the CYP2C19 gene promoter. 5'-Deletion fragments of the CYP2C19 
promoter containing wild type or mutant variants of this GATA binding site were
co-transfected with expression vectors encoding the transcription factors GATA-4 
or GATA-2 and analyzed using dual luciferase gene reporter assays in HepG2 and
Huh-7 hepatoma cells. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) and Chromatin
Immunoprecipitations (ChIP) were performed to proof a sequence-specific
interaction of GATA proteins with the putative GATA binding site.
KEY FINDINGS: The wild type fragments of CYP2C19 promoter were highly upregulated
by GATA-4 and GATA-2 in luciferase gene reporter assay, whereas mutations
introduced into the GATA binding sites caused a significant activity loss.
Similar attenuation was observed upon co-transfection of GATA-4 with a known
co-regulator of GATA activity, FOG-2. EMSA analysis revealed a sequence-specific 
binding of GATA-4 and GATA-6 to the wild type GATA binding site. In addition, the
association of GATA-4 with the CYP2C19 promoter was confirmed by ChIP analysis.
SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that GATA-4 plays an important role in the
transcriptional regulation of CYP2C19 expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2010 May;34(5):840-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01156.x. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Genome-wide association study of alcohol dependence implicates a region on
chromosome 11.

Edenberg HJ(1), Koller DL, Xuei X, Wetherill L, McClintick JN, Almasy L, Bierut
LJ, Bucholz KK, Goate A, Aliev F, Dick D, Hesselbrock V, Hinrichs A, Kramer J,
Kuperman S, Nurnberger JI Jr, Rice JP, Schuckit MA, Taylor R, Todd Webb B,
Tischfield JA, Porjesz B, Foroud T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, 46202-5122, USA. edenberg@iupui.edu <edenberg@iupui.edu>

BACKGROUND: Alcohol dependence is a complex disease, and although linkage and
candidate gene studies have identified several genes associated with the risk for
alcoholism, these explain only a portion of the risk.
METHODS: We carried out a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on a case-control 
sample drawn from the families in the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of
Alcoholism. The cases all met diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth
Edition; controls all consumed alcohol but were not dependent on alcohol or
illicit drugs. To prioritize among the strongest candidates, we genotyped most of
the top 199 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (p < or = 2.1 x 10(-4)) in a
sample of alcohol-dependent families and performed pedigree-based association
analysis. We also examined whether the genes harboring the top SNPs were
expressed in human brain or were differentially expressed in the presence of
ethanol in lymphoblastoid cells.
RESULTS: Although no single SNP met genome-wide criteria for significance, there 
were several clusters of SNPs that provided mutual support. Combining evidence
from the case-control study, the follow-up in families, and gene expression
provided strongest support for the association of a cluster of genes on
chromosome 11 (SLC22A18, PHLDA2, NAP1L4, SNORA54, CARS, and OSBPL5) with alcohol 
dependence. Several SNPs nominated as candidates in earlier GWAS studies
replicated in ours, including CPE, DNASE2B, SLC10A2, ARL6IP5, ID4, GATA4, SYNE1, 
and ADCY3.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified several promising associations that warrant
further examination in independent samples.

PMCID: PMC2884073
PMID: 20201924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Circ Heart Fail. 2010 May;3(3):440-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.889642. 
Epub 2010 Mar 3.

GATA-4 is an angiogenic survival factor of the infarcted heart.

Rysä J(1), Tenhunen O, Serpi R, Soini Y, Nemer M, Leskinen H, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine, Biocenter
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Recent data suggest that GATA-4 is an antiapoptotic factor required
for adaptive responses and a key regulator of hypertrophy and
hypertrophy-associated genes in the heart. As a leading cause of chronic heart
failure, reversal of postinfarction left ventricular remodeling represents an
important target for therapeutic interventions. Here, we studied the role of
GATA-4 as a mediator of postinfarction remodeling in rats.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Myocardial infarction, caused by ligating the left anterior 
descending coronary artery, significantly decreased the DNA binding activity of
GATA-4 at day 1, whereas at 2 weeks the GATA-4 DNA binding was significantly
upregulated. To determine the functional role of GATA-4, peri-infarct
intramyocardial delivery of adenoviral vector expressing GATA-4 was done before
left anterior descending coronary artery ligation. Hearts treated with GATA-4
gene transfer exhibited significantly increased ejection fraction and fractional 
shortening. Accordingly, infarct size was significantly reduced. To determine the
cardioprotective mechanisms of GATA-4, myocardial angiogenesis, rate of
apoptosis, c-kit+ cardiac stemlike cells, and genes regulated by GATA-4 were
studied. The number of capillaries and stemlike cells was significantly
increased, and decreased apoptosis was observed.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the reversal of reduced GATA-4 activity
prevents adverse postinfarction remodeling through myocardial angiogenesis,
antiapoptosis, and stem cell recruitment. GATA-4-based gene transfer may
represent a novel, efficient therapeutic approach for heart failure.

PMID: 20200331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):13721-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063057. Epub
2010 Mar 1.

TEAD-1 overexpression in the mouse heart promotes an age-dependent heart
dysfunction.

Tsika RW(1), Ma L, Kehat I, Schramm C, Simmer G, Morgan B, Fine DM, Hanft LM,
McDonald KS, Molkentin JD, Krenz M, Yang S, Ji J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

TEA domain transcription factor-1 (TEAD-1) is essential for proper heart
development and is implicated in cardiac specific gene expression and the
hypertrophic response of primary cardiomyocytes to hormonal and mechanical
stimuli, and its activity increases in the pressure-overloaded hypertrophied rat 
heart. To investigate whether TEAD-1 is an in vivo modulator of cardiac specific 
gene expression and hypertrophy, we developed transgenic mice expressing
hemagglutinin-tagged TEAD-1 under the control of the muscle creatine kinase
promoter. We show that a sustained increase in TEAD-1 protein leads to an
age-dependent dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed decreases in
cardiac output, stroke volume, ejection fraction, and fractional shortening.
Isolated TEAD-1 hearts revealed decreased left ventricular power output that
correlated with increased betaMyHC protein. Histological analysis showed altered 
alignment of cardiomyocytes, septal wall thickening, and fibrosis, although
electrocardiography displayed a left axis shift of mean electrical axis.
Transcripts representing most members of the fetal heart gene program remained
elevated from fetal to adult life. Western blot analyses revealed decreases in
p-phospholamban, SERCA2a, p-CX43, p-GSK-3alpha/beta, nuclear beta-catenin, GATA4,
NFATc3/c4, and increased NCX1, nuclear DYKR1A, and Pur alpha/beta protein. TEAD-1
mice did not display cardiac hypertrophy. TEAD-1 mice do not tolerate stress as
they die over a 4-day period after surgical induction of pressure overload. These
data provide the first in vivo evidence that increased TEAD-1 can induce
characteristics of cardiac remodeling associated with cardiomyopathy and heart
failure.

PMCID: PMC2859535
PMID: 20194497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Jan;22(1):30-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2009.11.006. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Influence of gestational overfeeding on cardiac morphometry and hypertrophic
protein markers in fetal sheep.

Fan X(1), Turdi S, Ford SP, Hua Y, Nijland MJ, Zhu M, Nathanielsz PW, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine, University of
Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

Intrauterine overnutrition is associated with development of cardiovascular
disease in adulthood although the underlying mechanism has not been precisely
elucidated. This study evaluated the effects of maternal overnutrition on fetal
cardiac morphometry and hypertrophy-related mRNA/protein expression. Multiparous 
ewes were fed either 150% of National Research Council (NRC) nutrient
requirements (overfed group) or 100% of NRC requirements (control group) from 60 
days before mating to Day 75 (D75) of gestation, when ewes were euthanized.
Cardiac morphometry, histology and expression of Akt, forkhead-3a (Foxo3a),
glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK3ß), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), NFATc3
and GATA4, atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), calcineurin A and caspase-8 were
examined. Crown rump length, left and right ventricular free wall weights and
left ventricular wall thickness were increased in D75 overnourished fetuses.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed irregular myofiber orientation and
increased interstitial space in heart tissues from overfed group. Masson's
trichrome staining displayed myofiber hypertrophy and fascicular disarray in
heart tissues from overfed group. Overfeeding significantly enhanced Foxo3a
phosphorylation in both ventricles, while protein expression of Akt, Foxo3a,
GSK3ß and caspase-8 as well as phosphorylated Akt and GSK3ß in either ventricle
was unaffected. Overfeeding increased left ventricular mTOR, NFATc3 (both total
and phosphorylated) and calcineurin A. GATA4, pGATA4 and ANF expression were
unchanged in both ventricles. Collectively, our data suggested that overfeeding
during early to mid gestation (D75) leads to morphometric changes without overt
pathology which may be related to elevated expression of mTOR, NFATc3,
calcineurin A and phosphorylation of Foxo3a, mTOR and NFATc3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2901772
PMID: 20188535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cytogenet. 2010 Feb 18;3:3. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-3-3.

8p23.1 duplication syndrome differentiated from copy number variation of the
defensin cluster at prenatal diagnosis in four new families.

Barber JC(1), Bunyan D, Curtis M, Robinson D, Morlot S, Dermitzel A, Liehr T,
Alves C, Trindade J, Paramos AI, Cooper C, Ocraft K, Taylor EJ, Maloney VK.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust,
Salisbury, SP2 8BJ, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: The 8p23.1 duplication syndrome and copy number variation of the
8p23.1 defensin gene cluster are cytogenetically indistinguishable but distinct
at the molecular level. To our knowledge, the 8p23.1 duplication syndrome has
been described at prenatal diagnosis only once and we report our experience with 
four further apparent duplications ascertained at prenatal diagnosis.
METHODS: Additional material at band 8p23.1 was detected using conventional
G-banded cytogenetics in each case. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe
Amplification (MLPA) or Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) were used
depending on whether only DNA (Cases 1 and 4) or cytogenetic preparations (Cases 
2 and 3) were available from the laboratory of origin. The extent of the
duplication in Case 1 was retrospectively determined using array Comparative
Genomic Hybridisation (array CGH).
RESULTS: Three cases of 8p23.1 duplication syndrome were found (Cases 1 to 3).
Two were de novo and continued to term and the third, a paternally transmitted
duplication, was terminated because of a previous child with psychomotor delay
and 8p23.1 duplication syndrome. Case 1 was ascertained with a hypoplastic left
heart but the ventricular septal and interventricular defects, in Cases 2 and 3
respectively, were found after ascertainment for advanced maternal age. By
contrast, case 4 was a maternally transmitted copy number variation of the
defensin cluster with normal outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data underline the need to differentiate 8p23.1 duplications
from copy number variation of the defensin cluster using FISH, MLPA or array CGH.
Cardiac defects were ascertained by ultrasound in only one of the three
duplication 8p23.1 pregnancies but were visible in two of the three at 21 to 22
weeks gestation. Our results provide further evidence that both deletion and
duplication of the GATA4 transcription factor can give rise to a variety of
conotruncal heart defects with variable penetrance and expressivity.

PMCID: PMC2846957
PMID: 20167067  [PubMed]


378. Dev Biol. 2010 May 1;341(1):305-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.010. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Estrogen represses SOX9 during sex determination in the red-eared slider turtle
Trachemys scripta.

Barske LA(1), Capel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Production of male offspring in viviparous eutherian mammals requires a
sex-determining mechanism resistant to maternal hormones. This constraint is
relaxed in egg-laying species, which are sensitive to hormones during sex
determination and often use an increase in aromatase, the estrogen-synthesizing
enzyme, as a key feminizing signal. In the turtle Trachemys scripta, sex is
normally determined by temperature, but estrogen treatment overrides this cue and
leads exclusively to female development. We assessed whether the expression of
SOX9, a central male sex-determining gene in mammals, or three other conserved
transcription factors (WT1, GATA4, and LHX9) was regulated by estrogen signaling 
in the turtle. As in mice, all somatic cell types in the immature turtle gonad
initially expressed WT1 and GATA4, whereas SOX9 was restricted to the Sertoli
precursors and LHX9 to the coelomic epithelium and interstitium. After the
bipotential period, SOX9 was abruptly down-regulated at the female temperature.
Strikingly, embryos treated with beta-estradiol at the male temperature lost SOX9
expression more than two stages earlier than controls, though WT1, GATA4, and
LHX9 were unaffected. Conversely, inhibition of estrogen synthesis and signaling 
prevented or delayed SOX9 down-regulation at the female temperature. These
results suggest that endogenous estrogen feminizes the medulla of the bipotential
turtle gonad by inhibiting SOX9 expression. This mechanism may be involved in the
male-to-female sex reversal in wild populations exposed to environmental
estrogens, and is consistent with results showing that the estrogen receptor
represses Sox9 to block transdifferentiation of granulosa cells into Sertoli-like
cells in the adult mouse ovary.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Apr;298(4):G504-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Cooperation between HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 in initiating an enterocytic
differentiation program in a normal human intestinal epithelial progenitor cell
line.

Benoit YD(1), Paré F, Francoeur C, Jean D, Tremblay E, Boudreau F, Escaffit F,
Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Team on Digestive Epithelium, Département d'anatomie et de biologie
cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

In the intestinal epithelium, the Cdx, GATA, and HNF transcription factor
families are responsible for the expression of differentiation markers such as
sucrase-isomaltase. Although previous studies have shown that Cdx2 can induce
differentiation in rat intestinal IEC-6 cells, no data are available concerning
the direct implication of transcription factors on differentiation in human
normal intestinal epithelial cell types. We investigated the role of Cdx2,
GATA-4, and HNF-1alpha using the undifferentiated human intestinal epithelial
crypt cell line HIEC. These transcription factors were tested on proliferation
and expression of polarization and differentiation markers. Ectopic expression of
Cdx2 or HNF-1alpha, alone or in combination, altered cell proliferation abilities
through the regulation of cyclin D1 and p27 expression. HNF-1alpha and GATA-4
together induced morphological modifications of the cells toward polarization,
resulting in the appearance of functional features such as microvilli. HNF-1alpha
was also sufficient to induce the expression of cadherins and
dipeptidylpeptidase, whereas in combination with Cdx2 it allowed the expression
of the late differentiation marker sucrase-isomaltase. Large-scale analysis of
gene expression confirmed the cooperative effect of these factors. Finally,
although DcamKL1 and Musashi-1 expression were downregulated in differentiated
HIEC, other intestinal stem cell markers, such as Bmi1, were unaffected. These
observations show that, in cooperation with Cdx2, HNF-1alpha acts as a key factor
on human intestinal cells to trigger the onset of their functional
differentiation program whereas GATA-4 appears to promote morphological changes.

PMCID: PMC2907224
PMID: 20133952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2009 Oct;15(10):932-6.

[The GATA family in reproduction].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing CX(1), Yang JZ, Ai QY, Miao NZ, Zhao YF, Wang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Cheng-du, Sichuan 610041, China.

The GATA family proteins are a group of zinc finger transcription factors that
are expressed in human and mammalian animals and play an important role in
mammalian organ morphogenesis, cell proliferation and sex differentiation. GATA-4
and GATA-6 have been identified in the ovaries and testes of humans, mice, pigs
and chickens. GATA-4 contributes to fetal male gonadal development by regulating 
the genes that mediate Müllerian duct regression and the onset of testosterone
production. GATA-4 and GATA-6 are localized in and regulate the function of the
ovarian and testicular somatic cells of fetal mice, especially granulosa cells,
thecal cells, Sertoli cells and Leydig cells. GATA-4 is also present in the germ 
cells of fetal and prepubertal mice.

PMID: 20112745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 19;5(1):e8777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008777.

Aberrant gene promoter methylation associated with sporadic multiple colorectal
cancer.

Gonzalo V(1), Lozano JJ, Muñoz J, Balaguer F, Pellisé M, Rodríguez de Miguel C,
Andreu M, Jover R, Llor X, Giráldez MD, Ocaña T, Serradesanferm A,
Alonso-Espinaco V, Jimeno M, Cuatrecasas M, Sendino O, Castellví-Bel S, Castells 
A; Gastrointestinal Oncology Group of the Spanish Gastroenterological
Association.

Collaborators: Morillas JD, Muñoz R, Manzano M, Colina F, Díaz J, Ibarrola C,
López G, Ibáñez A, Castells A, Piñol V, Castellví-Bel S, Balaguer F, Gonzalo V,
Ocaña T, Giráldez MD, Pellisé M, Elizalde JI, Serradesanferm A, Piqué JM, Lanas
A, Alcedo J, Ortego J, Cubiella J, Díez MS, Salgado M, Sánchez E, Vega M, Andreu 
M, Bessa X, Bellosillo B, Iglesias M, Navarro G, Bory F, Seoane A, Bujanda L,
Arenas JI, Montalvo I, Torrado J, Cosme A, Payá A, Jover R, Penalva JC, Alenda C,
Rigau J, Serrano A, Giménez A, Saló J, Batiste-Alentorn E, Autonell J, Barniol R,
García AM, Carballo F, Bienvenido A, Sanz E, González F, Sánchez J, Medina E,
Cuquerella J, Canelles P, Martorell M, García JA, Quiles F, Orti E, Clofent J,
Seoane J, Tardío A, Sanchez E, Bujanda L, Muñoz C, Ramírez Mdel M, Sánchez A,
Llor X, Xicola RM, Piñol M, Rosinach M, Roca A, Pons E, Hernández JM, Gassull MA,
Fernández-Bañares F, Viver JM, Salas A, Espinós J, Forné M, Esteve M, Reñé JM,
Piñol C, Buenestado J, Viñas J, Quintero E, Nicolás D, Parra A, Martín A,
Argüello L, Pons V, Pertejo V, Sala T, Naranjo A, Giraldez MD, García Mdel V,
López P, López F, Ortega R, Briceño J, Padillo J, Vilella A, Dolz C, Andreu H.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) multiplicity has been mainly related to
polyposis and non-polyposis hereditary syndromes. In sporadic CRC, aberrant gene 
promoter methylation has been shown to play a key role in carcinogenesis,
although little is known about its involvement in multiplicity. To assess the
effect of methylation in tumor multiplicity in sporadic CRC, hypermethylation of 
key tumor suppressor genes was evaluated in patients with both multiple and
solitary tumors, as a proof-of-concept of an underlying epigenetic defect.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examined a total of 47
synchronous/metachronous primary CRC from 41 patients, and 41 gender, age (5-year
intervals) and tumor location-paired patients with solitary tumors. Exclusion
criteria were polyposis syndromes, Lynch syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease.
DNA methylation at the promoter region of the MGMT, CDKN2A, SFRP1, TMEFF2, HS3ST2
(3OST2), RASSF1A and GATA4 genes was evaluated by quantitative methylation
specific PCR in both tumor and corresponding normal appearing colorectal mucosa
samples. Overall, patients with multiple lesions exhibited a higher degree of
methylation in tumor samples than those with solitary tumors regarding all
evaluated genes. After adjusting for age and gender, binomial logistic regression
analysis identified methylation of MGMT2 (OR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.10 to 1.97; p =
0.008) and RASSF1A (OR, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.01 to 4.13; p = 0.047) as variables
independently associated with tumor multiplicity, being the risk related to
methylation of any of these two genes 4.57 (95% CI, 1.53 to 13.61; p = 0.006).
Moreover, in six patients in whom both tumors were available, we found a
correlation in the methylation levels of MGMT2 (r = 0.64, p = 0.17), SFRP1 (r =
0.83, 0.06), HPP1 (r = 0.64, p = 0.17), 3OST2 (r = 0.83, p = 0.06) and GATA4 (r =
0.6, p = 0.24). Methylation in normal appearing colorectal mucosa from patients
with multiple and solitary CRC showed no relevant difference in any evaluated
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a proof-of-concept that gene promoter
methylation is associated with tumor multiplicity. This underlying epigenetic
defect may have noteworthy implications in the prevention of patients with
sporadic CRC.

PMCID: PMC2808250
PMID: 20098741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Reproduction. 2010 Apr;139(4):749-57. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0532. Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Establishment of long-term monolayer cultures of somatic cells from human fetal
testes and expansion of peritubular myoid cells in the presence of androgen.

Cowan G(1), Childs AJ, Anderson RA, Saunders PT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.

The somatic (Sertoli cell (SC), Leydig cell (LC), and peritubular myoid (PTM)
cell) cells play key roles in development of the fetal testis. We established
monolayer cultures from second trimester human testes and investigated the
pattern of expression of cell-lineage characteristic mRNAs. Expression of some
SC-associated genes (SRY, SOX9, WT1, GATA4, and SF1) was detectable up to and
including passage 3 (P3), while others (anti-Müllerian hormone; desert hedgehog) 
present prior to dissociation were not expressed in the cultured cells.
Transcripts encoding the androgen receptor were expressed but addition of
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) had no impact on expression of mRNAs expressed in SC or
LC. Total concentrations of mRNAs encoding smooth muscle actin (ACTA2) and desmin
increased from P1 to P3; an increasing proportion of the cells in the cultures
were immunopositive for ACTA2 consistent with proliferation/differentiation of
PTM cells. In conclusion, somatic cell monolayer cultures were established from
human fetal testes; these cultures could form the basis for future studies based 
on isolation of purified populations of somatic cells and manipulation of gene
expression that is difficult to achieve with organ culture systems. Our results
suggest that fetal SC do not maintain a fully differentiated phenotype in vitro, 
yet PTM (ACTA2 positive) cells readily adapt to monolayer culture conditions in
the presence of DHT. This culture system provides an opportunity to study the
impact of regulatory factors on gene expression in PTM cells, a population
thought to play a key role in mediating androgen action within the developing
testis.

PMID: 20089665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Feb;152A(2):340-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33194.

Pancreatic hypoplasia presenting with neonatal diabetes mellitus in association
with congenital heart defect and developmental delay.

Balasubramanian M(1), Shield JP, Acerini CL, Walker J, Ellard S, Marchand M,
Polak M, Vaxillaire M, Crolla JA, Bunyan DJ, Mackay DJ, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.

Congenital pancreatic hypoplasia is a rare cause of neonatal diabetes. We report 
on a series of three patients with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart
defects. All had abdominal scan evidence of pancreatic agenesis. In addition,
Patient 1 had a ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary
artery stenosis; Patient 2 had a truncus arteriosus and Patient 3 had tetralogy
of Fallot. Two of the three patients have developmental delay. All three patients
were isolated cases within the family. Investigations included sequencing of GCK,
ABCC8, IPF1, NEUROD1, PTF1A, HNF1B, INS, ISL1, NGN3, HHEX, G6PC2, TCF7L2, SOX4,
FOXP3 (Patients 1 and 2), GATA4 and KCNJ11 genes (all three patients), but no
mutations were found. Genetic investigation to exclude paternal UPD 6,
methylation aberrations and duplications of 6q24 was also negative in all three. 
22q11 deletion was excluded in all three patients. Array CGH in Patient (1)
showed a approximately 250 kb, paternally inherited duplication of chromosome 12q
[arr cgh 12q24.33 (B35:CHR12:131808577-132057649++) pat], not found in the other 
two patients. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic hypoplasia
with congenital heart defects has been reported before and may represent a
distinct condition. We discuss this rare association and review previously
reported literature.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20082465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9556-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070458. Epub 2010
Jan 17.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 is a component of the p300/GATA4 complex required for
phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes.

Sunagawa Y(1), Morimoto T, Takaya T, Kaichi S, Wada H, Kawamura T, Fujita M,
Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein GATA4 is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription
factors and forms a complex with an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, p300.
Disruption of this complex results in the inhibition of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
and heart failure in vivo. By tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometric
analyses, we identified cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (Cdk9) as a novel GATA4-binding
partner. Cdk9 also formed a complex with p300 as well as GATA4 and cyclin T1. We 
showed that p300 was required for the interaction of GATA4 with Cdk9 and for the 
kinase activity of Cdk9. Conversely, Cdk9 kinase activity was required for the
p300-induced transcriptional activities, DNA binding, and acetylation of GATA4.
Furthermore, the kinase activity of Cdk9 was required for the phosphorylation of 
p300 as well as for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. These findings demonstrate that
Cdk9 forms a functional complex with the p300/GATA4 and is required for
p300/GATA4- transcriptional pathway during cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC2843206
PMID: 20081228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Jun;17(6):1025-33. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.204. Epub 2010
Jan 15.

Nitric oxide repression of Nanog promotes mouse embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Mora-Castilla S(1), Tejedo JR, Hmadcha A, Cahuana GM, Martín F, Soria B, Bedoya
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine-University
Pablo de Olavide, CIBERDEM, Seville, Spain.

Exposure of mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells to high concentrations of chemical
nitric oxide (NO) donors promotes differentiation, but the mechanisms involved in
this process at the gene expression level are poorly defined. In this study we
report that culture of mES cells in the presence of 0.25-1.0 mM
diethylenetriamine nitric oxide adduct (DETA-NO) leads to downregulation of Nanog
and Oct4, the two master genes involved in the control of the pluripotent state. 
This action of NO was also apparent in the human ES cell line, HS 181. The
suppressive action of NO on Nanog gene depends on the activation of p53 repressor
protein by covalent modifications, such as pSer15, pSer315, pSer392 and acetyl
Lys 379. NO-induced repression of Nanog is also associated with binding of
trimethylated histone H3 and pSer315 p53 to its promoter region. In addition,
exposure to 0.5 mM DETA-NO induces early differentiation events of cells with
acquisition of epithelial morphology and expression of markers of definitive
endoderm, such as FoxA2, Gata4, Hfn1-beta and Sox 17. This phenotype was
increased when cells were treated with valproic acid (VPA) for 10 days.

PMID: 20075941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Cell Mol Med. 2010 Apr;14(4):878-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01009.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells into beating cardiomyocytes.

Choi YS(1), Dusting GJ, Stubbs S, Arunothayaraj S, Han XL, Collas P, Morrison WA,
Dilley RJ.

Author information: 
(1)O'Brien Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

Human adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) may differentiate into cardiomyocytes and
this provides a source of donor cells for tissue engineering. In this study, we
evaluated cardiomyogenic differentiation protocols using a DNA demethylating
agent 5-azacytidine (5-aza), a modified cardiomyogenic medium (MCM), a histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) and co-culture with neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes. 5-aza treatment reduced both cardiac actin and TropT mRNA
expression. Incubation in MCM only slightly increased gene expression (1.5- to
1.9-fold) and the number of cells co-expressing nkx2.5/sarcomeric alpha-actin
(27.2% versus 0.2% in control). TSA treatment increased cardiac actin mRNA
expression 11-fold after 1 week, which could be sustained for 2 weeks by
culturing cells in cardiomyocyte culture medium. TSA-treated cells also stained
positively for cardiac myosin heavy chain, alpha-actin, TropI and connexin43;
however, none of these treatments produced beating cells. ASCs in non-contact
co-culture showed no cardiac differentiation; however, ASCs co-cultured in direct
contact co-culture exhibited a time-dependent increase in cardiac actin mRNA
expression (up to 33-fold) between days 3 and 14. Immunocytochemistry revealed
co-expression of GATA4 and Nkx2.5, alpha-actin, TropI and cardiac myosin heavy
chain in CM-DiI labelled ASCs. Most importantly, many of these cells showed
spontaneous contractions accompanied by calcium transients in culture. Human ASC 
(hASC) showed synchronous Ca(2+) transient and contraction synchronous with
surrounding rat cardiomyocytes (106 beats/min.). Gap junctions also formed
between them as observed by dye transfer. In conclusion, cell-to-cell interaction
was identified as a key inducer for cardiomyogenic differentiation of hASCs. This
method was optimized by co-culture with contracting cardiomyocytes and provides a
potential cardiac differentiation system to progress applications for cardiac
cell therapy or tissue engineering.

PMCID: PMC3823119
PMID: 20070436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Environ Health Perspect. 2010 Mar;118(3):400-6. doi: 10.1289/ehp.0901161. Epub
2009 Oct 22.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma mediates bisphenol A inhibition 
of FSH-stimulated IGF-1, aromatase, and estradiol in human granulosa cells.

Kwintkiewicz J(1), Nishi Y, Yanase T, Giudice LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical used as a plasticizer, is a potent
endocrine disruptor that, even in low concentrations, disturbs normal development
and functions of reproductive organs in different species.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated whether BPA affects human ovarian granulosa cell
function.
METHODS: We treated KGN granulosa cells and granulosa cells from subjects
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 
BPA, or BPA plus FSH in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We then evaluated
expression of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), aromatase, and transcription 
factors known to mediate aromatase induction by FSH [including steroidogenic
factor-1 (SF-1), GATA4, cAMP response element binding protein-1 (CREB-1), and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma)], as well as
17beta-estradiol (E2) secretion. KGN cells were transfected with a
PPARgamma-containing vector, followed by assessment of aromatase and IGF-I
expression.
RESULTS: BPA reduced FSH-induced IGF-1 and aromatase expression and E2 secretion 
in a dose-dependent fashion. Similar effects on aromatase were observed in IVF
granulosa cells. SF-1 and GATA4, but not CREB-1, were reduced after BPA
treatment, although PPARgamma, an inhibitor of aromatase, was significantly
up-regulated by BPA in a dose-dependent manner, with simultaneous decrease of
aromatase. Overexpression of PPARgamma in KGN cells reduced FSH-stimulated
aromatase and IGF-1 mRNAs, with increasing concentrations of the transfected
expression vector, mimicking BPA action. Also, BPA reduced granulosa cell DNA
synthesis without changing DNA fragmentation, suggesting that BPA does not induce
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the data demonstrate that BPA induces PPARgamma, which
mediates down-regulation of FSH-stimulated IGF-1, SF-1, GATA4, aromatase, and E2 
in human granulosa cells. These observations support a potential role of altered 
steroidogenesis and proliferation within the ovarian follicular compartment due
to this endocrine disruptor.

PMCID: PMC2854770
PMID: 20064783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):535-47. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22197.

The tbx/bHLH transcription factor mga regulates gata4 and organogenesis.

Rikin A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.

The mga gene encodes a unique transcription factor containing both TBOX and
bHLHzip DNA-binding domains. Here we describe the structure, expression pattern, 
and loss-of-function phenotype for zebrafish mga. The mga gene is conserved with 
mammalian homologs for both DNA-binding domains. It is expressed maternally, and 
subsequently in the developing brain, heart, and gut, and its depletion causes
morphogenetic defects in each of these organ systems. The heart and gut
phenotypes are similar to those described previously for loss of gata4, and the
mga morphant shows increased levels of gata4 transcripts in lateral mesoderm.
Knockdown of gata4 rescues the early heart-looping defect (but not the gut
defect), indicating that mga restricts the normal levels of Gata4 required for
heart tube looping, while both genes are important for gut development.
Transcript profiling experiments show that mga functions early to influence key
regulators of mesendoderm, including tbx6, cas, and sox17.

PMCID: PMC3613857
PMID: 20044811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 24;4(12):e8454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008454.

Conserved usage of alternative 5' untranslated exons of the GATA4 gene.

Mazaud Guittot S(1), Bouchard MF, Robert-Grenon JP, Robert C, Goodyer CG,
Silversides DW, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Quebec City, Canada.

BACKGROUND: GATA4 is an essential transcription factor required for the
development and function of multiple organs. Despite this important role, our
knowledge of how the GATA4 gene is regulated remains limited. To better
understand this regulation, we characterized the 5' region of the mouse, rat, and
human GATA4 genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using 5' RACE, we identified novel transcription 
start sites in all three species. GATA4 is expressed as multiple transcripts with
varying 5' ends encoded by alternative untranslated first exons. Two of these
non-coding first exons are conserved between species: exon 1a located 3.5 kb
upstream of the GATA4 ATG site in exon 2, and a second first exon (exon 1b)
located 28 kb further upstream. Expression of both mRNA variants was found in all
GATA4-expressing organs but with a preference for the exon 1a-containing
transcript. The exception was the testis where exon 1a- and 1b-containing
transcripts were similarly expressed. In some tissues such as the intestine,
alternative transcript expression appears to be regionally regulated. Polysome
analysis suggests that both mRNA variants contribute to GATA4 protein synthesis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, our results indicate that the GATA4
gene closely resembles the other GATA family members in terms of gene structure
where alternative first exon usage appears to be an important mechanism for
regulating its tissue- and cell-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC2795200
PMID: 20041118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2009 Dec;29(6):741-4. doi:
10.1007/s11596-009-0614-2. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

Skeletal muscle-derived stem cells exhibit cardiocyte competences.

Li J(1), Fu D, Hong G, Chen J, Kang H, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China. lijin1973@hotmail.com

Adult stem cells from skeletal muscle cells were induced to differentiate into
cardiocytes to see if stem cells from another different but
histologically-comparable tissues can differentiate to the target cells. Skeletal
muscles-derived stem cells (MDSCs) were isolated from adult skeleton muscle
tissues by differential adhesion, and immunocytochemically identified by using
Sca-1. In order to induce the proliferation but not differentiation of MDSCs, the
cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium/F12 (DMEM/F12)
supplemented with 1:50 B27, 20 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), 20
ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF) in a suspension for 6 days. Then these stem
cells were treated with 5 mumol/L 5-azacytidine for 24 h in an adherence culture.
The characteristics of induced cells were examined by immunocytochemistry,
quantitative real time RT-PCR and morphological observation of cell phenotype.
Our results showed that the appearance of some cells gradually changed from
spindle-shape into polygonal or short-column-shape. Some of these post-treated
cells could contract spontaneously and rhythmically. The expression of GATA-4 and
cTnT was increased 1 and 2 week(s) after the treatment. And about 16.6% of
post-treated cells were cTnT-positive. Therefore, we are led to conclude that
skeletal muscle-derived stem cells could differentiate into cardiocyte-like
cells, which exhibited some characteristics of cardiocytes.

PMID: 20037819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Development. 2010 Jan;137(1):3; author reply 3-4. doi: 10.1242/dev.044917.

MHCalpha and cardiogenesis.

Samuel LJ, Latinkic BV.

Comment on
    Development. 2008 Oct;135(19):3185-90.

PMID: 20023154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biol Reprod. 2010 Apr;82(4):687-97. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.075697. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Cloning of complementary DNAs encoding structurally related homeoproteins from
preimplantation mouse embryos: their involvement in the differentiation of
embryonic stem cells.

Saito K(1), Abe H, Nakazawa M, Irokawa E, Watanabe M, Hosoi Y, Soma M, Kasuga K, 
Kojima I, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Bioresource Sciences, Akita
Prefectural University, Akita, Japan.

During the preimplantation development of mouse embryos between the 4-cell to
8-cell stage and the morula stage, when the first irreversible segregation of
cell fates proceeds into the pluripotent inner cell mass (progenitor cells to
form the fetus) and the trophectoderm (to form the placenta) of blastocysts,
pluripotency-maintaining and differentiation-inducing genes are expressed to
coordinately regulate cell fates. Three structurally related cDNAs (Crxos1,
Crxos1 sv2, and Crxos1 tv3) that exhibited concomitant elevated expression during
this critical period were identified by subtractive cDNA cloning. CRXOS1 contains
two homeodomains, while CRXOS1 sv2 and CRXOS1 tv3 each contain one of the
homeodomains included in CRXOS1. Crxos1, Crxos1 sv2, and Crxos1 tv3 were
expressed differentially during in vitro embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation. Even under differentiation-inducing conditions, forced
expression of Crxos1 sv2 inhibited the differentiation of ES cells. In contrast, 
under conditions that promote self-renewal of ES cells, forced expression of
Crxos1 induced differentiation. Forced expression of Crxos1 resulted in induction
of Gata4 but in repression of T, probably indicating that Crxos1 promotes the
differentiation of ES cells into primitive endoderm, while inhibiting
differentiation into mesoderm. On the other hand, no apparent effects of forced
expression of Crxos1 tv3 were observed. Taken together, it was concluded that
these transcripts encoding homeoproteins are capable of regulating the
maintenance and/or differentiation of mouse ES cells and likely regulate that of 
preimplantation embryos.

PMID: 20018908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):113-24. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082704as.

Pluripotency of bank vole embryonic cells depends on FGF2 and activin A signaling
pathways.

Suwinska A(1), Tarkowski AK, Ciemerych MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute of Zoology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.

The objective of this study was to investigate the capability of bank vole
(Myodes glareolus) embryonic cells to sustain their pluripotent character during 
in vitro culture, and to determine the optimal conditions for derivation of
embryonic stem (ES) cells. We compared the presence of specific pluripotency
(Oct4, Ssea1) and differentiation markers (Gata4 - primitive endoderm marker;
Cdx2 - trophectoderm marker) in blastocysts and inner cell mass (ICM) outgrowths 
obtained from blastocysts of bank vole, and two mouse hybrids F1(C57Bl/6xCBA/H)
and F1(C57Bl/6x129/Sv), which differ in the permissiveness of giving rise to ES
cells. We found that, in contrast to mouse, the expression of pluripotency
markers in the cells of bank vole ICM outgrowths is progressively downregulated
and rapidly lost by the 4th day of culture. This correlates with the appearance
of cells expressing Gata4 and Cdx2, indicating differentiation towards primitive 
endoderm and derivatives of trophectoderm, respectively. We have also shown that 
heterologous cytokine leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) in conjunction with
either homologous or heterologous feeder layer is unable to delay differentiation
and preserve pluripotency of bank vole embryonic cells. Thus, the conditions
optimised for mouse do not support the maintenance of bank vole embryonic cells
in the undifferentiated state and do not allow for the isolation of the ES cells.
Instead, combination of fibroblast growth factor 2 and activin A allows retention
of Oct4 expression in bank vole blastocyst outgrowths during 4-day culture,
indicating that signaling pathways operating in human, rather than mouse ES
cells, might be involved in the process of self-renewal of bank vole embryonic
cells.

PMID: 20013653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Mar;38(3):415-21. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.029405. Epub 2009 
Dec 7.

New insights into the regulation of CYP2C9 gene expression: the role of the
transcription factor GATA-4.

Mwinyi J(1), Nekvindová J, Cavaco I, Hofmann Y, Pedersen RS, Landman E, Mkrtchian
S, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden. Jessica.Mwinyi@ki.se

CYP2C9 is an important drug-metabolizing enzyme that metabolizes, e.g., warfarin,
antidiabetics, and antiphlogistics. However, the endogenous regulation of this
enzyme is largely unknown. In this study, we examined the role of GATA
transcription factors in the gene expression of CYP2C9. We investigated four
putative GATA binding sites within the first 200 base pairs of CYP2C9 promoter at
the positions I: -173/-170, II: -167/-164, III: -118/-115, and IV: -106/-103.
Luciferase activity driven by a wild-type CYP2C9 promoter construct was strongly 
up-regulated in Huh-7 cells upon cotransfection with expression plasmids for
GATA-2 and GATA-4, whereas mutations introduced into GATA binding site III or I
and II reduced this induction to a significant extent. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays revealed specific binding of GATA-4 and GATA-6 to the
oligonucleotides containing GATA binding sites I and II. Furthermore, the
association of GATA-4 with CYP2C9 promoter was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in HepG2 cells. Taken together, these data strongly
suggest an involvement of liver-specific transcription factor GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of CYP2C9.

PMID: 19995889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Mar;162(3):625-31. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0734. Epub 2009 Dec
7.

Differential developmental expression of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6,
their cofactor FOG-2 and downstream target genes in testicular carcinoma in situ 
and germ cell tumors.

Salonen J(1), Rajpert-De Meyts E, Mannisto S, Nielsen JE, Graem N, Toppari J,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Paediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Biomedicum Helsinki, PO Box 20, SF-00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

OBJECTIVE: Testicular germ cell cancer is the most common malignancy among young 
males. The pre-invasive precursor, carcinoma in situ testis (CIS), presumably
originates from arrested and transformed fetal gonocytes. Given that GATA
transcription factors have essential roles in embryonic and testicular
development, we explored the expression of GATA-4, GATA-6, cofactor friend of
GATA (FOG)-2, and downstream target genes during human testis development and
addressed the question whether changes in this pathway may contribute to germ
cell neoplasms.
METHODS: Fetal testis, testicular CIS, and overt tumor samples were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry for GATA-4, GATA-6, FOG-2, steroidogenic factor 1
(NR5A1/SF1), anti-Müllerian hormone/Müllerian-inhibiting substance (AMH), and
inhibin-alpha (INHalpha).
RESULTS: GATA-4 was not expressed in normal germ cells, except for a subset of
gonocytes at the 15th gestational week. The CIS cells expressed GATA-4 and GATA-6
heterogeneously, whereas most of the CIS cells expressed GATA-4 cofactor FOG-2.
GATA target gene SF-1 was expressed heterogeneously in CIS cells, whereas
INHalpha and AMH were mostly negative. Seminomas and yolk sac tumors were
positive for GATA-4 and GATA-6, but mostly negative for FOG-2 and the GATA target
genes. In contrast, pluripotent embryonal carcinomas and choriocarcinomas were
GATA-4 and GATA-6 negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential expression of the GATA-4 target genes suggested
cell-specific functions of GATA-4 in the germ and somatic cells. The GATA-4
expression in early fetal gonocytes, CIS, and seminoma cells but the absence in
more mature germ cells is consistent with the early fetal origin of CIS cells and
suggests that GATA-4 is involved in early germ cell differentiation.

PMID: 19969558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Circ J. 2010 Jan;74(1):156-62. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Aldosterone signaling associates with p300/GATA4 transcriptional pathway during
the hypertrophic response of cardiomyocytes.

Yoshida Y(1), Morimoto T, Takaya T, Kawamura T, Sunagawa Y, Wada H, Fujita M,
Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aldosterone exerts its effect by binding to specific
mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs). Spironolactone blocks the aldosterone system, 
which ameliorates heart failure in humans, but the precise molecular mechanisms
of MR blockade are unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were stimulated with
phenylephrine (PE), aldosterone, and/or spironolactone. The association of the MR
with p300, a transcriptional coactivator of GATA4 required for hypertrophic
responses, was examined. MR and p300 synergistically activated GATA4-dependent
atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) promoter activities. The stimulation of
cardiomyocytes with PE induced translocation of the MRs into the nuclei and
markedly increased the association of MRs with p300. Compatible with the
synergistic activation by the MR and p300, aldosterone further augmented the
PE-induced increase in cell size and induction of ANF gene transcription.
Blockade of MR activation by spironolactone inhibited the PE-induced nuclear
translocation of MRs and hypertrophic responses.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time it has been demonstrated that the aldosterone/MR 
system associates with the p300/GATA4 transcriptional pathway during the
hypertrophic response of cardiomyocytes, and may provide a mechanism of the
beneficial effects of aldosterone-blocking agents in heart failure therapy in
humans. (Circ J 2010; 74: 156 - 162).

PMID: 19966502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Dec;73(12):2754-7. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Dietary resistant starch reduces histone acetylation on the glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide gene in the jejunum.

Shimada M(1), Mochizuki K, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Nutritional and
Environmental Sciences, Global COE Program, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka-shi,
Japan.

We have reported that dietary resistant starch (RS) reduces glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) mRNA levels along the jejunoileum in both normal
and diabetic rats. In this study, we found that jejunal reduction of the GIP gene
by feeding normal rats dietary RS was associated with decreases in histone H3 and
H4 acetylation on the promoter/enhancer region of the gene.

PMID: 19966471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2010 Mar;5(1):2-12.

Rho kinase inhibitor y27632 alters the balance between pluripotency and early
differentiation events in human embryonic stem cells.

Sivasubramaniyan K(1), Pal R, Totey S, Bhat VS, Totey S.

Author information: 
(1)Stempeutics Research Pvt. Ltd., Manipal Hospital, Bangalore-560 017, India.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) differentiate spontaneously in culture and
develop a complex microenvironment comprising of autologously derived niche that 
in turn supports their pluripotency. The basic hypothesis that we deal with is
that hESCs undergoing differentiation, sequentially generate trophectoderm and
endoderm lineages and thereafter influence further events through the production 
of growth factors. These factors control the fate of hESCs either by promoting or
retarding the recruitment of new cells in the differentiation program. This
scenario therefore represents an analog of the in vivo situation in which
extra-embryonic tissues influence the behavior of the inner cell mass (ICM). The 
premise of the paper is the Rho kinase inhibitor Y27632 that can spatiotemporally
alter this balance between pluripotency and differentiation. To evaluate the
composition and inclination of lineage specification during spontaneous
differentiation, we have studied the hESC colonies and their surrounding niche as
interdependent entities. We show that the population of fibroblastic niche that
surrounds hESC colonies co-expresses trophectoderm and niche cell markers
including SSEA1, hCG, progesterone, HAND1, pSmad1 and FGFR1 as early as day 4. A 
sudden increase in the expression of GATA4 and AFP secretion indicated putative
endoderm formation on day 6 in both control and Y27632 treated cultures. On day
6, 20 microM of Y27632 supplementation significantly reduced the
trophectoderm-like niche population without affecting endoderm formation,
enhanced the average size and number of hESC colonies, decreased IGF1 secretion
thereby improving the pluripotency. Overall our findings support the afore
mentioned hypothesis and demonstrate that closely packed epithelial
trophectoderm-like cells bordering the hESC colonies present an initial and
imminent localized niche which is spatiotemporally regulated. Such advances in
understanding the behavior and modulation of hESC and its surrounding niche would
facilitate better differentiation protocols for applications in regenerative
medicine and drug screening.

PMID: 19951253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Korean Circ J. 2009 May;39(5):198-204. doi: 10.4070/kcj.2009.39.5.198. Epub 2009 
May 28.

Enhanced cardiomyogenic differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells.

Yang J(1), Ko SJ, Kim BS, Kim HS, Park S, Hong D, Hong SW, Choi JH, Park CY, Choi
SC, Hong SJ, Lim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: We investigated the effects of different
concentrations of serum, 5-azacytidine, and culture time on the cardiomyogenic
differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells in the course of developing
an efficient protocol for generating the cardiomyogenic lineage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: P19 cells were plated at a density of 1x10(6) cells on
10-cm bacterial dishes for 96 hours in the presence of 1% dimethyl sulfoxide to
form embryoid bodies. The embryoid bodies were cultured in medium with 2% or 10% 
fetal bovine serum for an additional 10 or 15 consecutive days in the presence of
0, 1, or 3 microM 5-azacytidine.
RESULTS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis showed
that the messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression of cardiac muscle-specific 
genes, such as GATA4, alpha-actin, alpha-myosin heavy chain, and cardiac troponin
T, were significantly higher in the 15-day culture groups than in the 10-day
culture groups. Furthermore, the cardiac muscle-specific genes were expressed
more in the high-serum groups compared to the low-serum groups regardless of the 
culture time. Cardiomyogenic differentiation of the P19 cells was most effective 
in 1 microM 5-azacytidine regardless of the serum concentrations. In addition,
the stimulation effects of 5-azacytidine on cardiomyogenic differentiation were
more significant under low-serum culture conditions compared to high-serum
culture conditions. Cardiomyogenic differentiation of P19 cells was further
confirmed by immunostaining with cardiac muscle-specific antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results demonstrated that cardiomyogenic
differentiation of P19 cells was enhanced by a combination of different
experimental factors.

PMCID: PMC2771787
PMID: 19949579  [PubMed]


400. Heart. 2010 May;96(9):673-7. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in
laterality genes.

De Luca A(1), Sarkozy A, Consoli F, Ferese R, Guida V, Dentici ML, Mingarelli R, 
Bellacchio E, Tuo G, Limongelli G, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. a.deluca@css-mendel.it

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is
still largely unknown. In general, TGA is not associated with the more common
genetic disorders nor with extracardiac anomalies, whereas it can be found in
individuals with lateralisation defects, heterotaxy and asplenia syndrome (right 
isomerism).
OBJECTIVE: To analyse genes previously associated with heterotaxy in order to
assess mutations in familial TGA unassociated with other features of laterality
defects.
METHODS: Probands of seven families with isolated TGA and a family history of
concordant or discordant congenital heart disease were screened for mutations in 
the ZIC3, ACVR2B, LEFTYA, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1, CRELD1, GATA4 and NKX2.5
genes.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis allowed the identification of three sequence
variations in two out of seven TGA probands. A FOXH1 (Pro21Ser) missense variant 
was found in a proband who was also heterozogous for an amino acid substitution
(Gly17Cys) in the ZIC3 gene. This ZIC3 variant was also found in another family
member with a second sequence variation (Val150Ile) in the NKX2.5 gene
homeodomain who was affected by multiple ventricular septal defects. A second
proband was found to harbour a splice site variant (IVS2-1G-->C) in the NODAL
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides evidence that some cases of familial TGA 
are caused by mutations in laterality genes and therefore are part of the same
disease spectrum of heterotaxy syndrome, and argues for an oligogenic or complex 
mode of inheritance in these pedigrees.

PMID: 19933292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Circ Res. 2010 Feb 5;106(2):346-53. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.205724. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Lamina-associated polypeptide 2alpha loss impairs heart function and stress
response in mice.

Gotic I(1), Leschnik M, Kolm U, Markovic M, Haubner BJ, Biadasiewicz K, Metzler
B, Stewart CL, Foisner R.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/3, 
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2010 Feb 5;106(2):234-7.

RATIONALE: Lamina-associated polypeptide (LAP)2alpha is a mammalian
chromatin-binding protein that interacts with a fraction of A-type lamins in the 
nuclear interior. Because mutations in lamins and LAP2alpha lead to cardiac
disorders in humans, we hypothesized that these factors may play important roles 
in heart development and adult tissue homeostasis.
OBJECTIVE: We asked whether the presence of LAP2alpha was required for normal
cardiac function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To study the molecular mechanisms of the disease, we
analyzed heart structure and function in complete and conditional Lap2alpha(-/-) 
mice as well as Lap2alpha(-/-)/Mdx mutants. Unlike conditional deletion of
LAP2alpha in late embryonic striated muscle, its complete knockout caused
systolic dysfunction in young mice, accompanied by sporadic fibrosis in old
animals, as well as deregulation of major cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and
myocyte enhancer factor 2c. Activation of compensatory pathways, including
downregulation of beta-adrenergic receptor signaling, resulted in reduced
responsiveness of the myocardium to chronic beta-adrenergic stimulation and
stalled the progression of LAP2alpha-deficient hearts from hypertrophy toward
cardiac failure. Dystrophin deficiency in an Mdx background resulted in a
transient rescue of the Lap2alpha(-/-) phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a novel role of LAP2alpha in the maintenance of
cardiac function under normal and stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC2818815
PMID: 19926876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Mol Histol. 2009 Aug;40(4):287-99. doi: 10.1007/s10735-009-9240-3. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Immunohistochemical study of nuclear changes associated with male germ cell death
and spermiogenesis.

McClusky LM(1), Patrick S, Barnhoorn IE, van Dyk JC, de Jager C, Bornman MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nursing Science, Narvik University College, Narvik,
Norway. leonmc@hin.no

In a previous study on the effects of gestational and lactational exposure of
para-nonylphenol on male rats, we noted in both induced and uninduced rats, that 
variations in cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining patterns were associated with
distinct nuclear alterations in mainly basally located germ cells (spermatogonia 
and preleptotene spermatocytes). These were re-analysed and compared with cleaved
caspase-3-labeled germ cells in the aging human and the spermatogenically active 
catfish testis. In the rat testes, cytoplasmic immunostaining was progressively
associated with lateral compression of the nucleus, its break up into large
pieces which can contain immunostained marginated chromatin masses. The pale
remnants of the nucleus continued to shrink in size concomitant with the
appearance of blue-purplish stained regions in the cytoplasm similar in color to 
the condensed chromatin in spermatids, a condition which was TUNEL-negative.
These large clumps of chromatin also eventually disappeared, giving rise to cells
resembling cytoplasmic ghosts, a condition which was TUNEL-positive. By contrast,
the immunolabeled nuclei of human and catfish germ cells condensed into a single 
mass, after which they lost immunoreactivity. To exclude the possibility that
these observations could reflect alterations in Sertoli nuclei, rat testicular
sections were probed with a mouse anti-human GATA-4 monoclonal (MHM) antibody.
The MHM was, however, the second of two GATA-4 antibodies tested, with a goat
anti-mouse polyclonal (GMP) initially used to label the rat Sertoli nuclei. GMP
unexpectedly, but distinctly labeled the complete development of the acrosome in 
the rat testis, a fortuitous finding with utility for staging of the seminiferous
epithelium.

PMID: 19924546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2009 Aug 30;3(1):47-55.

The developmental transcription factor Gata4 is overexpressed in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.

Karafin MS(1), Cummings CT, Fu B, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

GATA4 is a transcription factor that plays a role in regulating the normal
development of many mesoderm and endoderm derived tissues, including the
pancreas. Silencing of GATA4 mRNA expression by promoter methylation has been
implicated in carcinogenesis of the ovary, lung and colorectum. By contrast,
GATA4 mRNA expression is upregulated in pancreatic cancer cell lines and tissues.
To further clarify the relationship of GATA4 to pancreatic cancer, we
immunolabeled 90 samples of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma using a GATA4
specific monoclonal antibody. Both the intensity and percent of labeling was
recorded for each carcinoma and correlated to the clinic opathologic features
available for each patient. Samples of normal adult (n=26) and fetal pancreatic
tissue (n=8) were also immunolabeled for comparison to expression patterns in
pancreatic carcinoma tissues. Immunolabeling for GATA4 indicated robust nuclear
expression in developing acini in fetal pancreatic tissues, consistent with the
role of GATA4 in embryologic development, and in mature pancreatic acinar
epithelium. Immunolabeling for GATA4 was also noted within normal duct epithelial
cells, although it was always lesser in intensity than for acinar cell nuclei in 
the same section. Positive GATA4 immunolabeling was seen in 61/90 (68%)
infiltrating pancreatic cancers of which 27/90 (30%) showed strong positive
labeling. While there was no relationship among GATA4 and patient age, race or
pathologic features, we did find a significant association among strong positive 
labeling and female gender (p=0.01). These findings support previous studies
implicating GATA4 in pancreatic cancer and offer new avenues for investigation
into this aggressive tumor type.

PMCID: PMC2776266
PMID: 19918328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010 Jan;31(1):85-9. doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9576-1. Epub 2009
Nov 14.

GATA4 mutations in Chinese patients with congenital cardiac septal defects.

Chen MW(1), Pang YS, Guo Y, Pan JH, Liu BL, Shen J, Liu TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Anhui Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Anhui
Medical University, 17 Lujiang Road, 230001 Hefei, People's Republic of China.

The object of the study was to elucidate the mutations of the GATA4 gene in Han
ancestry patients with congenital cardiac septal defects. Fifty Han ancestry
patients with sporadic and familial cardiac septal defects and 200 normal
subjects of the same ethnical background were studied. A total of six exons and
the intron-exon boundaries of GATA4 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). The PCR products were purified and directly sequenced with an ABI PRISM
3730 Automatic DNA sequencer. Two novel heterozygous mutations were discovered in
the GATA4 gene in five children with cardiac septal defects (10%, 5/50), His28Tyr
in exon 2 and His436Tyr in exon 7, respectively, which were neither found in the 
control population nor reported in the SNP database at the website
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP. In addition, we did not identify any mutations
in GATA4 in three familial atrial septal defects and two familial ventricular
septal defects. Our finding suggests that the mutations in the transcription
factor GATA4 might be related to congenital cardiac septal defects in Han
ancestry patients.

PMID: 19915893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):793-804. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070037. Epub 2009
Nov 9.

Transcription factor GATA4 inhibits doxorubicin-induced autophagy and
cardiomyocyte death.

Kobayashi S(1), Volden P, Timm D, Mao K, Xu X, Liang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Health Research Center, Sanford Research, University of South
Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota 57105, USA.

Doxorubicin (DOX) is a potent anti-tumor drug known to cause heart failure. The
transcription factor GATA4 antagonizes DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. However, the
protective mechanism remains obscure. Autophagy is the primary cellular pathway
for lysosomal degradation of long-lived proteins and organelles, and its
activation could be either protective or detrimental depending on specific
pathophysiological conditions. Here we investigated the ability of GATA4 to
inhibit autophagy as a potential mechanism underlying its protection against DOX 
toxicity in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. DOX markedly increased
autophagic flux in cardiomyocytes as indicated by the difference in protein
levels of LC3-II (microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 form 2) or numbers
of autophagic vacuoles in the absence and presence of the lysosomal inhibitor
bafilomycin A1. DOX-induced cardiomyocyte death determined by multiple assays was
aggravated by a drug or genetic approach that activates autophagy, but it was
attenuated by manipulations that inhibit autophagy, suggesting that autophagy
contributes to DOX cardiotoxicity. DOX treatment depleted GATA4 protein levels,
which predisposed cardiomyocytes to DOX toxicity. Indeed, GATA4 gene silencing
triggered autophagy that rendered DOX more toxic, whereas GATA4 overexpression
inhibited DOX-induced autophagy, reducing cardiomyocyte death. Mechanistically,
GATA4 up-regulated gene expression of the survival factor Bcl2 and suppressed
DOX-induced activation of autophagy-related genes, which may likely be
responsible for the anti-apoptotic and anti-autophagic effects of GATA4.
Together, these findings suggest that activation of autophagy mediates DOX
cardiotoxicity, and preservation of GATA4 attenuates DOX cardiotoxicity by
inhibiting autophagy through modulation of the expression of Bcl2 and
autophagy-related genes.

PMCID: PMC2804228
PMID: 19901028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 15;285(3):1765-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038539. Epub 2009 
Nov 4.

Gata4 and Gata5 cooperatively regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation in mice.

Singh MK(1), Li Y, Li S, Cobb RM, Zhou D, Lu MM, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE, Gruber 
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

GATA5 is a member of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA family (GATA1-6)
that plays a wide variety of roles in embryonic and adult development.
Experiments in multiple model systems have emphasized the importance of the GATA 
family members 4-6 in the development of the endoderm and mesoderm. Yet despite
overlapping expression patterns, there is little evidence of an important role
for GATA5 in mammalian cardiac development. We have generated a new Gata5 mutant 
allele lacking exons 2 and 3 that encodes both zinc finger domains
(Gata5(tm)(2)(Eem)), and we show that although Gata5(-/-) mice are viable,
Gata4(+/-)5(-/-) mutants die at mid-gestation and exhibit profound cardiovascular
defects, including abnormalities of cardiomyocyte proliferation and cardiac
chamber maturation. These results demonstrate functional redundancy between Gata4
and Gata5 during cardiac development and implicate Gata5 as a candidate modifier 
gene for congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2804334
PMID: 19889636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Cytotherapy. 2009;11(6):778-92. doi: 10.3109/14653240902988818.

Human bone marrow stem cells co-cultured with neonatal rat cardiomyocytes display
limited cardiomyogenic plasticity.

Koninckx R(1), Hensen K, Daniëls A, Moreels M, Lambrichts I, Jongen H, Clijsters 
C, Mees U, Steels P, Hendrikx M, Rummens JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Virga Jesse Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AIMS: This study investigated whether neonatal rat cardiomyocytes
(NRCM), when co-cultured, can induce transdifferentiation of either human
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) or hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) into
cardiomyocytes. Stem cells were obtained from patients with ischemic heart
disease.
METHODS: Ex vivo-expanded MSC or freshly isolated HSC were used to set-up a
co-culture system between NRCM and MSC or HSC. 5-azacytidin (5-aza) or
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) was used as differentiation-inducing factor. Co-cultured
stem cells were separated from NRCM by flow sorting, and cardiac gene expression 
was analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Cellular
morphology was analyzed by immunofluorescence and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM).
RESULTS: Co-culturing MSC induced expression of troponin T and GATA-4. However,
no expression of alpha-actinin, myosin heavy chain or troponin I was detected. In
the case of HSC, only expression of troponin T could be induced.
Immunofluorescence and TEM confirmed the absence of sarcomeric organization in
co-cultured MSC and HSC. Adding 5-aza or DMSO to the co-cultures did not
influence differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: This in vitro co-culture study obtained no convincing evidence of
transdifferentiation of either MSC or HSC into functional cardiomyocytes.
Nevertheless, induction of troponin T was observed in MSC and HSC, and GATA-4 in 
MSC. However, no morphologic changes could be detected by immunofluorescence or
by TEM. These data could explain why only limited functional improvement was
reported in clinical stem cell trials.

PMID: 19878064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Biomaterials. 2010 Feb;31(5):854-62. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.09.096.
Epub 2009 Oct 25.

The influence of rat mesenchymal stem cell CD44 surface markers on cell growth,
fibronectin expression, and cardiomyogenic differentiation on silk fibroin -
Hyaluronic acid cardiac patches.

Yang MC(1), Chi NH, Chou NK, Huang YY, Chung TW, Chang YL, Liu HC, Shieh MJ, Wang
SS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, ROC.

Since MSCs contain an abundant of CD44 surface markers, it is of interesting to
investigate whether CD44 on rat MSC (rMSCs) influenced cell growth, fibronectin
expression and cardiomyogenic differentiation on new SF/HA cardiac patches. For
this investigation, we examined the influences of rMSCs with or without a
CD44-blockage treatment on the aforementioned issues after they were cultivated, 
and further induced by 5-aza on SF and SF/HA patches. The results showed that the
relative growth rates of rMSCs cultured on cultural wells, SF/HA patches without 
or with a CD44-blockage treatment were 100%, 208.9+/-7.1 (%) or 48.4+/-6.0 (%)
(n=3, for all), respectively, after five days of cultivations. Moreover, rMSCs
cultivated on SF/HA patches highly promoted fibronectin expressions (e.g.,
1.8x10(5)/cell, in fluorescent intensity) while cells with a CD44-blockage
treatment markedly diminished the expressions (e.g., 1.1x10(4)/cell, in
fluorescent intensity) on same patches. For investigating possible influences of 
CD44 surface markers of rMSCs on their cardiomyogenic differentiation, the
expressions of specific cardiac genes of cells were examined by using real-time
PCR analysis. The results indicated that 5-aza inducing rMSCs significantly
promoted the expressions of Gata4, Nkx2.5, Tnnt2 and Actc1 genes (all, P<0.01 or 
better, n=3) on SF/HA patches compared with those expressions on SF patches and
for cells with a CD44-blockage treatment on SF/HA patches. Furthermore, the
intensity of the expressions of cardiotin and connexin 43 of 5-aza inducing rMSCs
were markedly higher than those of cells with a CD44-blockage treatment after
they were cultured on SF/HA patches. Through this study, we reported that CD44
surface markers of rMSCs highly influenced the proliferations, fibronectin
expressions and cardiomyogenic differentiation of rMSCs cultivated on cardiac
SF/HA patches.

PMID: 19857893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Oct;44(10):1933-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.04.027.

Prenatal retinoic acid up-regulates pulmonary gene expression of COUP-TFII, FOG2,
and GATA4 in pulmonary hypoplasia.

Doi T(1), Sugimoto K, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Retinoids play an important role in lung development. Recently, prenatal
treatment with retinoic acid (RA) has been reported to stimulate alveologenesis
in hypoplastic lungs in the nitrofen model of congenital diaphragmatic hernia
(CDH). Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) is
a transcription factor in the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily, and
targeted ablation of COUP-TFII causes CDH and associated lung hypoplasia in mice.
Friend of GATA 2 (FOG2) is a zinc finger-containing protein that modulates the
transcriptional activity of GATA proteins. GATA4 is a member of a family of
DNA-binding proteins, which is found in the promoter regions of many genes. The
COUP-TFII, FOG2, and GATA4 genes, regulated by the retinoid signaling pathway,
are located on chromosomes 15q26, 8q23, and 8p23.1 respectively, regions reported
to be deleted in individuals with CDH. The aim of this study was to examine the
pulmonary gene expression of COUP-TFII, FOG2, and GATA4 in the nitrofen model of 
CDH.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pregnant rats were exposed to either olive oil or 100 mg
nitrofen on day 9 of gestation (D9). 5 mg/kg of RA was given intraperitoneally on
days D18, D19, and D20. The fetuses were recovered by caesarean section on D21,
and the diaphragm was carefully examined for the presence of a hernia under a
microscope. Left lungs were obtained from CDH fetuses and controls and divided
into four groups: control (n = 9), control + RA (n = 9), CDH (n = 9), and CDH +
RA (n = 9). The relative mRNA expression levels of COUP-TFII, FOG2, and GATA4
were analyzed in each lung by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction from cDNA generated by mRNA from pulmonary total RNA.
RESULTS: The relative mRNA expression levels of COUP-TFII, FOG2, and GATA4 were
significantly increased in CDH + RA lungs compared to control, control + RA, and 
CDH (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Up-regulation of pulmonary gene expression of COUP-TFII, FOG2, and
GATA4 after prenatal treatment with retinoic acid in the nitrofen model of CDH
suggests that RA may have a therapeutic potential in modulating lung growth.
Furthermore, these results support the concept that these proteins work together 
to regulate downstream target genes that play an important role in the
development of lung.

PMID: 19853750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):63-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.003. Epub 2009
Oct 20.

Gata4 directs development of cardiac-inducing endoderm from ES cells.

Holtzinger A(1), Rosenfeld GE, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The transcription factor Gata4 is essential for normal heart morphogenesis and
regulates the survival, growth, and proliferation of cardiomyocytes. We tested if
Gata4 can specify cardiomyocyte fate from an uncommitted stem or progenitor cell 
population, by developing a system for conditional expression of Gata4 in
embryonic stem cells. We find that in embryoid body cultures containing even a
low ratio of these cells, expression of Gata4 is sufficient to enhance
significantly the generation of cardiomyocytes, via a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism. The Gata4-expressing cells do not generate cardiac or other mesoderm
derivatives. Rather, Gata4 expression directs the development of two types of
Sox17+ endoderm. This includes an epCam+Dpp4+ subtype of visceral endoderm. In
addition, Gata4 generates similar amounts of epCam+Dpp4- definitive endoderm
enriched for Cxcr4, FoxA2, FoxA3, Dlx5 and other characteristic transcripts. Both
types of endoderm express cardiac-inducing factors, including WNT antagonists
Dkk1 and Sfrp5, although the visceral endoderm subtype has much higher
cardiac-inducing activity correlating with relatively enhanced levels of
transcripts encoding BMPs. The Gata4-expressing cells eventually express
differentiation markers showing commitment to liver development, even under
conditions that normally support mesoderm development. The results suggest that
Gata4 is capable of specifying endoderm fates that facilitate, with temporal and 
spatial specificity, the generation of cardiomyocyte progenitors from associated 
mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC2799892
PMID: 19850025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):3001-11. doi: 10.1002/stem.237.

RNA polymerase II associated factor 1/PD2 maintains self-renewal by its
interaction with Oct3/4 in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Ponnusamy MP(1), Deb S, Dey P, Chakraborty S, Rachagani S, Senapati S, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5870, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) maintain self-renewal while ensuring a rapid response
to differentiation signals, but the exact mechanism of this process remains
unknown. PD2 is the human homolog of the RNA polymerase II-associated factor 1
(Paf1). The Paf1/PD2 is a member of the human PAF complex that consists of four
other subunits, hCdc73, hLeo1, hCtr9, and hSki8, and is involved in the
regulation of transcriptional elongation and further downstream events. Here, we 
show that Paf1/PD2 is overexpressed in mouse ESCs and is involved in the
maintenance of mouse ESCs. The Paf1/PD2 knockdown and knockout ESCs grown under
self-renewal conditions express substantially reduced levels of self-renewal
regulators, including Oct3/4, SOX2, Nanog, and Shh. We observed that the level of
Paf1/PD2 expression is much higher in self-renewing mouse embryonic carcinoma
cells than in the differentiating cells. Knockout of Paf1/PD2 altered ESC
phenotype by increasing apoptosis and decreasing the percentage of cells in
S-phase of the cell cycle. Interestingly, we found that the key genes that
regulate endodermal differentiation (Gata4, Gata6, and Fgf8) are induced in the
Paf1/PD2 heterozygous knockout ESCs. This suggests that Paf1/PD2 plays a specific
role in regulating early commitment of ESCs to endodermal differentiation.
Furthermore, for the first time, we showed that Paf1/PD2 protein interacts with
Oct3/4 and RNA polymerase II, and through this interaction Paf1/PD2 may regulate 
Oct3/4-mediated gene expression. Thus, the Paf1/PD2 protein is a newly discovered
element of the interconnected regulatory network that maintains the self-renewal 
of mouse ESCs.

PMCID: PMC2891238
PMID: 19821493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2009 May;19(4):130-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2009.07.004.

Tetralogy of fallot as a model to study cardiac progenitor cell migration and
differentiation during heart development.

Di Felice V(1), Zummo G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università degli studi di Palermo,
Italy. vdfelice@inwind.it

Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) has long been considered a congenital disorder that
occurs due to environmental alterations during gestation. Recently, several
mutated genes have been discovered that are thought to be responsible for the
malformations observed in ToF. These genetic mutations, which are microdeletions,
are sporadic and are frequently also present in trisomy 21 patients. The ToF
malformations can be lethal, but for the last 50 years, surgical repairs that
place an artificial patch to repair the four features of ToF have improved the
survival of patients with ToF. However, 0.5% to 6% of patients who survive after 
surgical repair of ToF die of sudden cardiac death caused by ventricular
tachycardia. In fact, even if the septum has been repaired, the patch used to
close the interventricular defect may cause deformation of the heart, altering
the force lines essential for normal function of the right ventricle. In the
present review, we hypothesize that mutations in the GATA binding protein 4
(GATA-4)/friend of GATA-2 transcriptional complex and NKX2.5 gene may play a role
in the abnormal migration and behavior of precardiac cells during heart
development in patients with ToF. An understanding of cardiac precursor cell
behavior is needed in order for future research regarding therapeutic approaches 
to correct the defects seen in ToF without affecting cardiac hemodynamics to be
successful.

PMID: 19818949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):451-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.089. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

Inhibition of proliferation and differentiation and promotion of apoptosis by
cyclin L2 in mouse embryonic carcinoma P19 cells.

Zhuo L(1), Gong J, Yang R, Sheng Y, Zhou L, Kong X, Cao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, No 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

Cyclin L2 (CCNL2) is a novel member of the cyclin gene family. In a previous
study, we demonstrated that CCNL2 expression was upregulated in ventricular
septum tissues from patients with ventricular septal defect compared to healthy
controls. In the present study, we established a stable CCNL2-overexpressing P19 
cell line that can differentiate to myocardial cells when treated with 1%
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Our data showed that stable CCNL2-overexpressing P19
cells were less differentiated after treatment with 1% DMSO and that expression
of myocardial cell differentiation-related genes (such as cardiac actin, GATA4,
Mef2C, Nkx2.5, and BNP) were reduced compared to vector-only transfected P19.
Moreover, P19 cells overexpressing the CCNL2 gene had a reduced growth rate and a
remarkably decreased S phase. We also found that these cells underwent apoptosis,
as detected by two different apoptosis assays. The anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein
was also downregulated in these cells. In addition, real-time PCR analysis
revealed that expression of Wnt and beta-catenin was suppressed and GSK3beta was 
induced in the CCNL2-overexpressing P19 cells. These data suggest that
overexpression of CCNL2 inhibited proliferation and differentiation of mouse
embryonic carcinoma P19 cells and induced them to undergo apoptosis, possibly
through the Wnt signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 19785986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 28;4(9):e7216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007216.

Isolation of Oct4-expressing extraembryonic endoderm precursor cell lines.

Debeb BG(1), Galat V, Epple-Farmer J, Iannaccone S, Woodward WA, Bader M,
Iannaccone P, Binas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) defines the yolk sac, a set of
membranes that provide essential support for mammalian embryos. Recent findings
suggest that the committed ExEn precursor is present already in the embryonic
Inner Cell Mass (ICM) as a group of cells that intermingles with the closely
related epiblast precursor. All ICM cells contain Oct4, a key transcription
factor that is first expressed at the morula stage. In vitro, the epiblast
precursor is most closely represented by the well-characterized embryonic stem
(ES) cell lines that maintain the expression of Oct4, but analogous ExEn
precursor cell lines are not known and it is unclear if they would express Oct4.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report the isolation and characterization
of permanently proliferating Oct4-expressing rat cell lines ("XEN-P cell lines"),
which closely resemble the ExEn precursor. We isolated the XEN-P cell lines from 
blastocysts and characterized them by plating and gene expression assays as well 
as by injection into embryos. Like ES cells, the XEN-P cells express Oct4 and
SSEA1 at high levels and their growth is stimulated by leukemia inhibitory
factor, but instead of the epiblast determinant Nanog, they express the ExEn
determinants Gata6 and Gata4. Further, they lack markers characteristic of the
more differentiated primitive/visceral and parietal ExEn stages, but exclusively 
differentiate into these stages in vitro and contribute to them in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings (i) suggest strongly that the ExEn
precursor is a self-renewable entity, (ii) indicate that active Oct4 gene
expression (transcription plus translation) is part of its molecular identity,
and (iii) provide an in vitro model of early ExEn differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2747266
PMID: 19784378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2009 May;37(5):409-12.

[Association between GATA-4 mutations and congenital cardiac septal defects in
Han Chinese patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen MW(1), Pang YS, Guo Y, Liu BL, Shen J, Song HD, Liu TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, China.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the association between GATA-4 gene mutations and
congenital cardiac septal defects in Han Chinese patients.
METHODS: Fifty Han Chinese patients with congenital cardiac septal defects and
100 normal subjects with the same ethnical background were studied. Total six
exons and the intron-exon boundaries of GATA-4 were amplified by the polymerase
chain reaction. The polymerase chain reaction products were purified and directly
sequenced with automatic sequencer.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous mutations were discovered in the GATA-4 gene of
patients with congenital cardiac septal defects, His28Tyr in exon 2 and His436Tyr
in exon 7 respectively, which were absent in the control population and not
reported in the SNP database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP).
CONCLUSION: Our finding suggests that the mutations in the transcription factor
GATA-4 may be related to congenital cardiac septal defects in Han Chinese
patients.

PMID: 19781215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Dev Dyn. 2009 Oct;238(10):2588-98. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22091.

An endoderm-specific transcriptional enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene requires 
GATA and homeodomain protein-binding sites for function in vivo.

Rojas A(1), Schachterle W, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA.

Several transcription factors function in the specification and differentiation
of the endoderm, including the zinc finger transcription factor GATA4. Despite
its essential role in endoderm development, the transcriptional control of the
Gata4 gene in the developing endoderm and its derivatives remains incompletely
understood. Here, we identify a distal enhancer from the Gata4 gene, which
directs expression exclusively to the visceral and definitive endoderm of
transgenic mouse embryos. The activity of this enhancer is initially broad within
the definitive endoderm but later restricts to developing endoderm-derived
tissues, including pancreas, glandular stomach, and duodenum. The activity of
this enhancer in vivo is dependent on evolutionarily-conserved HOX- and
GATA-binding sites, which are bound by PDX-1 and GATA4, respectively. These
studies establish Gata4 as a direct transcriptional target of homeodomain and
GATA transcription factors in the endoderm and support a model in which GATA4
functions in the transcriptional network for pancreas formation.

PMCID: PMC2827249
PMID: 19777593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Feb 17;147(1):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.08.021. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Differentiation induction of mouse embryonic stem cells into sinus node-like
cells by suramin.

Wiese C(1), Nikolova T, Zahanich I, Sulzbacher S, Fuchs J, Yamanaka S, Graf E,
Ravens U, Boheler KR, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research IPK, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into cardiac phenotypes
representing early pacemaker-, atrial-, ventricular-, and sinus node-like cells, 
however, ES-derived specification into sinus nodal cells is not yet known. By
using the naphthylamine derivative of urea, suramin, we were able to follow the
process of cardiac specialization into sinus node-like cells.
METHODS: Differentiating mouse ES cells were treated with suramin (500 µM) from
day 5 to 7 of embryoid body formation, and cells were analysed for their
differentiation potential via morphological analysis, flow cytometry, RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Application of suramin resulted in an increased number of cardiac cells,
but inhibition of neuronal, skeletal muscle and definitive endoderm
differentiation. Immediately after suramin treatment, a decreased mesendoderm
differentiation was found. Brachyury, FGF10, Wnt8 and Wnt3a transcript levels
were significantly down-regulated, followed by a decrease in mesoderm- and
cardiac progenitor-specific markers BMP2, GATA4/5, Wnt11, Isl1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5
immediately after removal of the substance. With continued differentiation, a
significant up-regulation of Brachyury, FGF10 and GATA5 transcript levels was
observed, whereas Nkx2.5, Isl1, Tbx5, BMP2 and Wnt11 levels were normalized to
control levels. At advanced differentiation stages, sinus node-specific HCN4,
Tbx2 and Tbx3 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated.
Immunofluorescence and patch-clamp analysis confirmed the increased number of
sinus node-like cells, and electrophysiological analysis revealed a lower number 
of atrial- and ventricular-like cardiomyocytes following suramin treatment.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the interference of suramin with the cardiac
differentiation process modified mesoderm- and cardiac-specific gene expression
resulting in enhanced formation of sinus node-like cells.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4751033
PMID: 19775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biomed Sci. 2009 Sep 21;16:87. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-16-87.

Gravity, a regulation factor in the differentiation of rat bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

Huang Y(1), Dai ZQ, Ling SK, Zhang HY, Wan YM, Li YH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Space medicine Fundamentation and Application, China
Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beiqing Road, No,26, Beijing, China.
huangyan@be.buaa.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Stem cell therapy has emerged as a potential therapeutic option for
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, but many issues remain to be
resolved, such as the amount of seed cells, committed differentiation and the
efficiency. Several previous studies have focused on the study of chemical
inducement microenvironments. In the present study, we investigated the effects
of gravity on the differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs)
into force-sensitive or force-insensitive cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat BMSCs (rBMSCs) were cultured under hypergravity or
simulated microgravity (SMG) conditions with or without inducement medium. The
expression levels of the characteristic proteins were measured and analyzed using
immunocytochemical, RT-PCR and Western-blot analyses. After treatment with
5-azacytidine and hypergravity, rBMSCs expressed more characteristic proteins of 
cardiomyocytes such as cTnT, GATA4 and beta-MHC; however, fewer such proteins
were seen with SMG. After treating rBMSCs with osteogenic inducer and
hypergravity, there were marked increases in the expression levels of ColIA1,
Cbfa1 and ALP. Reverse results were obtained with SMG. rBMSCs treated with
adipogenic inducer and SMG expressed greater levels of PPARgamma. Greater levels 
of Cbfa1- or cTnT-positive cells were observed under hypergravity without
inducer, as shown by FACS analysis. These results indicate that hypergravity
induces differentiation of rBMSCs into force-sensitive cells (cardiomyocytes and 
osteoblasts), whereas SMG induces force-insensitive cells (adipocytes).
CONCLUSION: Taken together, we conclude that gravity is an important factor
affecting the differentiation of rBMSCs; this provides a new avenue for
mechanistic studies of stem cell differentiation and a new approach to obtain
more committed differentiated or undifferentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC2754420
PMID: 19772591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Dev Biol. 2009 Nov 15;335(2):374-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.09.012. Epub 2009 
Sep 15.

Neural ectoderm-secreted FGF initiates the expression of Nkx2.5 in cardiac
progenitors via a p38 MAPK/CREB pathway.

Keren-Politansky A(1), Keren A, Bengal E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical
Sciences, Haifa, Israel.

Vertebrate heart development is derived from paired primordia of anterior
dorsolateral mesoderm expressing Nkx2.5 and GATA4 transcription factors. Yet
growth factors and intracellular pathways specifying heart precursor gene
expression are poorly understood. In the present work, we investigated the
signaling events initiating Nkx2.5 expression in Xenopus laevis. We describe here
that fibroblast growth factor (FGF) initiates the expression of Nkx2.5 without
affecting GATA4. At gastrula, FGF3 is expressed in anterior neural ectoderm, and 
results presented here indicate that this tissue is involved in the induction of 
Nkx2.5 expression in neighboring lateral tissues. Further studies indicate that
the intracellular p38 MAPK and the CREB transcription factor function downstream 
of FGF to initiate Nkx2.5 expression. Activation of the p38 MAPK pathway and of
the CREB protein is both necessary and sufficient for the initial expression of
Nkx2.5. Therefore, we would like to suggest that FGF expressed in anterior neural
ectoderm is a major inducer of Nkx2.5 expression in neighboring cells. In these
cells, FGF activates an intracellular p38 MAPK signaling pathway and its
downstream target, the CREB transcription factor, all participating in the
expression of Nkx2.5 in cardiac progenitors.

PMID: 19765572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Med Genet. 2010 Apr;47(4):230-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069997. Epub 2009 Sep
16.

A gain-of-function TBX20 mutation causes congenital atrial septal defects, patent
foramen ovale and cardiac valve defects.

Posch MG(1), Gramlich M, Sunde M, Schmitt KR, Lee SH, Richter S, Kersten A,
Perrot A, Panek AN, Al Khatib IH, Nemer G, Mégarbané A, Dietz R, Stiller B,
Berger F, Harvey RP, Ozcelik C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany. maximilian.posch@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Ostium secundum atrial septal defects (ASDII) account for
approximately 10% of all congenital heart defects (CHD), and mutations in cardiac
transcription factors, including TBX20, were identified as an underlying cause
for ASDII. However, very little is known about disease penetrance in families and
functional consequences of inherited TBX20 mutations.
METHODS: The coding region of TBX20 was directly sequenced in 170 ASDII patients.
Functional consequences of one novel mutation were investigated by surface
plasmon resonance, CD spectropolarymetry, fluorescence spectrophotometry,
luciferase assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: We found a novel mutation in a highly conserved residue in the T-box DNA
binding domain (I121M) segregating with CHD in a three generation kindred. Four
mutation carriers revealed cardiac phenotypes in terms of cribriform ASDII, large
patent foramen ovale or cardiac valve defects. Interestingly, tertiary
hydrophobic interactions within the mutant TBX20 T-box were significantly altered
leading to a more dynamic structure of the protein. Moreover, Tbx20-I121M
resulted in a significantly enhanced transcriptional activity, which was further 
increased in the presence of co-transcription factors GATA4/5 and NKX2-5.
Occupancy of DNA binding sites on target genes was also increased.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that TBX20-I121M adopts a more fluid tertiary structure
leading to enhanced interactions with cofactors and more stable transcriptional
complexes on target DNA sequences. Our data, combined with that of others,
suggest that human ASDII may be related to loss-of-function as well as
gain-of-function TBX20 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2981023
PMID: 19762328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Clin Invest. 2009 Sep;119(9):2772-86. doi: 10.1172/JCI36154. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

MicroRNA-208a is a regulator of cardiac hypertrophy and conduction in mice.

Callis TE(1), Pandya K, Seok HY, Tang RH, Tatsuguchi M, Huang ZP, Chen JF, Deng
Z, Gunn B, Shumate J, Willis MS, Selzman CH, Wang DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small noncoding RNAs that have gained status as
important regulators of gene expression. Here, we investigated the function and
molecular mechanisms of the miR-208 family of miRNAs in adult mouse heart
physiology. We found that miR-208a, which is encoded within an intron of
alpha-cardiac muscle myosin heavy chain gene (Myh6), was actually a member of a
miRNA family that also included miR-208b, which was determined to be encoded
within an intron of beta-cardiac muscle myosin heavy chain gene (Myh7). These
miRNAs were differentially expressed in the mouse heart, paralleling the
expression of their host genes. Transgenic overexpression of miR-208a in the
heart was sufficient to induce hypertrophic growth in mice, which resulted in
pronounced repression of the miR-208 regulatory targets thyroid
hormone-associated protein 1 and myostatin, 2 negative regulators of muscle
growth and hypertrophy. Studies of the miR-208a Tg mice indicated that miR-208a
expression was sufficient to induce arrhythmias. Furthermore, analysis of mice
lacking miR-208a indicated that miR-208a was required for proper cardiac
conduction and expression of the cardiac transcription factors homeodomain-only
protein and GATA4 and the gap junction protein connexin 40. Together, our studies
uncover what we believe are novel miRNA-dependent mechanisms that modulate
cardiac hypertrophy and electrical conduction.

PMCID: PMC2735902
PMID: 19726871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Dec;221(3):729-39. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21912.

OPLA scaffold, collagen I, and horse serum induce an higher degree of myogenic
differentiation of adult rat cardiac stem cells.

Di Felice V(1), Ardizzone NM, De Luca A, Marcianò V, Marino Gammazza A, Macaluso 
F, Manente L, Cappello F, De Luca A, Zummo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Human Anatomy Section, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. vdfelice@inwind.it

In the last few years, a major goal of cardiac research has been to drive stem
cell differentiation to replace damaged myocardium. Several research groups have 
attempted to differentiate potential cardiac stem cells (CSCs) using bi- or
three-dimensional systems supplemented with growth factors or molecules acting as
differentiating substances. We hypothesize that these systems failed to induce a 
complete differentiation because they lacked an architectural space. In the
present study, we isolated a pool of small proliferating and fibroblast-like
cells from adult rat myocardium. The phenotype of these cells was assessed and
the characterized cells were cultured in a collagen I/OPLA scaffold with horse
serum to obtain fine myocardial differentiation. C-Kit(POS)/Sca-1(POS) CSCs fully
differentiated in vitro when an environment more similar to the CSC niche was
created. These experiments demonstrated an important model for the study of the
biology of CSCs and the biochemical pathways that lead to myocardial
differentiation. The results pave the way for a new surgical approach.

PMID: 19725057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Transplant Proc. 2009 Jul-Aug;41(6):2279-81. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2009.06.015.

Comparison of gene expression profiles in a porcine infarct model after
intracoronary, transthoracic, or transendocardiac injection of heterologous bone 
marrow mesenchymal cells.

Barallobre-Barreiro J(1), de Ilárduya OM, Moscoso I, Calviño R, Aldama G,
López-Peláez E, Centeno A, Doménech N.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación, INIBIC, CHU A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.

An in vivo porcine model of myocardial infarction was developed with the aim of
comparing the effectiveness for cardiac repair of intracoronary, transthoracic,
or transendocardial delivery strategies for bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(BMMSC) using an analysis of expression levels of transcripts related to various 
cellular processes at 8 heart regions using quantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction. We observed significant rises in cardiomyogenic
markers Mef2C, Gata4 and Nkx2.5, and contractibility marker Serca2A at infarcted 
regions for cell-treated pigs. We also observed differences in Sdf1 expression
related to the organ stress response between delivery strategies. Unexpectedly,
increased expression of Col1A1 was detected in 2 cell-treated groups at various
heart regions. Our results suggest improvements in both contractility and
cardiomyogenic capability of damaged tissue after BMMSC injection, but also
warned us about the relevance of the chosen delivery strategy and potential
undesired effects like increasing fibrosis after treatment.

PMID: 19715897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Transplant Proc. 2009 Jul-Aug;41(6):2276-8. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2009.06.008.

Gene expression profiles in a porcine model of infarction: differential
expression after intracoronary injection of heterologous bone marrow mesenchymal 
cells.

Martínez de Ilárduya O(1), Barallobre Barreiro J, Moscoso I, Añón P, Fraga M,
Centeno A, López E, Doménech N.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña-CHU A Coruña, A Coruña,
Spain. omarrui@sergas.es

Myocardial infarction is one of the main causes of mortality in developed
countries. Injection of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSC) with the
ability to regenerate lost cardiomyocytes is a promising therapy for heart
failure. To evaluate this strategy, an in vivo porcine model of infarction was
used. Gene expression profiles of 3 groups of pigs (n = 5 each) were analyzed and
compared by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
One of the groups underwent anterior descending coronary occlusion followed by
BMMSC injection; a placebo group was injected with culture medium without cells
after infarction; and a third group was formed by healthy pigs. Four weeks later,
cells or medium was administered by intracoronary injection and, a month later,
animals were sacrificed and samples collected. Genes related to cardiomyogenesis 
(Mef2C, Gata4, Nkx2.5), mobilization and homing of resident or circulating stem
cells (Sdf1, Cxcr4, c-Kit), contractibility (Serca2a), and fibrosis (CollA1) were
analyzed. Gene expression profiles changed in various heart areas in the 3
groups. Expression of genes related to cardiomyogenesis decreased in infarcted
zones compared with homologous regions of healthy hearts. Sdf1 expression
increased in the apex of infarcted hearts. Serca2a expression was reduced in the 
ventricles and atria of infarcted hearts. Also, increases in Cxcr4 and CollA1
expression were observed in infarcted hearts of cell-treated pigs compared with
the placebo group. In conclusion, infarction induced changes in genes involved in
various biological processes. Intracoronary injection of heterologous BMMSC
resulted in localized changes in the expression of Cxcr4 and Col1A1.

PMID: 19715896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Surgery. 2009 Sep;146(3):506-14. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2009.03.022. Epub 2009 Jun
9.

Carbamylated erythropoietin protects the myocardium from acute
ischemia/reperfusion injury through a PI3K/Akt-dependent mechanism.

Xu X(1), Cao Z, Cao B, Li J, Guo L, Que L, Ha T, Chen Q, Li C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Department of
Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Erythropoietin (EPO) and carbamylated erythropoietin (CEPO) can
protect tissue from injury; however, CEPO has its protective effect in the
absence of erythropoietic stimulation. The mechanism whereby CEPO protects heart 
from acute ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury remains unknown.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were subjected to myocardial ischemia for 45 min followed by
reperfusion for 4 h, and they received a single dose of CEPO intraperitoneal at
the onset of reperfusion. Myocardial infarct size and cardiac function were
assessed. The association of erythropoietin receptor with beta common receptor
(betacR) was examined. The level of Akt phosphorylation in the myocardium was
assayed as well as a series of downstream target genes of PI3K/Akt,including
p-GATA-4, GATA-4, MHC, and troponin I.
RESULTS: CEPO administration immediately before reperfusion decreased infarction 
by 40% and increased ejection fraction (27%) and fractional shortening (22%),
compared with untreated ischemic hearts (P < .05 each). CEPO promoted association
of the EPO receptor and betacR. Furthermore, CEPO administration increased the
levels of phospho-Akt in the myocardium by 59% (P < .05). A PI3K inhibitor,
wortmannin, blocked the beneficial effect of CEPO on infarct size and cardiac
function and attenuated the CEPO-induced Akt phosphorylation. CEPO also increased
the expression of p-GATA-4, GATA-4, myosin heavy chain, and troponin I.
CONCLUSION: A single dose of CEPO at the onset of reperfusion attenuated acute
myocardial I/R injury in the mouse. CEPO-induced cardioprotection appears to be
mediated through a PI3K/Akt-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 19715808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Nov 1;84(2):176-7. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp297. Epub 2009 Aug
27.

GATA4, a new regulator of cardiac fibroblasts, is sensitive to natriuretic
peptides.

Jankowski M.

Comment on
    Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Nov 1;84(2):209-17.

PMID: 19713284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1481-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605276. Epub 2009
Aug 25.

GATA factors in human neuroblastoma: distinctive expression patterns in clinical 
subtypes.

Hoene V(1), Fischer M, Ivanova A, Wallach T, Berthold F, Dame C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to elucidate the expression patterns of GATA
transcription factors in neuroblastoma and the developing sympathetic nervous
system (SNS).
METHODS: GATA-2, -3 and -4 and their cofactor friend-of-GATA (FOG)-2 were
investigated in primary neuroblastoma by immunohistochemistry, real-time RT-PCR
(n=73) and microarray analysis (n=251). In addition, GATA-2, -3 and FOG-2
expression was determined by northern-blot hybridisation. In the developing
murine SNS, Gata-4 and Fog-2 were examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Although Gata-2, -3 and Fog-2 are expressed in the developing nervous
system, Gata-4 was not detected. In contrast, protein expression of all factors
was observed in human neuroblastoma. Northern-blot hybridisation and real-time
RT-PCR suggested specific expression patterns of the four genes in primary
neuroblastoma, but did not show unequivocal results. In the large cohort examined
by microarrays, a significant association of GATA-2, -3 and FOG-2 expression with
low-risk features was observed, whereas GATA-4 mRNA levels correlated with
MYCN-amplification.
CONCLUSION: The transcription factors GATA-2 and -3, which are essential for
normal SNS development, and their cofactor FOG-2 are downregulated in aggressive 
but not in favourable neuroblastoma. In contrast, upregulation of GATA-4 appears 
to be a common feature of this malignancy and might contribute to neuroblastoma
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2768442
PMID: 19707195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(7):909-22. doi: 10.1071/RD09027.

Involvement of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in gonadal
steroidogenesis and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein expression.

Kowalewski MP(1), Dyson MT, Manna PR, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma belongs to the PPAR
family of nuclear transcription factors whose ligands, such as eicosanoids, fatty
acids and prostaglandins, are known to affect gonadal function. Although several 
of these enhance the expression of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(STAR) and steroid production, the role of PPARgamma in regulating STAR-mediated 
steroidogenesis remains unclear. In the present study, we used ciglitazone to
selectively activate PPARgamma and examine its role in STAR-mediated
steroidogenesis in immortalised KK1 mouse granulosa cells and MA-10 mouse Leydig 
tumour cells. Cotreatment with both dibutyryl-cAMP and ciglitazone revealed a
dose-dependent, significant increase in progesterone synthesis, Star promoter
activity, Star mRNA and STAR protein relative to either compound alone. The
overexpression of PPARgamma further increased Star-promoter activity. The
ciglitazone-induced activity of the Star-promoter appears to be mediated through 
the cAMP-response element half-sites located within its proximal 151 bp. Combined
treatment with ciglitazone and dibutyryl-cAMP significantly increased the
expression and activity of transcriptional pathways impacted by the activator
protein-1 family member c-JUN. The present study demonstrates that ciglitazone
and dibutyryl-cAMP synergistically enhance STAR expression in MA-10 and KK1
cells. Ciglitazone-activated PPARgamma appears to increase the sensitivity of
Leydig and granulosa cells to cAMP stimulation, possibly via upregulation of
c-JUN expression.

PMID: 19698295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009 Oct;107(4):1241-8. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00564.2009. Epub 2009 Aug 13.

The phenotype and potential origin of nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cells
following infarction.

Béguin PC(1), El-Helou V, Assimakopoulos J, Clément R, Gosselin H, Brugada R,
Villeneuve L, Rohlicek CV, Del Duca D, Lapointe N, Rouleau JL, Calderone A.

Author information: 
(1)angelo.calderone@umontreal.ca

Nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cells were detected in the peri-infarct/infarct
region of the ischemically damaged heart. The present study was undertaken to
elucidate the phenotype and potential origin of nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like
cells and identify stimuli implicated in their appearance. In the infarcted human
and rat heart, nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cells were morphologically and
structurally immature, exhibited a desmin-immunoreactive striated phenotype,
expressed the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor, and associated with an aberrant
pattern of connexin-43 expression and/or organization. Nestin+ cardiac
myocyte-like cells were detected 24 h postischemic injury and persisted in the
infarcted rat heart for 9 mo. In the normal rat heart, cardiac progenitor
transcriptional factors Nkx2.5/GATA4 were detected in a subpopulation of nestin+ 
neural stem cells. Following an ischemic insult, nestin+/Nkx2.5+ neural stem
cells migrated to the peri-infarct/infarct region and appeared to be in a
primordial state of differentiation to a nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cell. The
exposure of adult male rats to normobaric hypoxia (12% O2) for 10 days failed to 
promote the appearance of nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cells. Following osmotic
pump delivery of isoproterenol to normal adult rats, nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like
cells were detected, albeit the response was modest and secondary to tissue loss.
Thus ischemia-induced appearance of nestin+ cardiac myocyte-like cells apparently
represents an adaptive response to heal the infarcted heart. Nkx2.5/GATA4
expression in a subpopulation of resident neural stem cells provides the
appropriate phenotype for their potential differentiation to a nestin+ cardiac
myocyte-like cell.

PMID: 19679743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Cardiol Young. 2009 Sep;19(5):482-5. doi: 10.1017/S1047951109990813. Epub 2009
Aug 13.

Genetic screening of 104 patients with congenitally malformed hearts revealed a
fresh mutation of GATA4 in those with atrial septal defects.

Hamanoue H(1), Rahayuningsih SE, Hirahara Y, Itoh J, Yokoyama U, Mizuguchi T,
Saitsu H, Miyake N, Hirahara F, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

We analysed the GATA binding protein 4 gene, or GATA4, along with the NK2
transcription factor related, locus 5 gene, or NKX2.5, to determine their genetic
contribution to 104 sporadic patients in Indonesia with congenitally malformed
hearts, 76 cases having atrial septal defect and 28 tetralogy of Fallot. We found
only 1 novel mutation of GATA4 in those with atrial septal defects. Analysis of
the genetic background of the parents of the patient showed for the first time
that a new mutation of GATA4 can cause sporadic atrial septal defects. We failed 
to discover any other mutations of either the GATA4 or NKX2-5 genes, supporting
the marked genetic heterogeneity of human congenital cardiac defects.

PMID: 19678963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):14022-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903201106. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells restore cardiac function in chronic ischemic
cardiomyopathy via trilineage differentiating capacity.

Quevedo HC(1), Hatzistergos KE, Oskouei BN, Feigenbaum GS, Rodriguez JE, Valdes
D, Pattany PM, Zambrano JP, Hu Q, McNiece I, Heldman AW, Hare JM.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute and Department of Medicine,
Cardiovascular Division, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami,
FL 33136, USA.

The mechanism(s) underlying cardiac reparative effects of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) remain highly controversial. Here we tested the
hypothesis that MSCs regenerate chronically infarcted myocardium through
mechanisms comprising long-term engraftment and trilineage differentiation.
Twelve weeks after myocardial infarction, female swine received catheter-based
transendocardial injections of either placebo (n = 4) or male allogeneic MSCs
(200 million; n = 6). Animals underwent serial cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging, and in vivo cell fate was determined by co-localization of Y-chromosome 
(Y(pos)) cells with markers of cardiac, vascular muscle, and endothelial
lineages. MSCs engrafted in infarct and border zones and differentiated into
cardiomyocytes as ascertained by co-localization with GATA-4, Nkx2.5, and
alpha-sarcomeric actin. In addition, Y(pos) MSCs exhibited vascular smooth muscle
and endothelial cell differentiation, contributing to large and small vessel
formation. Infarct size was reduced from 19.3 +/- 1.7% to 13.9 +/- 2.0% (P <
0.001), and ejection fraction (EF) increased from 35.0 +/- 1.7% to 41.3 +/- 2.7% 
(P < 0.05) in MSC but not placebo pigs over 12 weeks. This was accompanied by
increases in regional contractility and myocardial blood flow (MBF), particularly
in the infarct border zone. Importantly, MSC engraftment correlated with
functional recovery in contractility (R = 0.85, P < 0.05) and MBF (R = 0.76, P < 
0.01). Together these findings demonstrate long-term MSC survival, engraftment,
and trilineage differentiation following transplantation into chronically scarred
myocardium. MSCs are an adult stem cell with the capacity for cardiomyogenesis
and vasculogenesis which contribute, at least in part, to their ability to repair
chronically scarred myocardium.

PMCID: PMC2729013
PMID: 19666564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Clin Invest. 2009 Sep;119(9):2758-71. doi: 10.1172/JCI39162. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Sirt3 blocks the cardiac hypertrophic response by augmenting Foxo3a-dependent
antioxidant defense mechanisms in mice.

Sundaresan NR(1), Gupta M, Kim G, Rajamohan SB, Isbatan A, Gupta MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) is a member of the sirtuin family of proteins that promote
longevity in many organisms. Increased expression of SIRT3 has been linked to an 
extended life span in humans. Here, we have shown that Sirt3 protects the mouse
heart by blocking the cardiac hypertrophic response. Although Sirt3-deficient
mice appeared to have normal activity, they showed signs of cardiac hypertrophy
and interstitial fibrosis at 8 weeks of age. Application of hypertrophic stimuli 
to these mice produced a severe cardiac hypertrophic response, whereas
Sirt3-expressing Tg mice were protected from similar stimuli. In primary cultures
of cardiomyocytes, Sirt3 blocked cardiac hypertrophy by activating the forkhead
box O3a-dependent (Foxo3a-dependent), antioxidant-encoding genes manganese
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and catalase (Cat), thereby decreasing cellular
levels of ROS. Reduced ROS levels suppressed Ras activation and downstream
signaling through the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways. This resulted in repressed 
activity of transcription factors, specifically GATA4 and NFAT, and translation
factors, specifically eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (elf4E) and S6 ribosomal
protein (S6P), which are involved in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.
These results demonstrate that SIRT3 is an endogenous negative regulator of
cardiac hypertrophy, which protects hearts by suppressing cellular levels of ROS.

PMCID: PMC2735933
PMID: 19652361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 31;4(7):e6454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006454.

Loss of GATA4 and GATA6 expression specifies ovarian cancer histological subtypes
and precedes neoplastic transformation of ovarian surface epithelia.

Cai KQ(1), Caslini C, Capo-chichi CD, Slater C, Smith ER, Wu H, Klein-Szanto AJ, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The family of zinc finger-containing GATA transcription factors plays
critical roles in cell lineage specification during early embryonic development
and organ formation. GATA4 and GATA6 were found to be frequently lost in ovarian 
cancer, and the loss is proposed to account for dedifferentiation of the cancer
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We further investigated the expression of GATA4
and GATA6 in ovarian surface epithelial lesions and histological subtypes of
ovarian carcinomas by immunostaining. GATA4 and GATA6 were found to be absent in 
high percentages (80 to 90%) of serous, clear cell, and endometrioid ovarian
cancer examined. In contrast, both were found positive in 11 out of 12 cases of
mucinous carcinomas, suggesting the expression of the GATA factors can
distinguish mucinous cancer from other histological subtypes. GATA4 was
frequently lost in preneoplastic lesions such as morphologically normal inclusion
cysts and epithelial hyperplasia adjacent to malignant cells. The loss of GATA6
correlates closely with neoplastic morphological transformation of ovarian
surface epithelia. In culture, GATA4 expression was progressively reduced upon
passaging primary ovarian surface epithelial cells, which correlated with changes
in histone modification of the GATA4 locus. A reduced GATA6 gene dosage as in
GATA6 (+/-) mice led to an increased pre-neoplastic changes and inclusion cysts
in the ovaries, suggesting the loss of GATA6 contributes to ovarian cancer
development.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study suggests that the expression status of GATA4
and GATA6 may dictate distinct pathologic pathways leading to serous or mucinous 
ovarian carcinomas. The readily loss of GATA4 expression through changes in
chromatin conformation suggests a potential non-phenotypic initiating event,
leading to subsequent loss of GATA6, morphological transformation, and ultimate
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2715102
PMID: 19649254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Jan 1;85(1):17-27. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp267.

Spontaneously beating cardiomyocytes derived from white mature adipocytes.

Jumabay M(1), Zhang R, Yao Y, Goldhaber JI, Boström KI.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1679, USA.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Jan 1;85(1):1-2.

AIMS: Adipose stromal cells and dissociated brown adipose tissue have been shown 
to generate cardiomyocyte-like cells. However, it is not clear whether white
mature adipocytes have the same potential, even though a close relationship has
been found between adipocytes and vascular endothelial cells, another
cardiovascular cell type. The objective of this study was to examine if white
adipocytes would be able to supply cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We prepared a highly purified population of lipid-filled
adipocytes from mice, 6-7 weeks of age. When allowed to lose lipids, the
adipocytes assumed a fibroblast-like morphology, so-called dedifferentiated fat
(DFAT) cells. Subsequently, 10-15% of the DFAT cells spontaneously differentiated
into cardiomyocyte-like cells, in which the cardiomyocyte phenotype was
identified by morphological observations, expression of cardiomyocyte-specific
markers, and immunocytochemical staining. In addition, electrophysiological
studies revealed pacemaker activity in these cells, and functional studies showed
that a beta-adrenergic agonist stimulated the beating rate, whereas a
beta-antagonist reduced it. In vitro treatment of newly isolated adipocytes or
DFAT cells with inhibitors of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) and Wnt
signalling promoted the development of the cardiomyocyte phenotype as determined 
by the number or beating colonies of cardiomyocyte-like cells and expression of
troponin I, a cardiomyocyte-specific marker. Inhibition of BMP was most effective
in promoting the cardiomyocyte phenotype in adipocytes, whereas Wnt-inhibition
was most effective in DFAT cells.
CONCLUSION: White mature adipocytes can differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like
cells, suggesting a link between adipocyte and cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2791054
PMID: 19643806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Apr;19(4):503-12. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0179.

Clonal differentiation of skeletal muscle-derived CD34(-)/45(-) stem cells into
cardiomyocytes in vivo.

Tamaki T(1), Uchiyama Y, Okada Y, Tono K, Masuda M, Nitta M, Hoshi A, Akatsuka A.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Physiology and Cell Biology Unit, Tokai University School of Medicine, 
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. tamaki@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

The differentiation and/or therapeutic potential of skeletal muscle-derived stem 
cells for cardiac infarction have been studied extensively for use in cellular
cardiomyoplasty, as injured cardiomyocytes exhibit limited regenerative capacity.
We previously reported cardio-myogenic differentiation of skeletal muscle-derived
CD34+/45(-) (Sk-34) stem cells after therapeutic transplantation. However, the
clonal differentiation potential of these cells remains unknown. Here, we show
that skeletal muscle-derived CD34(-)/45(-) (Sk-DN) stem cells, which are situated
upstream of Sk-34 cells in the same lineage, exhibit clonal differentiation into 
cardiomyocytes after single cell-derived single-sphere implantation into
myocardium. Sk-DN cells were enzymatically isolated from green fluorescent
protein (GFP) transgenic mice and purified by flow cytometry, and were then
clonally cultured in collagen-based medium with bFGF and EGF after clonal cell
sorting. Single cell-derived single-sphere colonies of Sk-DN cells were directly 
implanted into the wild-type mouse myocardium. At 4 weeks after implantation,
donor cells exhibited typical cardiomyocyte structure with the formation of
gap-junctions between donor and recipient cells. Expression of specific mRNAs for
cardiomyocytes, such as cardiac actin and GATA-4, Nkx2-5, Isl-1, Mef2, and Hand2,
were also seen in clonal cell cultures of Sk-DN cells. Cell fusion-independent
differentiation was also confirmed by bulk cell transplantation using Cre- and
loxP (enhanced GFP)-mice. We conclude that Sk-DN cells can give rise to cardiac
muscle cells clonally, and that skeletal muscle includes a practical cell source 
for cellular cardiomyoplasty.

PMID: 19634996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Reproduction. 2009 Oct;138(4):721-31. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0138. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

The effects of growth factors on in vitro-cultured porcine testicular cells.

Kuijk EW(1), Colenbrander B, Roelen BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cell lines from neonate porcine testis were cultured and characterized and the
effect of growth factors were investigated, in order to determine the
requirements for the establishment of porcine male germ cell lines. In primary
cultures, three different colony types with distinctive morphologies could be
recognized. From colonies resembling mouse spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), two 
cell lines were derived and maintained for nine passages after which
proliferation stopped. Growth of these cell lines depended on the growth factors 
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), glial derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF). In both cell
lines NANOG, promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger (PLZF), and EPCAM, were expressed
at higher levels and GFRA1, ITGA6, and THY1 at lower levels than in neonate
porcine testis. Primary cultures of neonate pig testis were subjected to a
factorial design of the growth factors LIF, GDNF, EGF, and FGF. EGF and FGF had a
positive effect on the number and size of the SSC-like colonies. Addition of EGF 
and FGF to primary cell cultures of neonate pig testis affected the expression of
NANOG, PLZF, POU5F1, and GATA4, whereas effects of LIF or GDNF could not be
detected. FGF decreased the expression levels of NANOG, a marker for pluripotency
also expressed in neonatal porcine male germ cells. FGF decreased expression of
PLZF and enhanced the expression of pluripotency-related gene POU5F1 and Sertoli 
cell marker GATA4. EGF had a positive effect on PLZF expression levels and
counteracted the positive effect of FGF on GATA4 expression. These results
suggest that FGF can impede successful derivation of porcine SSCs from neonate
pig testis.

PMID: 19633132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Jan 1;85(1):100-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp254.

Wnt-11 signalling controls ventricular myocardium development by patterning
N-cadherin and beta-catenin expression.

Nagy II(1), Railo A, Rapila R, Hast T, Sormunen R, Tavi P, Räsänen J, Vainio SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oulu, 
90014 Oulu, Finland.

AIMS: The stage-dependent organization of the cardiomyocytes during formation of 
the different layers of the developing ventricular wall is critical for the
establishment of a functional heart, but the instructive signals involved are
still poorly known. We have addressed the potential role of Wnt-11 in the control
of early ventricular myocardium assembly.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrate by means of expression analysis and a mouse
model in which Wnt-11 function has been inactivated that Wnt-11 is expressed by
the embryonic ventricular cardiomyocytes and serves as one important signal for
ventricular wall development. In the absence of Wnt-11, the coordinated
organization, intercellular contacts, co-localized expression of the cell
adhesion components N-cadherin and beta-catenin, and the cytoskeleton of the
differentiating ventricular cardiomyocytes are all disturbed. Moreover, the
ventricular wall lacking Wnt-11 signalling is thinner and the expression of the
Gata-4, Nkx2.5, Mef2c, ANP, and BNP genes is down-regulated relative to controls.
These defects lie behind disturbed embryonic cardiac functional development,
marked by an increase in the ventricular relaxation time during the early
diastole.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that Wnt-11 signalling serves as a critical cell adhesion
cue for the organization of the cardiomyocytes in the developing ventricular
wall, which is essential for the establishment of a functional heart.

PMID: 19622544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Aug;149A(8):1661-77. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32896.

Chromosome 8p23.1 deletions as a cause of complex congenital heart defects and
diaphragmatic hernia.

Wat MJ(1), Shchelochkov OA, Holder AM, Breman AM, Dagli A, Bacino C, Scaglia F,
Zori RT, Cheung SW, Scott DA, Kang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Recurrent interstitial deletion of a region of 8p23.1 flanked by the low copy
repeats 8p-OR-REPD and 8p-OR-REPP is associated with a spectrum of anomalies that
can include congenital heart malformations and congenital diaphragmatic hernia
(CDH). Haploinsufficiency of GATA4 is thought to play a critical role in the
development of these birth defects. We describe two individuals and a monozygotic
twin pair discordant for anterior CDH all of whom have complex congenital heart
defects caused by this recurrent interstitial deletion as demonstrated by array
comparative genomic hybridization. To better define the genotype/phenotype
relationships associated with alterations of genes on 8p23.1, we review the
spectrum of congenital heart and diaphragmatic defects that have been reported in
individuals with isolated GATA4 mutations and interstitial, terminal, and complex
chromosomal rearrangements involving the 8p23.1 region. Our findings allow us to 
clearly define the CDH minimal deleted region on chromosome 8p23.1 and suggest
that haploinsufficiency of other genes, in addition to GATA4, may play a role in 
the severe cardiac and diaphragmatic defects associated with 8p23.1 deletions.
These findings also underscore the importance of conducting a careful
cytogenetic/molecular analysis of the 8p23.1 region in all prenatal and postnatal
cases involving congenital defects of the heart and/or diaphragm.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2765374
PMID: 19606479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Physiol Sci. 2009 Nov;59(6):413-20. doi: 10.1007/s12576-009-0050-x. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

Adenovirus-mediated hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha double-mutant promotes
differentiation of bone marrow stem cells to cardiomyocytes.

Wang Y(1), Feng C, Xue J, Sun A, Li J, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, 510080, Guangzhou, China. yesong_wang@yahoo.com.cn

The hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) regulates transcriptional genes 
involved in cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Under normoxia,
HIF-1alpha has a short half-life (t((1/2)) approximately 5 min) and low
transcriptional activity. An HIF-1alpha mutant, produced by substitution of
alanine (Ala) for proline (Pro) at position 564 and asparagine (Asp) at position 
803, can prevent HIF-1alpha hydroxylation and results in a highly active form of 
HIF-1alpha (HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803). We hypothesized that adenovirus
(Ad)-mediated transfer of the active form of HIF-1alpha
(pAd-HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803) could effectively occur in bone marrow stem cells 
(MSCs) and promote MSC differentiation under normoxia. PCR-based site-specific
mutagenesis was used to construct the Ad vector expressing
HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803. RT-PCR and immunostaining were used to study whether
pAd-HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803 affected MSC differentiation to cardiomyocyte (CMC).
pAd-HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803 exhibited higher transcriptional activity and stable
HIF-1alpha protein expression. Under normoxia, an MSC-CMC co-culture treated with
pAd-HIF1a-Ala564-Ala803 augmented TGF-beta(1), Smad4, NKx2.5, and GATA4
expression. Higher expression of cTnT and alpha-actinin was observed by
immunostaining in MSCs, compared with the control and contrast groups.
Adenovirus-mediated hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha double-mutant,
pAd-HIF-1alpha-Ala564-Ala803, can stably express HIF-1alpha and promote its
downstream genes and MSC differentiation to CMC in the MSC-CMC co-culture system 
under normoxia.

PMID: 19603255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(7):935-46. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082819ck.

Identification of regulatory elements in the Isl1 gene locus.

Kappen C(1), Salbaum JM.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA 71010, USA.
Claudia.Kappen@pbrc.edu

Isl1 is a LIM/homeodomain transcription factor with critical roles for the
development of the heart, the nervous system and the pancreas. Both deficiency
and mis-expression of Isl1 cause profound developmental defects, demonstrating
the importance of proper regulation of Isl1 gene expression during development.
In order to understand the mechanisms that control Isl1 expression during
embryogenesis and in tissue differentiation, we initiated a screen for gene
regulatory elements in the Isl1 locus using a novel dual reporter gene vector
that allows screens of large genomic regions through reporter gene assays in
vitro and in vivo. We identified regions from the Isl1 gene locus that confer
transcriptional activity in pancreatic cell lines in vitro. Using transgenic
mice, we furthermore discovered an enhancer with in vivo specificity for the
developing heart, as well as visceral and posterior mesoderm. Our findings
further suggest that Foxo1 as well as Gata4 contribute to the activity of this
enhancer in the developing embryo. We conclude that Isl1 gene expression is
controlled in modular fashion by several elements with distinct functionality.
Embryonic Isl1 expression in several tissues of mesodermal origin is driven by a 
specific enhancer that is located 3-6kb downstream of the gene.

PMCID: PMC3482124
PMID: 19598113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Development. 2009 Aug;136(15):2665-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.038562.

Cx30.2 enhancer analysis identifies Gata4 as a novel regulator of
atrioventricular delay.

Munshi NV(1), McAnally J, Bezprozvannaya S, Berry JM, Richardson JA, Hill JA,
Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The cardiac conduction system comprises a specialized tract of electrically
coupled cardiomyocytes responsible for impulse propagation through the heart.
Abnormalities in cardiac conduction are responsible for numerous forms of cardiac
arrhythmias, but relatively little is known about the gene regulatory mechanisms 
that control the formation of the conduction system. We demonstrate that a distal
enhancer for the connexin 30.2 (Cx30.2, also known as Gjd3) gene, which encodes a
gap junction protein required for normal atrioventricular (AV) delay in mice, is 
necessary and sufficient to direct expression to the developing AV conduction
system (AVCS). Moreover, we show that this enhancer requires Tbx5 and Gata4 for
proper expression in the conduction system, and Gata4(+/-) mice have short PR
intervals indicative of accelerated AV conduction. Thus, our results implicate
Gata4 in conduction system function and provide a clearer understanding of the
transcriptional pathways that impact normal AV delay.

PMCID: PMC2709072
PMID: 19592579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):285-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.040. Epub 2009 
Jul 4.

Coordinating the timing of cardiac precursor development during gastrulation: a
new role for Notch signaling.

Miazga CM(1), McLaughlin KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tufts University, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, 
USA.

Notch signaling has been shown to mediate a wide array of cell fate decisions
during development. While previous work has demonstrated that Notch signaling
plays an important role in regulating cardiac differentiation and morphogenesis, 
an earlier role during cardiac field formation has not yet been fully
characterized. Previously, our lab demonstrated that perturbations in Notch
signaling beginning at the onset of gastrulation affect the subdivision of germ
layers. However due to the potential additive effects of misregulating Notch
signaling over multiple stages of development, it was not possible to distinguish
a specific role for this pathway during heart field specification. Here, we
developed an innovative approach that takes advantage of temporally inducible
constructs to isolate our manipulations to specific windows of development. In
particular, we focused our studies on some of the earliest stages of
cardiogenesis when heart field specification occurs. Our findings demonstrate a
novel role for Notch signaling during the prepatterning of the cardiac mesoderm. 
Specifically, once relieved of aberrantly activated Notch signaling following
gastrulation, cardiac precursors retain the ability to express markers of the
cardiac field. Conversely, downregulating Notch signaling in cells fated to
become heart tissue results in the induction of cardiac field genes in gastrula
embryos. Finally, we provide evidence suggesting that this new role for Notch
signaling is mediated at least in part via the Notch effector protein, Esr9 and
the transcription factor GATA4. Taken together, these findings provide strong
evidence for a novel role for Notch signaling in regulating the timing of heart
field specification during early cardiogenesis.

PMID: 19580804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Pak J Biol Sci. 2009 Feb 15;12(4):324-31.

Kinetics of gene expression during exposure of mouse stem cells to activin A.

Hashemi-Tabar M(1), Orazizadeh M, Ghanbari A, Dehbashi FN.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Research Centre, School of Medicine, Jondishapour
University of Medical Sciences, Ahwaz, Iran.

This study aimed to evaluate the pattern of gene expression induced by activin A 
in mouse Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs). Mouse ES cells cultured in undifferentiated
state by leukemia inhibitory factor and feeder layer cells. Following removing
these two anti differentiation factors for 5 days and forming Embryoid Bodies
(EBs), the cells divided to 8 equal cells per groups. Differentiation procedure
was performed in a two staged protocol; Formed EBs for 4 days (Stage one);
expanded differentiated ESCs on gelatin coated dishes for one week (stage two).
In the stage one, the media of groups 2-7 contained 10, 30 and 100 ng mL(-1)
Activin A. The media in stage two was the same for all groups and contained only 
Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). The expression of undifferentiated, ectoderm, mesoderm 
and endoderm markers were compared with relative RT-PCR method and statistically 
analyzed. The expression of an undifferentiating marker; Nanog was increased in
the Activin A treated groups of stage one. The expression of OCT4 reduced in
Activin A treated groups in stage two. In the stage one, the expression of Nodal 
increased by Activin A. expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) was suppressed in
Activin A treated groups of both stages. In stage two, there were significant
decrease for the expression of mesoderm (Brachyury) and Nodal and visceral
endoderm (GATA4) markers (p < 0.01). The expression of definitive endoderm
markers (PDX1, TAT) showed significantly increased in Activin A treated groups (p
< 0.01). Activin A induced differentiation in high concentration by imbalance in 
undifferentiating markers. Nodal has a dual role, undifferentiating effect and
regulation of visceral endoderm towards definitive endoderm. Overexpression of
Nanog, alteration in the expression of Nodal and Shh inhibition are three
mechanisms for explanation of differentiation induced by activin A in ES cells.
These mechanisms induces cascade of gene expression that commits ESCs towards
definitive endodermal cells.

PMID: 19579965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. ScientificWorldJournal. 2009 Jul 4;9:575-87. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2009.75.

Cardiac expression of Tnnt1 requires the GATA4-FOG2 transcription complex.

Manuylov NL(1), Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA.
manuilov@dartmouth.edu

Previous work by us and others has shown that the loss of interaction between
GATA4 and FOG2 protein partners is embryonic lethal due to heart failure at
embryonic day (E) 13.5; however, the role of this important protein duo in
various cardiac compartments (e.g., myocardial, endocardial, or epicardial cells)
remains to be understood. Although a dual role (both as an activator and a
repressor) for the GATA4-FOG2 transcriptional complex has been put forward, the
specific genes under GATA4-FOG2 control in the developing heart have remained
largely elusive. Since the myocardial-restricted Fog2 re-expression in the Fog2
null embryos is sufficient to extend their life span, identification of
GATA4-FOG2 target genes in cardiomyocytes could shed light on the molecular
mechanism of GATA4-FOG2 action in these cells. We report here that cardiac
expression of slow skeletal troponin T (Tnnt1) strictly depends on the physical
interaction between GATA4-FOG2 in the myocardium of both atria and ventricles.

PMID: 19578715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Jun 24;7:65. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-65.

Chronic crude garlic-feeding modified adult male rat testicular markers:
mechanisms of action.

Hammami I(1), Amara S, Benahmed M, El May MV, Mauduit C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche n 01/UR/08-07, Faculté de Médecine, Tunis, Tunisie.
hammamiimen@hotmail.fr

BACKGROUND: Garlic or Allium sativum (As) shows therapeutic effects such as
reduction of blood pressure or hypercholesterolemia but side-effects on
reproductive functions remain poorly investigated. Because of garlic's chemical
complexity, the processing methods and yield in preparations differ in efficacy
and safety. In this context, we clarify the mechanisms of action of crushed crude
garlic on testicular markers.
METHODS: During one month of treatment, 24 male rats were fed 5%, 10% and 15%
crude garlic.
RESULTS: We showed that crude garlic-feeding induced apoptosis in testicular germ
cells (spermatocytes and spermatids). This cell death process was characterized
by increased levels of active CASP3 but not CASP6. Expression of the caspase
inhibitors BIRC3 and BIRC2 was increased at all doses of As while expression of
XIAP and BIRC5 was unchanged. Moreover, expression of the IAP inhibitor DIABLO
was increased at doses 10% and 15% of As. The germ cell death process induced by 
As might be related to a decrease in testosterone production because of the
reduced expression of steroidogenic enzymes (Star, Cyp11a, Hsd3b5 and Hsd17b).
Evaluation of Sertoli markers showed that TUBB3 and GSTA2 expression was
unchanged. In contrast, AMH, RHOX5 and CDKN1B expression was decreased while
GATA4 expression was increased.
CONCLUSION: In summary, we showed that feeding with crude garlic inhibited Leydig
steroidogenic enzyme expression and Sertoli cell markers. These alterations might
induce apoptosis in testicular germ cells.

PMCID: PMC2710331
PMID: 19552815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 24;4(6):e6029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006029.

MYC is a metastasis gene for non-small-cell lung cancer.

Rapp UR(1), Korn C, Ceteci F, Karreman C, Luetkenhaus K, Serafin V, Zanucco E,
Castro I, Potapenko T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry,
München, Germany. rapp@biochem.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Metastasis is a process by which cancer cells learn to form satellite
tumors in distant organs and represents the principle cause of death of patients 
with solid tumors. NSCLC is the most lethal human cancer due to its high rate of 
metastasis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Lack of a suitable animal model has so far
hampered analysis of metastatic progression. We have examined c-MYC for its
ability to induce metastasis in a C-RAF-driven mouse model for non-small-cell
lung cancer. c-MYC alone induced frank tumor growth only after long latency at
which time secondary mutations in K-Ras or LKB1 were detected reminiscent of
human NSCLC. Combination with C-RAF led to immediate acceleration of tumor
growth, conversion to papillary epithelial cells and angiogenic switch induction.
Moreover, addition of c-MYC was sufficient to induce macrometastasis in liver and
lymph nodes with short latency associated with lineage switch events. Thus we
have generated the first conditional model for metastasis of NSCLC and identified
a gene, c-MYC that is able to orchestrate all steps of this process.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Potential markers for detection of metastasis were
identified and validated for diagnosis of human biopsies. These markers may
represent targets for future therapeutic intervention as they include genes such 
as Gata4 that are exclusively expressed during lung development.

PMCID: PMC2696940
PMID: 19551151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Nov 1;84(2):209-17. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp208. Epub 2009 Jun
22.

Atrial natriuretic peptide suppresses endothelin gene expression and
proliferation in cardiac fibroblasts through a GATA4-dependent mechanism.

Glenn DJ(1), Rahmutula D, Nishimoto M, Liang F, Gardner DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Nov 1;84(2):176-7.

AIMS: Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a hormone that has both
antihypertrophic and antifibrotic properties in the heart. We hypothesized that
myocyte-derived ANP inhibits endothelin (ET) gene expression in fibroblasts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have investigated the mechanism(s) involved in the
antiproliferative effect of ANP on cardiac fibroblasts in a cell culture model.
We found that cardiac myocytes inhibited DNA synthesis in co-cultured cardiac
fibroblasts as did treatment with the ET-1 antagonist BQ610. The effect of
co-culture was reversed by antibody directed against ANP or the ANP receptor
antagonist HS-142-1. ANP inhibited the expression of the ET-1 gene and ET-1 gene 
promoter activity in cultured fibroblasts. The site of the inhibition was
localized to a GATA-binding site positioned between -132 and -135 upstream from
the transcription start site. GATA4 expression was demonstrated in cardiac
fibroblasts, GATA4 bound the ET-1 promoter both in vitro and in vivo, and
siRNA-mediated knockdown of GATA4 inhibited ET-1 expression. ET-1 treatment
resulted in increased levels of phospho-serine(105) GATA4 in cardiac fibroblasts 
and this induction was partially suppressed by co-treatment with ANP.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these findings suggest that locally produced ET-1
serves as an autocrine stimulator of fibroblast proliferation, that ANP produced 
in neighbouring myocytes serves as a paracrine inhibitor of this proliferation,
and that the latter effect operates through a reduction in GATA4 phosphorylation 
and coincident reduction in GATA4-dependent transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2761198
PMID: 19546173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Oncogene. 2009 Aug 27;28(34):3033-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.159. Epub 2009 Jun
22.

GATA4 is a regulator of astrocyte cell proliferation and apoptosis in the human
and murine central nervous system.

Agnihotri S(1), Wolf A, Picard D, Hawkins C, Guha A.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt's Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for
Sick Children's Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The GATA transcription factors consist of six family members, which bind to the
consensus DNA-binding element, W-GATA-R, and are poorly characterized in the
central nervous system (CNS). Using retroviral gene trapping on transgenic mouse 
glioma models, we identified GATA6 to be a novel tumor suppressor gene in
glioblastoma multiforme. We now show GATA4, a family member of GATA6, to be
expressed in the neurons and glia of normal murine and human embryonic and adult 
CNS. Silencing GATA4 in normal astrocytes did not alter their growth properties. 
In contrast, knockdown of Gata4 in p53 null non-transformed murine astrocytes
induced transformation, with increased proliferation and resistance to
chemotherapy or radiation-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, GATA4 expression was
lost in a panel of human malignant astrocytoma cell lines. GATA4 overexpression
in normal human and murine astrocytes resulted in a cell cycle block in G1 phase,
with increased apoptosis. Mechanistically, GATA4 was a transcriptional inducer of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p15INK4B, leading to the attenuation of
cyclin D1. GATA4 expression was also induced by transforming growth factor-beta, 
leading to the inhibition of astrocyte proliferation. Collectively, we show that 
GATA4 is expressed in the embryonic and adult CNS and acts as a negative
regulator of astrocyte proliferation and growth.

PMID: 19543315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 15;15(12):3990-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0055.
Epub 2009 Jun 9.

GATA4 and GATA5 are potential tumor suppressors and biomarkers in colorectal
cancer.

Hellebrekers DM(1), Lentjes MH, van den Bosch SM, Melotte V, Wouters KA, Daenen
KL, Smits KM, Akiyama Y, Yuasa Y, Sanduleanu S, Khalid-de Bakker CA, Jonkers D,
Weijenberg MP, Louwagie J, van Criekinge W, Carvalho B, Meijer GA, Baylin SB,
Herman JG, de Bruïne AP, van Engeland M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Epidemiology, GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: The transcription factors GATA4 and GATA5 are involved in
gastrointestinal development and are inactivated by promoter hypermethylation in 
colorectal cancer. Here, we evaluated GATA4/5 promoter methylation as potential
biomarkers for noninvasive colorectal cancer detection, and investigated the role
of GATA4/5 in colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Promoter methylation of GATA4/5 was analyzed in colorectal
tissue and fecal DNA from colorectal cancer patients and healthy controls using
methylation-specific PCR. The potential function of GATA4/5 as tumor suppressors 
was studied by inducing GATA4/5 overexpression in human colorectal cancer cell
lines.
RESULTS: GATA4/5 methylation was observed in 70% (63/90) and 79% (61/77) of
colorectal carcinomas, respectively, and was independent of clinicopathologic
features. Methylation frequencies in normal colon tissues from noncancerous
controls were 6% (5 of 88, GATA4; P < 0.001) and 13% (13 of 100, GATA5; P <
0.001). GATA4/5 overexpression suppressed colony formation (P < 0.005),
proliferation (P < 0.001), migration (P < 0.05), invasion (P < 0.05), and
anchorage-independent growth (P < 0.0001) of colorectal cancer cells. Examination
of GATA4 methylation in fecal DNA from two independent series of colorectal
cancer patients and controls yielded a sensitivity of 71% [95% confidence
interval (95% CI), 55-88%] and specificity of 84% (95% CI, 74-95%) for colorectal
cancer detection in the training set, and a sensitivity of 51% (95% CI, 37-65%)
and specificity of 93% (95% CI, 84-100%) in the validation set.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of GATA4/5 is a common and specific event in colorectal 
carcinomas, and GATA4/5 exhibit tumor suppressive effects in colorectal cancer
cells in vitro. GATA4 methylation in fecal DNA may be of interest for colorectal 
cancer detection.

PMID: 19509152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jun;26(3):277-81. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2009.03.009.

[Preliminary functional analysis of a novel mutation in GATA-4 gene in Chinese
patients with congenital cardiac septal defects].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen MW(1), Pang YS, Guo Y, Liu BL, Shen J, Song HD, Liu TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, 530021 PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To perform the functional analysis of a novel H436Y mutation of GATA-4
gene identified in Han Chinese patients with congenital cardiac septal defects.
METHODS: Using bioinformatics to predict if the H436Y mutation in the GATA-4 gene
affects its protein function. H436Y mutation in the GATA-4 gene was generated by 
Quick Change Lightning site-directed mutagenesis kit and verified by DNA
sequencing. GATA-4-wt or GATA-4-mut DNA was cotransfected into Hela cells with
DNA for the luciferase reporter gene atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), and
luciferase activity was measured by an LKB luminometer 48 h after transient
transfection.
RESULTS: Alignment of the GATA-4 amino acid sequence indicated that the histidine
residue at position 436 was conserved, and H436Y mutation in the GATA-4 gene is
expected to affect its protein function. The H436Y mutation significantly reduced
the transcriptional activation of downstream reporter ANF when compared to
wild-type GATA-4 (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The mutation c.1306C-->T of the GATA-4 gene impaired the activation
of the downstream target, suggesting that the H436Y mutation in the C-terminal
region of the GATA-4 gene might prevent its biological function.

PMID: 19504439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Exp Hematol. 2009 Sep;37(9):1038-53. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.05.011. Epub 2009
Jun 6.

VEGF and IHH rescue definitive hematopoiesis in Gata-4 and Gata-6-deficient
murine embryoid bodies.

Pierre M(1), Yoshimoto M, Huang L, Richardson M, Yoder MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Murine embryonic stem cells can be differentiated into embryoid bodies
(EBs), which serve as an in vitro model recapitulating many aspects of embryonic 
yolk sac hematopoiesis. Differentiation of embryonic stem cells deficient in
either Gata-4 or Gata-6 results in EBs with disrupted visceral endoderm (VE).
While lack of VE has detrimental effects on hematopoiesis in vivo, it is unclear 
whether lack of VE affects hematopoiesis in EBs. Therefore, we compared Gata-4
null (G4N) and Gata-6 null (G6N) EBs with wild-type EBs to assess their ability
to commit to hematopoietic cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EB VE formation was examined using cell-sorting techniques
and analysis visceral endoderm gene expression. Hematopoietic progenitor
potential of EBs cultured under various conditions was assessed using
colony-forming assays.
RESULTS: Definitive erythroid, granulocyte-macrophage, and mixed colonies were
significantly reduced in G4N and G6N EBs compared to wild-type EBs. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and secretion were also reduced in
both G4N and G6N EBs, consistent with VE serving as a site of VEGF production.
Addition of exogenous VEGF(165), to EB cultures completely rescued definitive
colony-forming cells in G4N and G6N EBs. This rescue response could be blocked by
addition of soluble Flk-1 Fc to EB cultures. Similarly, addition of exogenous
Indian hedgehog to EB cultures also recovers the diminishment in definitive
hematopoiesis in a reversible manner.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the absence of VE in G4N and G6N EBs does 
not prevent emergence of definitive progenitors from EBs. However, the decreased 
level of VEGF and Indian hedgehog production in VE devoid G4N and G6N EBs
attenuates definitive hematopoietic progenitor cell expansion.

PMCID: PMC2727578
PMID: 19501129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Sep 1;18(17):3153-63. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp254. Epub 2009 Jun 
3.

Partial loss of GATA factor Pannier impairs adult heart function in Drosophila.

Qian L(1), Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)NASCR Center, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The GATA transcription factor encoded by pannier (pnr) is a critical regulator of
heart progenitor formation in Drosophila. Mutations in GATA4, the mammalian
homolog of pnr, have also been implicated in causing human cardiac disease in a
haploinsufficient manner. Mouse models of Gata4 loss-of-function and
gain-of-function studies underscored the importance of Gata4 in regulating
cardiac progenitor cells specification and differentiation. However, it is not
known whether pnr/Gata4 is directly involved in establishing and maintaining
adult heart physiology because of the lethality associated with defective heart
function and redundancy among various GATA factors in vertebrates. Here, we took 
advantage of the Drosophila heart model to examine the function of pnr in adult
heart physiology. We found that pnr heterozygous mutants result in defective
cardiac performance in response to electrical pacing of the heart as well as in
elevated arrhythmias. Adult-specific disruption of pnr function using a
dominant-negative form pnrEnR revealed a cardiac autonomous requirement of pnr in
regulating heart physiology. Moreover, we identified Tbx20/neuromancer (nmr) as a
potential downstream mediator of pnr in regulating cardiac performance and rhythm
regularity, based on the observation that overexpression of nmr genes, but not of
tinman, partially rescues the adult defects in pnr mutants. We conclude that pnr 
is not only essential for early cardiac progenitor formation, along with tinman
and T-box factors, but also plays an important role in establishing and/or
maintaining proper heart function, which is partially through another key
regulator Tbx20/nmr.

PMCID: PMC2722980
PMID: 19494035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;43(4):157-69. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0030. Epub 2009 Jun 
2.

Transgenic mice expressing small interfering RNA against Gata4 point to a crucial
role of Gata4 in the heart and gonads.

Thurisch B(1), Liang SY, Sarioglu N, Schomburg L, Bungert J, Dame C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany.

Homozygous deficiency of the transcription factor Gata4 in mice causes lethality 
due to defects in ventral morphogenesis and heart tube formation. There is
increasing evidence demonstrating that GATA4 function is also relevant for normal
developed organ systems, including the heart and endocrinum. To analyze the
implication of Gata4 beyond development, we generated transgenic mice expressing 
inducible small interfering RNA against Gata4. In longitudinal analysis,
efficient suppression of Gata4 mRNA (down to 80% of wild-type levels) and protein
expression in the heart was detected 38 days after induction of Gata4 short
hairpin RNA. Decreased Gata4 expression was associated with reduction in the
expression of known cardiac target genes, but the function of the heart remained 
unperturbed at 20-30% of normal Gata4 levels. Interestingly, Gata4 expression was
almost abolished in the ovary and testis. This was accompanied in the testis by a
significant reduction of GATA4 downstream target genes, such as the genes
encoding Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS) and steroidogenic acute regulatory 
(StAR) protein. By contrast, expression levels of Mis and Star were only slightly
modified in the ovary, and concentrations of circulating FSH and LH were normal
in female transgenic mice after induction of Gata4 short hairpin RNA. However,
inhibition of Gata4 expression led to the formation of ovarian teratoma in 10% of
females. Histology of the teratomas showed predominantly ectodermal and
mesodermal structures. Our data demonstrate that Gata4 is critically involved in 
the function and integrity of the gonads in vivo.

PMID: 19491195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. PLoS One. 2009 May 28;4(5):e5698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005698.

NKX2-5 regulates the expression of beta-catenin and GATA4 in ventricular
myocytes.

Riazi AM(1), Takeuchi JK, Hornberger LK, Zaidi SH, Amini F, Coles J, Bruneau BG, 
Van Arsdell GS.

Author information: 
(1)Labatt Family Heart Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. ali.riazi@sickkids.ca

BACKGROUND: The molecular pathway that controls cardiogenesis is temporally and
spatially regulated by master transcriptional regulators such as NKX2-5, Isl1,
MEF2C, GATA4, and beta-catenin. The interplay between these factors and their
downstream targets are not completely understood. Here, we studied regulation of 
beta-catenin and GATA4 by NKX2-5 in human fetal cardiac myocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using antisense inhibition we disrupted the
expression of NKX2-5 and studied changes in expression of cardiac-associated
genes. Down-regulation of NKX2-5 resulted in increased beta-catenin while GATA4
was decreased. We demonstrated that this regulation was conferred by binding of
NKX2-5 to specific elements (NKEs) in the promoter region of the beta-catenin and
GATA4 genes. Using promoter-luciferase reporter assay combined with mutational
analysis of the NKEs we demonstrated that the identified NKX2-5 binding sites
were essential for the suppression of beta-catenin, and upregulation of GATA4 by 
NKX2-5.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that NKX2-5 modulates the beta-catenin and GATA4
transcriptional activities in developing human cardiac myocytes.

PMCID: PMC2684637
PMID: 19479054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 7;385(4):497-502. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.073. Epub 2009 May 21.

In vitro pharmacologic testing using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes.

Tanaka T(1), Tohyama S, Murata M, Nomura F, Kaneko T, Chen H, Hattori F, Egashira
T, Seki T, Ohno Y, Koshimizu U, Yuasa S, Ogawa S, Yamanaka S, Yasuda K, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, School 
of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

The lethal ventricular arrhythmia Torsade de pointes (TdP) is the most common
reason for the withdrawal or restricted use of many cardiovascular and
non-cardiovascular drugs. The lack of an in vitro model to detect pro-arrhythmic 
effects on human heart cells hinders the development of new drugs. We
hypothesized that recently established human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS)
cells could be used in an in vitro drug screening model. In this study, hiPS
cells were driven to differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes, which
expressed cardiac markers including Nkx2.5, GATA4, and atrial natriuretic
peptide. The hiPS-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPS-CMs) were analyzed using a multi
electrode assay. The application of ion channel inhibitors resulted in
dose-dependent changes to the field potential waveform, and these changes were
identical to those induced in the native cardiomyocytes. This study shows that
hiPS-CMs represent a promising in vitro model for cardiac electrophysiologic
studies and drug screening.

PMID: 19464263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Sep;76(9):873-80. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21054.

The expression of the nuclear receptors NR5A1 and NR5A2 and transcription factor 
GATA6 correlates with steroidogenic gene expression in the bovine corpus luteum.

Taniguchi H(1), Komiyama J, Viger RS, Okuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction (CRBR), Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

The corpus luteum (CL) is the major site of progesterone (P4) production during
the luteal phase of the estrous cycle in cattle. To better understand the
molecular mechanisms underlying P4 production, we compared the mRNA and protein
expression profiles of key components of the steroidogenic pathway (StAR, CYP11A,
and 3beta-HSD) during the bovine CL luteal phase with that of several
transcription factors (NR5A1, NR5A2, GATA4, GATA6) known for their roles in the
control of steroidogenic gene expression. In the bovine CL, StAR, CYP11A, and
3beta-HSD mRNA and protein levels remained constant at the mid and late luteal
phases but markedly declined at the regressed luteal stage. NR5A1 and NR5A2
exhibited a similar pattern with a significant decrease in expression at the
regressed luteal stage. Both GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA and proteins could be detected 
in bovine CL; GATA6 levels, however, were generally higher. Although GATA4
expression did not change during the luteal phase, GATA6 showed a marked decrease
at the regressed luteal stage, like NR5A1, NR5A2, and the other steroidogenic
markers. Thus, we suggest that NR5A1, NR5A2, and GATA6, but not GATA4, contribute
to the transcriptional regulation of steroidogenic gene expression, and hence P4 
production, in the bovine CL. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the association
of NR5A1 and NR5A2 with the bovine StAR promoter in the mid-luteal CL using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, suggesting that these factors have definitive
roles in the regulation of StAR gene transcription in vivo.

PMID: 19455657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 15;315(17):3044-51. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.005. Epub
2009 May 13.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid promotes cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat
mesenchymal stem cells.

Feng C(1), Zhu J, Zhao L, Lu T, Zhang W, Liu Z, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
People's Republic of China.

This study was to investigate the effect of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, on cardiomyocyte differentiation of bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vitro. Rat MSCs were isolated and induced
to differentiate into cardiomyocyte with SAHA or 5-azacytidine (5-aza, a DNA
methylation inhibitor) or their combination. Following 7 days of SAHA treatment, 
the transcriptional expression of the cardiomyocyte-specific genes GATA4, NKx2.5,
and Mef2c was dose-dependently increased in the cells with up to 15-fold increase
in their mRNA levels over baseline. However, the mRNA levels of these genes were 
only increased by 2-4 fold in 5-aza-treated cells. After 4 weeks of induction
with SAHA, cTnT protein content was substantially increased dose-dependently by
up to 8-fold in the cells over the baseline. In contrast, only minimal cTnT
protein was found in 5-aza-treated cells. When MSCs were treated with both SAHA
and 5-aza, the mRNA levels of GATA4, NKx2.5, and Mef2c and cTnT protein content
were the same as those in the cells treated with SAHA alone. These results
indicate that SAHA effectively promotes cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat MSCs
in vitro. SAHA was a much more potent inducer for cardiac differentiation of MSCs
then 5-aza. Our data also indicate that no synergistic or antagonistic effect
between SAHA and 5-aza on cardiomyocyte differentiation of MSCs is present, and
histone acetylation, not DNA demethylation, may be the dominant mechanism that
determines the cardiac differentiation of rat MSCs.

PMID: 19445929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1574-81. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21964.

Isolation of a ventricle-specific promoter for the zebrafish ventricular myosin
heavy chain (vmhc) gene and its regulation by GATA factors during embryonic heart
development.

Park JS(1), Kim HS, Kim JD, Seo J, Chung KS, Lee HS, Huh TL, Jo I, Kim YO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, Korea
National Institute of Health, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated chamber-specific gene expression by isolating a 2.2-kb polymerase
chain reaction product containing the 5'-flanking region of the zebrafish
ventricular myosin heavy-chain gene (vmhc). Promoter analysis revealed that the
fragment, consisting of nucleotides from -301 to +26, is sufficient for vmhc
promoter activity. Among several putative cis-acting elements in the region, a
GATA-binding site was identified to be crucial for the activity of the promoter, 
as evidenced by the complete abolishment of promoter activity by a single
nucleotide substitution of GATA-binding site (-287, C-->T). Knockdown of
GATA-binding proteins 4 and 6 (GATA4 and -6) by their antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides resulted in reduced green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
gene and endogenous vmhc expression. These findings suggest that GATA4 and -6
play a key role in the regulation of vmhc expression in the ventricle. In
addition, the vmhc promoter and the transgenic zebrafish (vmhc:gfp) are useful
tools to study the formation and function of the ventricle. Developmental
Dynamics 238:1574-1581, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19441085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Vet Pathol. 2009 Sep;46(5):893-6. doi: 10.1354/vp.08-VP-0287-R-BC. Epub 2009 May 
9.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of GATA-4 in canine testicular tumors.

Ramos-Vara JA(1), Miller MA.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Purdue University, 406 South University,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. ramosja@purdue.edu

GATA-4 is a transcription factor expressed in Sertoli cells and less commonly in 
Leydig (interstitial) cells but not germ cells in adult human beings, cattle,
pigs, and mice. We examined GATA-4 in 76 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded canine
testicular tumors, including 21 Sertoli cell tumors (SCT), 28 Leydig
(interstitial) cell tumors (LCT), 24 seminomas (GCT), and 3 mixed germ cell sex
cord-stromal tumors (MGSCT). Our hypothesis was that immunohistochemistry for
GATA-4 could discriminate between germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors of the
canine testis. SCTs (21/21) had strong diffuse nuclear and weak and inconsistent 
cytoplasmic staining. LCTs (27/28) also had strong diffuse nuclear staining and
much weaker and granular cytoplasmic staining. GCTs were negative for this
marker. Sex cord-stromal cells of MGSCT were also positive. These results
indicate that GATA-4 is mainly expressed in sex cord-stromal tumors and not in
germ cell tumors of the canine testis.

PMID: 19429994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Circulation. 2009 May 19;119(19):2587-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.827691.
Epub 2009 May 4.

Sca-1+ stem cell survival and engraftment in the infarcted heart: dual role for
preconditioning-induced connexin-43.

Lu G(1), Haider HK, Jiang S, Ashraf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0529, USA.

BACKGROUND: We report that elevated connexin-43 (Cx-43) in stem cells
preconditioned with insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is cytoprotective and
reprograms the cells for cardiomyogenic differentiation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sca-1+ cells were preconditioned with 100 nmol/L IGF-1 for
30 minutes followed by 8 hours of oxygen glucose deprivation to assess the
cytoprotective effects of preconditioning. LDH release assay, cytochrome c
release, and mitochondrial membrane potential assay showed improved survival of
preconditioned Sca-1+ cells under oxygen glucose deprivation compared with
nonpreconditioned Sca-1+ cells via PI3K/Akt-dependent caspase-3 downregulation.
We observed PI3K/Akt-dependent upregulation of cardiac-specific markers including
MEF-2c (2.5-fold), GATA4 (3.1-fold), and Cx-43 (3.5-fold). Cx-43 inhibition with 
specific RNA interference reduced cell survival under oxygen glucose deprivation 
and after transplantation. In vivo studies were performed in a female rat model
of acute myocardial infarction (n=78). Animals were grouped to receive
intramyocardially 70 microL Dulbecco modified Eagles medium without cells (group 
1) or containing male 1 x 10(6) nonpreconditioned Sca-1+ cells (group 2) or
preconditioned Sca-1+ (group 3) cells labeled with PKH26. Survival of the
preconditioned Sca-1+ cells was 5.5-fold higher in group 3 compared with group 2 
at 7 days after transplantation. Confocal imaging after actinin and Cx-43
specific immunostaining showed extensive engraftment and myogenic differentiation
of preconditioned Sca-1+ cells. Compared with group 2, group 3 showed increased
blood vessel density (22.3+/-1.7 per microscopic field; P<0.0001) and attenuated 
infarction size (23.3+/-3.6%; P=0.002). Heart function indices including ejection
fraction (56.2+/-3.5; P=0.029) and fractional shortening (24.3+/-2.1; P=0.03)
were improved in group 3 compared with group 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Preconditioning with IGF-1 reprograms Sca-1+ for prosurvival
signaling and cardiomyogenic differentiation with an important role for Cx-43 in 
this process.

PMCID: PMC2839162
PMID: 19414636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 May;13(5):909-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00620.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Crocetin protects against cardiac hypertrophy by blocking MEK-ERK1/2 signalling
pathway.

Cai J(1), Yi FF, Bian ZY, Shen DF, Yang L, Yan L, Tang QZ, Yang XC, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Mol Med. 2010 Jun;14(6B):1868.
    J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Aug;13(8B):2754.

Oxidative stress plays a critical role in the progression of pathological cardiac
hypertrophy and heart failure. Because crocetin represses oxidative stress in
vitro and in vivo, we have suggested that crocetin would repress cardiac
hypertrophy by targeting oxidative stress-dependent signalling. We tested this
hypothesis using primary cultured cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts and one
well-established animal model of cardiac hypertrophy. The results showed that
crocetin (1-10 microM) dose-dependently blocked cardiac hypertrophy induced by
angiogensin II (Ang II; 1 microM) in vitro. Our data further revealed that
crocetin (50 mg/kg/day) both prevented and reversed cardiac hypertrophy induced
by aortic banding (AB), as assessed by heart weight/body weight and lung
weight/body weight ratios, echocardio-graphic parameters and gene expression of
hypertrophic markers. The inhibitory effect of crocetin on cardiac hypertrophy is
mediated by blocking the reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2
(MEK/ERK1/2) pathway and GATA binding protein 4 (GATA-4) activation. Further
investigation demonstrated that crocetin inhibited inflammation by blocking
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) signalling and attenuated fibrosis and
collagen synthesis by abrogating MEK-ERK1/2 signalling. Overall, our results
indicate that crocetin, which is a potentially safe and inexpensive therapy for
clinical use, has protective potential in targeting cardiac hypertrophy and
fibrosis by suppression of ROS-dependent signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3823407
PMID: 19413885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1462-76. doi: 10.1172/JCI38723.

Fog2 is critical for cardiac function and maintenance of coronary vasculature in 
the adult mouse heart.

Zhou B(1), Ma Q, Kong SW, Hu Y, Campbell PH, McGowan FX, Ackerman KG, Wu B, Zhou 
B, Tevosian SG, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Aberrant transcriptional regulation contributes to the pathogenesis of both
congenital and adult forms of heart disease. While the transcriptional regulator 
friend of Gata 2 (FOG2) is known to be essential for heart morphogenesis and
coronary development, its tissue-specific function has not been previously
investigated. Additionally, little is known about the role of FOG2 in the adult
heart. Here we used spatiotemporally regulated inactivation of Fog2 to delineate 
its function in both the embryonic and adult mouse heart. Early cardiomyocyte-
restricted loss of Fog2 recapitulated the cardiac and coronary defects of the
Fog2 germline murine knockouts. Later cardiomyocyte-restricted loss of Fog2
(Fog2MC) did not result in defects in cardiac structure or coronary vessel
formation. However, Fog2MC adult mice had severely depressed ventricular function
and died at 8-14 weeks. Fog2MC adult hearts displayed a paucity of coronary
vessels, associated with myocardial hypoxia, increased cardiomyocyte apoptosis,
and cardiac fibrosis. Induced inactivation of Fog2 in the adult mouse heart
resulted in similar phenotypes, as did ablation of the FOG2 interaction with the 
transcription factor GATA4. Loss of the FOG2 or FOG2-GATA4 interaction altered
the expression of a panel of angiogenesis-related genes. Collectively, our data
indicate that FOG2 regulates adult heart function and coronary angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2689123
PMID: 19411759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biomaterials. 2009 Aug;30(22):3757-65. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.03.057.
Epub 2009 May 1.

The cardiomyogenic differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells on silk
fibroin-polysaccharide cardiac patches in vitro.

Yang MC(1), Wang SS, Chou NK, Chi NH, Huang YY, Chang YL, Shieh MJ, Chung TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of
Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Polysaccharides and proteins profoundly impact the development and growth of
tissues in the natural extra-cellular matrix (ECM). To mimic a natural ECM,
polysaccharides were incorporated to/or co-sprayed with silk fibroin (SF) to
produce SF/chitosan (CS) or SF/CS-hyaluronic acid (SF/CS-HA) microparticles that 
were further processed by mechanical pressing and genipin cross-linking to
produce hybrid cardiac patches. The ATR-FTIR spectra confirm the co-existence of 
CS or CS-HA and SF in microparticles and patches. For evaluating the cellular
responses of rMSCs to the SF/CS and SF/CS-HA cardiac patches, the growth of rMSCs
and cardiomyogenic differentiation of 5-aza inducing rMSCs cultured on patches
was examined. First, the isolated rMSCs were identified with various positive and
negative surface markers such as CD 44 and CD 31 by a flow cytometric technique, 
respectively. For examining the growth of rMSCs on the patches, MTT viability
assay was performed, and the results demonstrated that the growth of rMSCs on SF 
and SF-hybrid patches significantly exceeded (P<0.001) that on culture wells
after seven days of cultivation. Additionally, the relative growth rates of rMSCs
on SF/CS and SF/CS-HA hybrid patches were significantly better (P<0.01) than that
on SF patches that were also observed by using vimentin stain to the cells. For
instance, the relative cell growth rates (%) in cell culture wells, SF, SF/CS and
SF/CS-HA patches were 100%, 282.9+/-6.5%, 337.0+/-8.0% and 332.6+/-6.6% (n=6, for
all), respectively. For investigating the effects of the hybrid patches on
cardiomyogenic differentiation of 5-aza inducing rMSCs, the expressions of
specific cardiac genes of cells such as Gata4 and Nkx2.5 were examined by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR) analysis. The
results of cardiomyogenic differentiation of induced rMSCs on SF/CS and SF/CS-HA 
hybrid patches significantly improved the expressions of cardiac genes of Gata4, 
Nkx2.5, Tnnt2 and Actc1 genes (all, P<0.01 or better, n=3) than those on SF
patches and culture wells. Interestingly, the results of cardiac gene expressions
of the cells on the SF/CS-HA hybrid patches were the most pronounced in promoting
cardiomyogenic differentiations in this investigation. Furthermore,
immunofluorescence staining of cardiac proteins such as cardiotin and connexin 43
for induced rMSCs cultured on SF/CS and SF/CS-HA hybrid patches were much
pronounced compared with SF patches, indicating the improvements of
cardiomyogenic differentiation on the hybrid patches. The results of this study
demonstrate that the SF/CS and SF/CS-HA hybrid patches may be promising
biomaterials for regenerating infarcted cardiac tissues.

PMID: 19410289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Nature. 2009 Jun 4;459(7247):708-11. doi: 10.1038/nature08039. Epub 2009 Apr 26.

Directed transdifferentiation of mouse mesoderm to heart tissue by defined
factors.

Takeuchi JK(1), Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. takeuchi.j.ab@m.titech.ac.jp

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Jun 4;459(7247):654-5.

Heart disease is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the western
world. The heart has little regenerative capacity after damage, leading to much
interest in understanding the factors required to produce new cardiac myocytes.
Despite a robust understanding of the molecular networks regulating cardiac
differentiation, no single transcription factor or combination of factors has
been shown to activate the cardiac gene program de novo in mammalian cells or
tissues. Here we define the minimal requirements for transdifferentiation of
mouse mesoderm to cardiac myocytes. We show that two cardiac transcription
factors, Gata4 and Tbx5, and a cardiac-specific subunit of BAF
chromatin-remodelling complexes, Baf60c (also called Smarcd3), can direct ectopic
differentiation of mouse mesoderm into beating cardiomyocytes, including the
normally non-cardiogenic posterior mesoderm and the extraembryonic mesoderm of
the amnion. Gata4 with Baf60c initiated ectopic cardiac gene expression. Addition
of Tbx5 allowed differentiation into contracting cardiomyocytes and repression of
non-cardiac mesodermal genes. Baf60c was essential for the ectopic cardiogenic
activity of Gata4 and Tbx5, partly by permitting binding of Gata4 to cardiac
genes, indicating a novel instructive role for BAF complexes in tissue-specific
regulation. The combined function of these factors establishes a robust mechanism
for controlling cellular differentiation, and may allow reprogramming of new
cardiomyocytes for regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC2728356
PMID: 19396158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G124-34. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90690.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha contributes to an intestinal epithelial
phenotype in vitro and plays a partial role in mouse intestinal epithelium
differentiation.

Babeu JP(1), Darsigny M, Lussier CR, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de
Sherbrooke,Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a regulator of hepatocyte and
pancreatic transcription. Hnf4alpha deletion in the mouse is embryonically lethal
with severe defects in visceral endoderm formation. It has been concluded in the 
past that the role of Hnf4alpha in the developing colon was much less important
than in the liver. However, the precise role of Hnf4alpha in the homeostasis of
the small intestinal epithelium remains unclear. Our aim was to evaluate the
potential of Hnf4alpha to support an intestinal epithelial phenotype. First,
Hnf4alpha potential to dictate this phenotype was assessed in nonintestinal cell 
lines in vitro. Forced expression of Hnf4alpha in fibroblasts showed an induction
of features normally restricted to epithelial cells. Combinatory expression of
Hnf4alpha with specific transcriptional regulators of the intestine resulted in
the induction of intestinal epithelial genes in this context. Second, the
importance of Hnf4alpha in maintaining the homeostasis of the intestinal
epithelium was investigated in mice. Mice conditionally deficient for intestinal 
Hnf4alpha developed normally throughout adulthood with an epithelium displaying
normal morphological and functional structures with minor alterations. Subtle but
statistical differences were observed at the proliferation and the
cytodifferentiation levels. Hnf4alpha mutant mice displayed an increase in the
number of goblet and enteroendocrine cells compared with controls. Given the
fundamental role of this transcription factor in other tissues, these findings
dispute the crucial role for this regulator in the maintenance of intestinal
epithelial cell function at a period of time that follows cytodifferentiation but
may suggest a functional role in instructing cells to become specific to the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 19389805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 May;149A(5):1062-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32769.

A duplication including GATA4 does not co-segregate with congenital heart
defects.

Joziasse IC(1), van der Smagt JJ, Poot M, Hochstenbach R, Nelen MR, van Gijn M,
Dooijes D, Mulder BJ, Doevendans PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. i.c.joziasse@umcutrecht.n

PMID: 19353638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Clin Immunol. 2009 Jul;29(4):444-53. doi: 10.1007/s10875-009-9292-x. Epub 2009 
Apr 8.

Enhanced expression of transcription factor GATA-4 in inflammatory bowel disease 
and its possible regulation by TGF-beta1.

Haveri H(1), Ashorn M, Iltanen S, Wilson DB, Andersson LC, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) promotes epithelial
healing in inflammatory bowel disease. We hypothesized that GATA-4, a
transcription factor cooperating with TGF-beta signaling pathway, is upregulated 
by TGF-beta1 in the inflamed intestinal epithelium.
METHODS: Normal and inflamed intestinal samples were subjected to
immunohistochemistry for GATA-4/6 and the TGF-beta signaling pathway components
Smad2/3/4. Proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed using Ki-67 and in situ DNA 
3'-end labeling assays and Bax and Bcl-2 immunohistochemistry. Furthermore,
GATA-4 was assessed in intestinal Caco-2 cells stimulated with TGF-beta1, or
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha.
RESULTS: GATA-4 was detected in only 20% of normal intestinal samples, but was
upregulated in corresponding inflamed regions. GATA-6 expression remained
unchanged during inflammation. TGF-beta1 and Smad3/4, but not Smad2, were
expressed concomitantly with GATA-4 in inflamed bowel mucosa. In intestinal
Caco-2 cells, TGF-beta1 upregulated GATA-4 and Smad2/3/4, whereas treatment with 
control cytokines had no effect. Inflammation was associated with increased
epithelial cell apoptosis and the enhancement of Bcl-2, but not Bax.
CONCLUSIONS: We surmise GATA-4 expression is upregulated in inflamed intestine
correlating with the activation of TGF-beta signaling pathway. We speculate that 
TGF-beta1 drives GATA-4 expression during intestinal inflammation, these two
components cooperating to promote epithelial healing.

PMID: 19353247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Circulation. 2009 Apr 14;119(14):1941-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.823799. 
Epub 2009 Mar 30.

Transgenic overexpression of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 rescues chronic alcohol
intake-induced myocardial hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction.

Doser TA(1), Turdi S, Thomas DP, Epstein PN, Li SY, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine, University of
Wyoming College of Health Sciences, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic alcoholism leads to the onset and progression of alcoholic
cardiomyopathy through toxic mechanisms of ethanol and its metabolite,
acetaldehyde. This study examined the impact of altered acetaldehyde metabolism
through systemic transgenic overexpression of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2) on
chronic alcohol ingestion-induced myocardial damage.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ALDH2 transgenic mice were produced with the chicken
beta-actin promoter. Wild-type FVB and ALDH2 mice were placed on a 4% alcohol
diet or a control diet for 14 weeks. Myocardial and cardiomyocyte contraction,
intracellular Ca(2+) handling, histology (hematoxylin and eosin, Masson
trichrome), protein damage, and apoptosis were determined. Western blot was used 
to monitor the expression of NADPH oxidase, calcineurin, apoptosis-stimulated
kinase (ASK-1), glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), GATA4, and
cAMP-response element binding (CREB) protein. ALDH2 reduced the chronic alcohol
ingestion-induced elevation in plasma and tissue acetaldehyde levels. Chronic
alcohol consumption led to cardiac hypertrophy, reduced fractional shortening,
cell shortening, and impaired intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis, the effect of
which was alleviated by ALDH2. In addition, the ALDH2 transgene significantly
attenuated chronic alcohol intake-induced myocardial fibrosis, protein carbonyl
formation, apoptosis, enhanced NADPH oxidase p47(phox) and calcineurin
expression, as well as phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3beta, GATA4, and CREB.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results suggest that transgenic overexpression of ALDH2 
effectively antagonizes chronic alcohol intake-elicited myocardial hypertrophy
and contractile defect through a mechanism that is associated, at least in part, 
with phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3beta, GATA4, and CREB. These data strongly
support the notion that acetaldehyde may be an essential contributor to the
chronic development of alcoholic cardiomyopathy.

PMCID: PMC2740924
PMID: 19332462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biosci Bioeng. 2009 Apr;107(4):442-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2008.12.004.

Development of cystic embryoid bodies with visceral yolk-sac-like structures from
mouse embryonic stem cells using low-adherence 96-well plate.

Yasuda E(1), Seki Y, Higuchi T, Nakashima F, Noda T, Kurosawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine and Engineering Science, Interdisciplinary Graduate
School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, 4-3-11 Takeda, Kofu,
Yamanashi, Japan.

Cystic embryoid bodies with visceral yolk-sac-like structure (cystic EB-Vs) are
used as a model for the study of early extraembryonic tissue formation containing
visceral endoderm-like derivatives. In this study, we optimized the cell density 
of embryonic stem (ES) cells for developing cystic EB-Vs in a low-adherence
96-well plate. When ES cells were seeded at a density of 4000 cells/well, the
cystic EB-Vs were most efficiently developed from ES cells via forming
multicellular spherical aggregates called embryoid bodies (EBs). The suspension
culture in the low-adherence plate was preferable for developing EBs into cystic 
EB-Vs rather than the attachment culture in the plate coated with 0.1% gelatin.
The seeding cell density of 4000 cells/well was always superior to 1000
cells/well in the efficiency of cystic EB-V development. Because the high-cell
density culture generally raises the limitation of oxygen and nutrient supplies, 
we investigated the effects of low-oxygen and low-nutrient conditions on the
development of cystic EB-Vs. It was found that low oxygen tension was not a
factor for promoting the development of cystic EB-Vs. It was suggested that a
low-nutrient medium is preferred for developing cystic EB-Vs rather than a
sufficient-nutrient medium. In conclusion, the suspension culture in the
low-adherence 96-well plate seeded with 4000 ES cells/well was optimum for
developing cystic EB-Vs. The low-nutrient condition may be one of the factors for
promoting the development of cystic EB-Vs.

PMID: 19332306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Apr 15;315(7):1302-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.02.001. Epub 
2009 Feb 12.

Inhibition of ErbB2 by receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors causes myofibrillar
structural damage without cell death in adult rat cardiomyocytes.

Pentassuglia L(1), Graf M, Lane H, Kuramochi Y, Cote G, Timolati F, Sawyer DB,
Zuppinger C, Suter TM.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Cardiovascular Center, Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland.

Inhibition of ErbB2 (HER2) with monoclonal antibodies, an effective therapy in
some forms of breast cancer, is associated with cardiotoxicity, the
pathophysiology of which is poorly understood. Recent data suggest, that dual
inhibition of ErbB1 (EGFR) and ErbB2 signaling is more efficient in cancer
therapy, however, cardiac safety of this therapeutic approach is unknown. We
therefore tested an ErbB1-(CGP059326) and an ErbB1/ErbB2-(PKI166) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor in an in-vitro system of adult rat ventricular cardiomyocytes and
assessed their effects on 1. cell viability, 2. myofibrillar structure, 3.
contractile function, and 4. MAPK- and Akt-signaling alone or in combination with
Doxorubicin. Neither CGP nor PKI induced cardiomyocyte necrosis or apoptosis. PKI
but not CGP caused myofibrillar structural damage that was additive to that
induced by Doxorubicin at clinically relevant doses. These changes were
associated with an inhibition of excitation-contraction coupling. PKI but not CGP
decreased p-Erk1/2, suggesting a role for this MAP-kinase signaling pathway in
the maintenance of myofibrils. These data indicate that the ErbB2 signaling
pathway is critical for the maintenance of myofibrillar structure and function.
Clinical studies using ErbB2-targeted inhibitors for the treatment of cancer
should be designed to include careful monitoring for cardiac dysfunction.

PMID: 19331811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jan;29(1):363-9.

Promoter methylation primarily occurs in tumor cells of patients with non-small
cell lung cancer.

De Jong WK(1), Verpooten GF, Kramer H, Louwagie J, Groen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. w.k.de.jong@int.umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: The distribution of promoter methylation throughout the lungs of
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unknown. In this explorative 
study, we assessed the methylation status of the promoter region of 11 genes in
brush samples of 3 well-defined endobronchial locations in patients with NSCLC
and in brushes of former and current smokers without NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The methylation status of RASSF1A, GATA4, GATA5, SFRP1,
RARbeta2, DAPK, MGMT, p16, p14, CHFR and APC2 was determined in all samples using
real-time methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Ten patients with NSCLC and 18 non-NSCLC controls were included. Eight
patients had one or more methylated genes in their tumor brush. Promoter
methylation of genes in proximal or contralateral locations was much less
frequent than in tumor brushes, and almost exclusively occurred in normal tissue 
if the same gene was also methylated in the tumor brush.
CONCLUSION: Promoter methylation almost exclusively occurred in tumor cells of
patients with NSCLC.

PMID: 19331174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Pathol Res Pract. 2009;205(9):615-25. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.02.010. Epub 2009
Mar 26.

Relation of Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) and cardiac transcription factor GATA4
expression in rat's cardiac myocytes hypertrophy and apoptosis.

He-nan Z(1), Yan W, Miao-na J, Cai-hua Z, Shen L, Yu-jie J.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathophysiology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of GATA4 in hypertrophy and
survival functions of CT-1 in the heart, and to apply chemical inhibitor
strategies to assess a possible interaction of signaling pathways involved in
these processes. Expression of GATA4 was determined at the mRNA expression
(polymerase chain reaction, PCR) and protein binding activity (electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, EMSAs) levels. Myocardial apoptosis was detected using the
in-situ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)
method. Parthenolide (an inhibitor to STAT3) and U0126 (an MEK inhibitor to block
ERK1/2) were used to assess a possible interaction of signaling pathways involved
in the processes. The results showed that CT-1 had a significant role in the
expression of GATA4 mRNA and binding activity of cardiomyocytes. The stronger
expression of GATA4 mRNA stimulated by CT-1 was essentially mediated by STAT3,
and was negatively regulated by ERK1/2. The intercross relationship between STAT3
and ERK1/2 might assist CT-1 in cardiac hypertrophy. At the same time, CT-1 had
its effect on anti-apoptosis and survival of cardiac myocytes. During this
process, GATA4 expression showed a negative relationship with myocardial
apoptosis. Obviously, STAT3 cannot affect the anti-apoptotic process of CT-1, but
obstruction of ERK signaling pathway can inhibit the CT-1 anti-apoptotic effect
significantly. Our data suggest that CT-1 can affect the expression of GATA4 mRNA
and the binding activity of cardiac myocytes. GATA4 plays an important role in
the hypertrophic effect of CT-1, in which STAT3 plays a primary role. The
regulation of CT-1 on the anti-apoptotic process is mediated partly by GATA4, and
can be inhibited by obstructing the ERK signaling pathway.

PMID: 19327894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 10;381(3):317-21.

Chemical and physical stimuli induce cardiomyocyte differentiation from stem
cells.

Ge D(1), Liu X, Li L, Wu J, Tu Q, Shi Y, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, West China Center of Medical Sciences,
Sichuan University, No. 3-17 Ren Min Nan Lu Road, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

In this study we investigated cardiomyocyte differentiation of rat bone
marrow-mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) by treating the stem cells with
conditions mimicking that of myocardial infarction. The extract from infarcted
rat myocardium contained the biochemical factors arising after infarction. The
cardiac contraction and relaxation were simulated by applying 4% strain at 1 Hz
to the stem cells. We found that the extract from infarcted myocardium or 4%
strain each alone could induce cardiomyocyte differentiation of BM-MSCs, as shown
by expression of cardiomyocyte-specific genes including alpha-actin, connexin 43,
Nkx2.5, MEF2c, GATA4, alpha-MHC, and Troponin I. Furthermore, a combination of
the extract and 4% strain had stronger effects on cardiomyocyte differentiation
than what either treatment alone had. Our results suggest that this in vitro
model system simulates the local cardiac environment cues after infarction and
may be useful in identifying the biochemical and physical factors involved in
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMID: 19309791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Feb 20;122(4):416-9.

GATA4 and NKX2.5 gene analysis in Chinese Uygur patients with congenital heart
disease.

Zhang WM(1), Li XF, Ma ZY, Zhang J, Zhou SH, Li T, Shi L, Li ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Center, Beijing Children's Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Beijing100045, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common developmental
anomaly in newborns. The germline mutations in GATA4 and NKX2.5 genes have been
identified as responsible for CHD. The frequency of GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in
Chinese Uygur patients with CHD and the correlation between their genotype and
CHD phenotype are unknown.
METHODS: We examined the coding region of GATA4 and NKX2.5 genes in 62 Chinese
Uygur patients with CHD and 117 Chinese Uygur individuals as the controls by
denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing.
RESULTS: Two heterozygous missense mutations of c.1220C > A and c.1273G > A in
GATA4 gene, which cause the amino acid residue changes of P407Q and D425N in
GATA4, were found in a patient with tetralogy of Fallot and a patient with
ventricular septal defect, respectively. The two patients did not have
atrioventricular conduct defects or non-cardiac abnormalities. The two mutations 
are expected to affect the protein function. There were no reported NKX2.5
mutations in the patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results provided the primary data on CHD phenotype associated
with GATA4 mutation in the Chinese Uygur population.

PMID: 19302747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1465-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.032748. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Common genetic control of haemangioblast and cardiac development in zebrafish.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington, 
Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Over the past few years it has become clear that over half of the mammalian heart
derives from outside the heart field as originally defined. Such a second heart
field, however, has not been described in zebrafish, which could explain its
smaller, two-chambered heart. Instead, zebrafish have a population of
haemangioblasts, which is absent in mammalian embryos, raising the possibility
that these cells represent the evolutionary ancestor of the second heart field.
Here, we show for the first time that the genetic programmes of these anterior
haemangioblasts and the adjacent heart field are co-regulated, by transcription
factors previously associated with heart but not blood or endothelial
development. We demonstrate that gata4, gata5 and gata6 are essential for
anterior haemangioblast specification, and for subsequent myelopoiesis, acting as
early as cloche and upstream of scl. The requirement for gata4, gata5 and gata6
in myeloid, endothelial and cardiac specification is in the mesoderm, but these
factors also control, from within the endoderm and the yolk syncytial layer, the 
migration of the cardiac precursors as they differentiate. This genetic link
between the blood/endothelial and cardiac programmes supports the notion that
this haemangioblast population in zebrafish is an evolutionary antecedent of the 
second heart field, and has implications for the differentiation of
haemangioblasts and cardiomyocytes from pluripotent cells, and for the origins of
stem cells in the adult heart.

PMCID: PMC2730399
PMID: 19297410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Pflugers Arch. 2009 Aug;458(4):785-93. doi: 10.1007/s00424-009-0659-x. Epub 2009 
Mar 18.

RhoA-ROCK signaling is involved in contraction-mediated inhibition of SERCA2a
expression in cardiomyocytes.

Vlasblom R(1), Muller A, Beckers CM, van Nieuw Amerongen GP, Zuidwijk MJ, van
Hardeveld C, Paulus WJ, Simonides WS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiology, Institute for Cardiovascular Research (ICaR-VU), VU
University Medical Center, Van der Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

In neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes (NVCM), decreased contractile activity
stimulates sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase2a (SERCA2a), analogous to
reduced myocardial load in vivo. This study investigated in contracting NVCM the 
role of load-dependent RhoA-ROCK signaling in SERCA2a regulation. Contractile
arrest of NVCM resulted in low peri-nuclear localized RhoA levels relative to
contracting NVCM. In arrested NVCM, ROCK activity was decreased (59%) and
paralleled a loss in F-actin levels. Y-27632-induced ROCK inhibition in
contracting NVCM increased SERCA2a messenger RNA expression by 150%. This
stimulation was transcriptional, as evident from transfections with the SERCA2a
promoter. A reciprocal effect of Y-27632 treatment on the promoter activity of
atrial natriuretic factor was observed. SERCA2a transcription was not altered by 
co-transfection of the RhoA-ROCK-dependent serum response factor (SRF) alone or
in combination with myocardin. Furthermore, GATA4, another ROCK-dependent
transcription factor, induced rather than repressed SERCA2a transcription. This
study shows that contractile activity suppresses SERCA2a gene expression via
RhoA-ROCK-dependent transcription modulation. This modulation is likely to be
accomplished by a transcription factor other than SRF, myocardin, or GATA4.

PMCID: PMC2704291
PMID: 19294414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Jan;40(1):85-8.

[Effects of cardiotrophin-1 on differentiation of cardiomyocyte-like cells
induced from rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XY(1), Zeng Z, Rao L, Li SF, Zhou B, Chen YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) on
differentiation of induced rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs) in
vitro with 5-azacytidine (5-aza) for the purpose of elucidation of the cellular
biological mechanisms.
METHODS: BMMSCs isolated from femur of rats were divided into four groups:
untreated group as control (group A); 0.1 nmol/L CT-1 added to medium (Group B); 
induced with 10 micromol/L 5-aza only (Group C); induced with 10 micromol/L 5-aza
combined with 0.1 nmol/L CT-1 added to medium (Group D). After 4 weeks of induced
culturing, the differentiation of induced myocyte like cells were estimated,
levels of cardiac troponin-T (cTnT) by immunohistochemical staining and
ultrastructure of induce-cultured BMMSCs were determined and mRNA expression of
alpha-actin, beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC), Nkx2.5, GATA4 were analyzed by
real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: After 4 weeks of induced culturing, morphological characteristics of
myocyte like cells with the expression of cTnT were observed in group C and D
cells. Higher level expression of GATA4, Nkx2.5, alpha- actin and beta-MHC mRNA
in group D was observed by comparing with those of group C and the differentiated
BMMSCs with formations of myofilaments distinctly were also existed in 5-aza
combined with CT-1 treatment group.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that induced culturing of BMMSCs in the presence 
of 5-aza combined with CT-1 can enhance cardiomyocytic characteristics. CT-1
upregulates the expression of GATA4, Nkx2.5, alpha-actin and beta-MHC mRNA, and
rapidly promotes the differentiation and maturation of cardiomyocyte-like cells
differentiated from BMMSCs induced with 5-aza.

PMID: 19292052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Mar;7(3):402-14. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0175. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

A negative feedback regulatory loop associates the tyrosine kinase receptor ERBB2
and the transcription factor GATA4 in breast cancer cells.

Hua G(1), Zhu B, Rosa F, Deblon N, Adélaïde J, Kahn-Perlès B, Birnbaum D, Imbert 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Université de la Méditerranée, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Centre de
Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille, France.

Overexpression of the ERBB2 gene, linked to genomic and transcriptional
amplifications, is a poor prognosis indicator in 25% to 30% of breast cancers. In
contrast to some well-documented genomic amplifications, molecular mechanisms
leading to ERBB2 transcriptional overexpression remain poorly characterized. Gene
expression analyses of breast cancer have characterized distinct transcriptional 
signatures allowing a molecular classification of breast carcinoma. Coexpression 
of the ERBB2 and GATA4 genes was originally observed in tumors. Both genes are
essential for cardiovascular development and GATA4 has been proposed to control
the transcription of critical genes for the differentiation and the function of
myocardium. We determined that ERBB2-targeted small interfering RNA repressed
both ERBB2 and GATA4 genes, whereas GATA4-targeted small interfering RNA
repressed GATA4 and activated ERBB2 transcription. Transfected GATA4-expressing
construct repressed ERBB2 promoter. Phylogenetic foot printing revealed multiple 
putative GATA4 binding sites conserved in mammals within the ERBB2 promoter
region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that GATA4 binds specifically to
several ERBB2 gene noncoding regions. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
revealed GATA4 binding to a well-conserved consensus motif. Site-directed
mutagenesis confirmed the role of this new regulatory element for the activity of
the ERBB2 gene enhancer. In agreement with a repressor role of GATA4 on ERBB2
gene expression balanced by ERBB2 activation of the GATA4 gene, a negative
correlation between the relative levels of ERBB2 and GATA4 mRNA was observed in
breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor samples. We propose that the negative
feedback loop linking ERBB2 and GATA4 plays a role in the transcriptional
dysregulation of ERBB2 gene expression in breast cancer.

PMID: 19276186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Cardiol. 2010 Aug 20;143(2):171-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.02.009. Epub 
2009 Mar 9.

Effects of cardiotrophin-1 on differentiation and maturation of rat bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells induced with 5-azacytidine in vitro.

Xinyun C(1), Zhi Z, Bin Z, Li R, Yucheng C, Yafei Y, Tingjie Z, Shengfu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

BACKGROUND: Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) is a cytokine involved in the growth and
survival of cardiac cells that stimulates cardiomyogenesis in pluripotent murine 
embryonic stem (ES) cells. But it is not known whether CT-1 is responsible for
the fate of differentiated bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs).
METHODS: We investigated the effects of CT-1 on differentiation and maturation of
BMMSCs in vitro induced with 5-azacytidine. BMMSCs isolated from femur of rats
were induced by CT-1 only, by 5-azacytidine with or without CT-1,and an untreated
control group was also set. After 4 weeks of induced culturing, we observed the
levels of alpha-cardiac actin and troponin-I by immunohistochemical staining, the
ultrastructure of induce-cultured BMMSCs, and the expression of GATA4, Nkx2.5,
beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) and alpha-cardiac actin mRNA by real time
RT-PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Differentiated BMMSCs treated by 5-azacytidine and CT-1 distinctly
showed formations of myofilaments and myotube-like structures-morphological
characteristics of myocyte like cells, and spontaneous contraction of a few cells
was observed. The protein levels of alpha-cardiac actin and troponin-T were
significantly higher than control. Furthermore, mRNA expression of GATA4, Nkx2.5,
alpha-cardiac actin and beta-MHC was increased remarkably.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that induced culturing of BMMSCs in the presence
of 5-azacytidine combined with CT-1 can enhance cardiomyocytic characteristics.
CT-1 upregulates the expression of GATA4, Nkx2-5, alpha-cardiac actin and
beta-MHC mRNA, and rapidly promotes the differentiation and maturation of
cardiomyocyte-like cells differentiated from BMMSCs induced with 5-azacytidine.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19269704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2008 Nov;39(6):882-5.

[The expression of GATA-4 and Nkx2.5 gene in the transformation of Rattus
mesenchymal stem cells into cardiomyocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu CX(1), Zhang EY, Yang SY, Ma JY, An Q, Shi YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the transcriptive factors, GATA-4 and
Nkx2.5 gene, in the course of induction of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
cardiomyocytes, and analyze its molecular biological mechanism.
METHODS: Rattus Mesenchymal Stem Cells were cultured in vitro and 3rd generation 
cells were induced in 10 micromol/L 5-azacytidine, troponin I was checked with
immunohistochemistry and Western blot, GATA-4 and NkX2.5 gene were analyzed by
RT-PCR in 1, 2, 3 and 4 weeks respectively.
RESULTS: Growth of MSCs stopped after being induced, trending to form colonies,
troponin I positive expressed since 2nd week, GATA-4 and Nkx2.5 began to express 
in 1st week, increasing gradually, peak in 3rd week.
CONCLUSION: GATA-4 and Nkx2. 5 gene expression increased gradually in the course 
of stem cells differentiation, which may control the rule of cardiomyocyte
transcription.

PMID: 19253817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(8-10):1445-55. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072417cl.

Movement and commitment of primitive streak precardiac cells during
cardiogenesis.

Lopez-Sanchez C(1), Garcia-Masa N, Gañan CM, Garcia-Martinez V.

Author information: 
(1)Human Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Extremadura, 
Badajoz, Spain.

Fate maps are required to address questions about the commitment and
differentiation of precardiac cells. Here, we report a detailed study of the
precardiac cells located at the level of the primitive streak, employing
different experiments with a variety of techniques combining double
transplantations, microinjections and immunocytochemistry. Most cells of the more
rostral segments of the primitive streak were found to contribute cells to the
endodermal layer, adjacent to precardiac mesodermal cells of the heart forming
region whose provenance was in the immediately more caudal segments of the
primitive streak. We established a close spatio-temporal relationship between the
two cell layers and the expression of their specific cardiac markers (cNkx-2.5,
Bmp2, Cripto, Usmaar, dHand, GATA4, Pitx2, Hex, Fgf8, AMHC1 and VMHC1). We also
analyzed the ability of precardiac cells to differentiate when they are
transplanted to ectopic locations or are subjected to the influence of the
organizer. We propose that the precardiac cells of the primitive streak form at
least two groups with different significance. One, regulated by mediation of the 
organizer, is located preferentially in the more rostral region of the primitive 
streak. It consists of the prospective cells of the endoderm layer, with a
hierarchic pattern of expression of different genes characterized by its capacity
for induction and regulation of a second group of cells. This second group is
located preferentially in the more caudal segments, and is fated to form the
precardiac mesoderm, whose differentiation would be characterized by the
expression of various specific genes.

PMID: 19247942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;15(5):1801-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1361.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

CpG island methylator phenotype predicts progression of malignant melanoma.

Tanemura A(1), Terando AM, Sim MS, van Hoesel AQ, de Maat MF, Morton DL, Hoon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Saint John's
Health Center, Santa Monica, California 90404, USA.

PURPOSE: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) may be associated with
development of malignancy through coordinated inactivation of tumor suppressor
and tumor-related genes (TRG) and methylation of multiple noncoding,
methylated-in-tumor (MINT) loci. These epigenetic changes create a distinct CIMP 
pattern that has been linked to recurrence and survival in gastrointestinal
cancers. Because epigenetic inactivation of TRGs also has been shown in malignant
melanoma, we hypothesized the existence of a clinically significant CIMP in
cutaneous melanoma progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The methylation status of the CpG island promoter region of 
TRGs related to melanoma pathophysiology (WIF1, TFPI2, RASSF1A, RARbeta2, SOCS1, 
and GATA4) and a panel of MINT loci (MINT1, MINT2, MINT3, MINT12, MINT17, MINT25,
and MINT31) in primary and metastatic tumors of different clinical stages (n=122)
was assessed.
RESULTS: Here, we show an increase in hypermethylation of the TRGs WIF1, TFPI2,
RASSF1A, and SOCS1 with advancing clinical tumor stage. Furthermore, we find a
significant positive association between the methylation status of MINT17,
MINT31, and TRGs. The methylation status of MINT31 is associated with disease
outcome in stage III melanoma.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show the significance of a CIMP pattern that is
associated with advancing clinical stage of malignant melanoma. Future
prospective large-scale studies may determine if CIMP-positive primary melanomas 
are at high risk of metastasis or recurrence.

PMCID: PMC2703821
PMID: 19223509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;11(1):27-38. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0040.

Characterization of embryonic stem cell lines derived from New Zealand white
rabbit embryos.

Intawicha P(1), Ou YW, Lo NW, Zhang SC, Chen YZ, Lin TA, Su HL, Guu HF, Chen MJ, 
Lee KH, Chiu YT, Ju JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

The purposes of this study were to examine technical details in deriving and
maintaining rabbit embryonic stem (rES) cell lines and to analyze their
characteristics. When STO cells were used as feeder cells, no rES cell lines were
established using either intact blastocysts or inner cell masses (ICMs). On the
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) feeder, rES cell lines were efficiently (24%)
derived. Addition of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) to the cells cultured on
the MEF feeders further increased the derivation efficiency (57%) of rES cells.
The fact that LIF induced serine-phosphorylation of STAT3 suggested LIF-dependent
maintenance of rES cells. Most of the rES cell lines expressed AP, SSEA-4, Oct4, 
TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81. Western blot or RT-PCR analysis also confirmed the
expression of Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2. When induced to form EBs in vitro or
injected to the severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, the rES cells
generated embryoid bodies (EBs) and teratomas with three germ layers expressing
the marker genes including MAP2, Desmin, and GATA4, respectively. In conclusion, 
rabbit ES cell lines can be efficiently established using our current protocols
with LIF supplement. These ES cells express pluripotent stem cell markers and
retain their capability to differentiate into different tissue cells.
Furthermore, rES cells depend on LIF for self-renewal, likely via the JAK-STAT
pathway.

PMID: 19220131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Indian Heart J. 2008 Mar-Apr;60(2):95-100.

In vitro cardiogenesis can be initiated in human CD34+ cells.

Sarma PV(1), Subramanyam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences,
Tirupati 517507, India.

BACKGROUND: The extensive damage that occurs in the cardiac tissue after
myocardial infarct is the major concern in post infarct management. It is very
well known that adult stem cells mobilized by administration of G-CSF result in
homing of stem cells into the damaged myocardium. This is because of the fact
that stem cells have the ability to proliferate and capacity to generate into
multiple cell lineages.
METHOD: A healthy donor was selected as per the guidelines given by the
institutional ethical committee and Helsinki declaration. The donor was given
G-CSF 5 microg/kg/day and stem cells were harvested from the peripheral blood
using Fresenius ASTec204 cell separator. The PBSC were then evaluated by
immunohistochemical staining using anti-human CD34 monoclonal antibodies. The
cells were then cultured in DMEM with 10% FCS for 17 weeks and in vitro
cardiogenesis was initiated by adding 4 microM/l 5'Azacytidine.
RESULTS: In vitro cardiogenesis was initiated in pure CD34+ cells with 5'
Azacytidine. The cells showed spontaneous beating after 24 hours of treatment and
after 5 weeks, the cells connected with the adjoining cells by a myotube. In
these cells, expression of myosin light chain (MLC2v) gene and GATA-4
transcription factor validated the development of cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSION: It is observed that the transplantation of autologous stem
cells/fetal cardiomyocytes in the heart scar tissue developed due to infarct,
limited the scar expansion, and prevented post infarct heart failures. Homing
process due to the transplantation of autologous stem cells is time consuming;
therefore, transplantation of cardiomyocytes developed from autologous stem cells
could be the future method of correcting the infracted myocardium.

PMID: 19218716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Aug;15(8):1897-907. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0351.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived mesoderm-like epithelium transitions to
mesenchymal progenitor cells.

Boyd NL(1), Robbins KR, Dhara SK, West FD, Stice SL.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Bioscience Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) have the potential to produce all of the cells 
in the body. They are able to self-renew indefinitely, potentially making them a 
source for large-scale production of therapeutic cell lines. Here, we developed a
monolayer differentiation culture that induces hESC (WA09 and BG01) to form
epithelial sheets with mesodermal gene expression patterns (BMP4, RUNX1, and
GATA4). These E-cadherin+ CD90low cells then undergo apparent
epithelial-mesenchymal transition for the derivation of mesenchymal progenitor
cells (hESC-derived mesenchymal cells [hES-MC]) that by flow cytometry are
negative for hematopoietic (CD34, CD45, and CD133) and endothelial (CD31 and
CD146) markers, but positive for markers associated with mesenchymal stem cells
(CD73, CD90, CD105, and CD166). To determine their functionality, we tested their
capacity to produce the three lineages associated with mesenchymal stem cells and
found they could form osteogenic and chondrogenic, but not adipogenic lineages.
The derived hES-MC were able to remodel and contract collagen I lattice
constructs to an equivalent degree as keloid fibroblasts and were induced to
express alpha-smooth muscle actin when exposed to transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta1, but not platelet derived growth factor-B (PDGF-B). These data
suggest that the derived hES-MC are multipotent cells with potential uses in
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine and for providing a highly
reproducible cell source for adult-like progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2792108
PMID: 19196144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Feb;15(2):331-42. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0145.

Cardiomyogenic differentiation of embryoid bodies is promoted by rotary orbital
suspension culture.

Sargent CY(1), Berguig GY, McDevitt TC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology/Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can differentiate into all somatic cell types,
including cardiomyocytes, which may be used for regenerative cardiac cell
therapies. ESCs are commonly differentiated via cell aggregates known as embryoid
bodies (EBs), but current cardiomyogenic differentiation methods, such as
formation via hanging drops, yield relatively small numbers of EBs and
differentiated cells. On the other hand, batch culture methods, like static
suspension, yield increased numbers of EBs and cells, but typically exhibit less 
overall cardiomyogenic differentiation. The objective of this study was to
determine if rotary orbital suspension culture, which produces EBs resembling
hanging drops, was capable of enhancing cardiomyogenic differentiation compared
to static suspension culture. Similar to hanging drops, rotary suspension culture
significantly increased the proportion of spontaneously contracting EBs compared 
to static suspension culture. The gene expression of mesoderm (Brachyury-T) and
cardiac transcription factors (Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Mef2c), as well as sarcomeric
muscle proteins (alpha-MHC and MLC-2v) was increased within EBs cultured in
rotary suspension conditions. Rotary orbital culture also yielded a greater
percentage of EBs that were immunoreactive for alpha-sarcomeric actin protein
compared to static suspension, and augmented the average percentage of
alpha-sarcomeric actin-positive cells detected via flow cytometry. These results 
demonstrate that rotary orbital suspension culture enhances endogenous
cardiomyogenesis of EBs and therefore could benefit the development of
regenerative cardiac therapies.

PMID: 19193130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(8):2193-204. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01222-08. Epub 2009 Feb 
2.

MicroRNA-1 negatively regulates expression of the hypertrophy-associated
calmodulin and Mef2a genes.

Ikeda S(1), He A, Kong SW, Lu J, Bejar R, Bodyak N, Lee KH, Ma Q, Kang PM, Golub 
TR, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 021151, USA.

Calcium signaling is a central regulator of cardiomyocyte growth and function.
Calmodulin is a critical mediator of calcium signals. Because the amount of
calmodulin within cardiomyocytes is limiting, the precise control of calmodulin
expression is important for the regulation of calcium signaling. In this study,
we show for the first time that calmodulin levels are regulated
posttranscriptionally in heart failure. The cardiomyocyte-restricted microRNA
miR-1 inhibited the translation of calmodulin-encoding mRNAs via highly conserved
target sites within their 3' untranslated regions. In keeping with its effect on 
calmodulin expression, miR-1 downregulated calcium-calmodulin signaling through
calcineurin to NFAT. miR-1 also negatively regulated the expression of Mef2a and 
Gata4, key transcription factors that mediate calcium-dependent changes in gene
expression. Consistent with the downregulation of these hypertrophy-associated
genes, miR-1 attenuated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in cultured neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes and in the intact adult heart. Our data indicate that miR-1
regulates cardiomyocyte growth responses by negatively regulating the calcium
signaling components calmodulin, Mef2a, and Gata4.

PMCID: PMC2663304
PMID: 19188439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Card Fail. 2009 Feb;15(1):48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2008.08.011. Epub 2008
Oct 15.

Cardiac contractility modulation electrical signals normalize activity,
expression, and phosphorylation of the Na+-Ca2+ exchanger in heart failure.

Gupta RC(1), Mishra S, Wang M, Jiang A, Rastogi S, Rousso B, Mika Y, Sabbah HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Henry Ford Heart 
and Vascular Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Expression and phosphorylation of the cardiac Na(+)-Ca(2+)
exchanger-1 (NCX-1) are up-regulated in heart failure (HF). We examined the
effects of chronic cardiac contractility modulation (CCM) therapy on the
expression and phosphorylation of NCX-1 and its regulators GATA-4 and FOG-2 in HF
dogs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Studies were performed in LV tissue from 7 CCM-treated HF
dogs, 7 untreated HF dogs, and 6 normal (NL) dogs. mRNA expression of NCX-1,
GATA-4, and FOG-2 was measured using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction, and protein level was determined by Western blotting. Phosphorylated
NCX-1 (P-NCX) was determined using a phosphoprotein enrichment kit. Compared with
NL dogs, NCX-1 mRNA and protein expression and GATA-4 mRNA and protein expression
increased in untreated HF dogs, whereas FOG-2 expression decreased. Compared with
NL dogs, the level of P-NCX-1 normalized to total NCX-1 increased in untreated HF
dogs (0.80+/-0.10 vs 0.37+/-0.04; P < .05). CCM therapy normalized NCX-1
expression, GATA-4, and FOG-2 expression, and the ratio of P-NCX-1 to total NCX-1
(0.62+/-0.10).
CONCLUSION: Chronic monotherapy with CCM restores expression and phosphorylation 
of NCX-1. These findings are consistent with previous observations of improved LV
function and normalized sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium cycling in the left
ventricles of HF dogs treated with CCM therapy.

PMID: 19181294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 May;46(5):653-62. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.12.010. Epub
2008 Dec 31.

Cardiac interstitial cells express GATA4 and control dedifferentiation and cell
cycle re-entry of adult cardiomyocytes.

Zaglia T(1), Dedja A, Candiotto C, Cozzi E, Schiaffino S, Ausoni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.

Interstitial cells of the adult rat heart were characterized with respect to i)
expression of cardiac markers of commitment and differentiation, ii) myogenic
potential in vitro and iii) ability to modulate cardiomyocyte differentiation
state. We demonstrate for the first time that fibroblasts and a proportion of
pericytes in the adult rat heart express the transcription factor GATA4. This
appears to be a peculiar property of the heart. Fibroblasts that are also derived
from the splanchnopleuric mesoderm, such as those of the gut, or fibroblasts of
different embryological origin, such as those of skin and skeletal muscle, lack
this property. Of note, a nestin+/GATA4+ putative stem cell population is also
detected in the adult heart. GATA4+ cardiac interstitial cells do not display
myogenic potential in vitro. However, cardiac fibroblasts, but not skin
fibroblasts, stimulate dedifferentiation of adult cardiomyocytes and their
re-entry into the cell cycle in vitro, as demonstrated by the high number of
cardiomyocytes expressing Ki67, phosphorylated histone H3 (H3P) and incorporating
5-bromodeoxiuridine (BrdU) in the co-cultures. In conclusion, cardiac fibroblasts
have peculiar expression of myogenic transcription factors, a property that may
have an impact for reprogramming these cells to the myogenic differentiation. In 
addition, they are able to modulate the behavior of adult cardiomyocytes, a
property that may be used to promote dedifferentiation and proliferation of
cardiac cells in the damaged myocardium.

PMID: 19162035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2008 Sep;24(9):1582-7.

[Differentiation of human amniotic fluid stem cells into cardiomyocytes through
embryonic body formation].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Chen S, Cheng X, Dou Z, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A & F University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Shaanxi Stem Cell Engineering
and Technology Research Center, Yangling 712100, China.

To isolate human amniotic fluid stem cells (hASCs) and induce hASCs into
cardiomyocytes after forming the embryonic bodies. We cultivated hASCs isolated
from the amniotic fluid continually for over 42 passages. The biological
characteristics of hASCs were detected by immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and flow
cytometer, hASCs at 10-15th passage were suspension cultured to form embryonic
bodies that were induced to cardiomyocytes. Fibroblastoid-type hASCs were
obtained. Immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and flow cytometry analysis demonstrated
that hASCs were positive for some specific makers of the embryonic stem cell.
hASCs could form embryonic bodies that were alkaline-phosphatase positive and
expressed fgf5, zeta-globin and alpha-fetoprotein. The embryonic bodies could
differentiate into cardiomyocytes showing alpha-actin positive and Tbx5, Nkx2.5, 
GATA4 and alpha-MHC positive. We conclued that hASCs obtained from human amniotic
fluid could differentiate into cardiomyocytes through the formation of embryonic 
bodies.

PMID: 19160841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2008 Oct;39(4):302-6.

[Role of GATA-4 in cardiac development and remodeling].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang SY(1), Xu M, Zhang YY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital and Key
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of Education, Beijing
100191, China.

GATA-4 plays important roles in the process of cardiac development and
remodeling. Deletion or mutation of GATA-4 is associated with malformation of
cardiac development directly, even embryolethality. Down-regulation of GATA-4 may
lead to deterioration of cardiac function. GATA4 activity is significantly
changed by pathological stimulation induced by pressure overload, hypoxia,
sympathetic nerve activation, etc. It involves in the process of myocardium
remodeling through regulating ANP, BNP, Bcl-2, CARP, etc. Overall, GATA-4 has
important roles in the process of cardiac development and remodeling. Exploration
of underlying mechanism of GATA4 transcriptional regulation may provide a new
clue for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 19119610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jan 15;122(Pt 2):233-42. doi: 10.1242/jcs.037663.

Integrins are required for the differentiation of visceral endoderm.

Liu J(1), He X, Corbett SA, Lowry SF, Graham AM, Fässler R, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

Integrins of the beta1 subfamily are highly expressed in the early mouse embryo
and are essential for the formation of primitive germ layers from the inner cell 
mass (ICM). We investigated the mechanisms by which alphabeta1 integrins regulate
ICM morphogenesis by using the embryonic-stem-cell-derived embryoid body (EB), a 
model for peri-implantation development. Ablation of integrin beta1 in EBs
resulted in endoderm detachment and in maturation defects, which were manifested 
by the mislocalization of GATA4 in the cytoplasm and the markedly reduced
synthesis of basement membrane (BM) components and the lineage marker disabled
homolog 2. The mutant endoderm cells failed to spread on BM substrates, but could
spread on vitronectin, which induced upregulation of alphavbeta3 integrin and
integrin-dependent GATA4 nuclear translocation. Forced expression of integrin
beta3 in the mutant EBs completely rescued endoderm morphogenesis, suggesting
that integrin beta3 can substitute for integrin beta1 in the endoderm.
Furthermore, the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) ERK1 and ERK2 (ERK1/2)
and p38 were activated in endoderm in an integrin-dependent fashion.
Pharmacological inhibition of ERK1/2 or p38 MAPK blocked vitronectin-induced
GATA4 nuclear translocation and endoderm maturation, whereas expression of a
constitutively active ERK kinase (MEK1) or p38 MAPK in the mutant cells rescued
endoderm maturation in integrin-beta1-null endoderm cells. Collectively, these
results suggest that integrins are required for both the stable adhesion and
maturation of visceral endoderm, the latter being mediated through the activation
of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK.

PMCID: PMC2714419
PMID: 19118216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):427-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22023.

The truncated Hoxa1 protein interacts with Hoxa1 and Pbx1 in stem cells.

Fernandez CC(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue,
New York, New York 10065, USA.

Hox genes contain a homeobox encoding a 60-amino acid DNA binding sequence. The
Hoxa1 gene (Hox1.6, ERA1) encodes two alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode
distinct proteins, one with the homeodomain (Hoxa1-993), and another protein
lacking this domain (Hoxa1-399). The functions of Hoxa1-399 are unknown. We
detected Hoxa1-993 and Hoxa1-399 by immunoprecipitation using Hoxa1 antibodies.
To assess whether Hoxa1-399 functions in cellular differentiation, we analyzed
Hoxb1, a Hoxa1 target gene. Hoxa1-993 and its cofactor, Pbx1, bind to the Hoxb1
SOct-R3 promoter to transcriptionally activate a luciferase reporter. Results
from F9 stem cells that stably express ectopic Hoxa1-399 (the F9-399 line) show
that Hoxa1-399 reduces this transcriptional activation. Gel shift assays
demonstrate that Hoxa1-399 reduces Hoxa1-993/Pbx1 binding to the Hoxb1 SOct-R3
region. GST pull-down experiments suggest that Hoxa1-399, Hoxa1-993, and Pbx1
form a trimer. However, the F9-399 line exhibits no differences in RA-induced
proliferation arrest or endogenous Hoxb1, Pbx1, Hoxa5, Cyp26a1, GATA4, or Meis
mRNA levels when compared to F9 wild-type.

PMCID: PMC3923656
PMID: 19115252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 2009 Jan;136(2):207-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.029561.

Distinct functions of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in KV development and cardiac
asymmetry.

Lin X(1), Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Division of Cardiovascular
Diseases, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
lin.xueying@mayo.edu

The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway exhibits distinct and developmental stage-specific
roles during cardiogenesis. However, little is known about the molecular
mechanisms of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the establishment of cardiac
left-right (LR) asymmetry. Using zebrafish as an animal model, we show here that 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is differentially required in cardiac LR patterning.
At an early stage, during asymmetric signal generation, Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling is necessary for Kupffer's vesicle development and for the regulation
of both heart and visceral laterality. At a later stage, during asymmetric signal
propagation, excessive Wnt/beta-catenin signaling inhibits the transmission of
asymmetric cues from the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) to the cardiac field but
not to the developing gut; as such, it only regulates heart laterality. Molecular
analysis identifies Gata4 as the downstream target of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling 
in the cardiac field that responds to the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
regulates the competence of the heart field to express left-sided genes. In
summary, our results reveal a previously unexpected role of Wnt-Gata4 signaling
in the control of asymmetric signal propagation from the LPM to the cardiac
field.

PMID: 19103803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Jul;36(7):651-4.

[Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells cocultured with semi-permeable membrane
separated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes differentiated into cardiomyocyte
phenotype].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XH(1), Yu XY, Lin QX, Shan ZX, Zhang GF, Zhang X, Deng CY, Fu YH, Kuang SJ,
Huang W, Yang M, Lin SG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Medical Sciences, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the ability of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(hBMSCs), cocultured with semi-permeable membrane separated neonatal rat
ventricular myocytes, to differentiate into cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: hBMSCs were isolated and purified by density gradient centrifugation and
adherence screening method. Cells were expanded as undifferentiated cells in
culture for more than 3 passages and their phenotypes were identified with flow
cytometer. hBMSCs were cocultured with neonatal rat ventricular myocytes in a
rate of 1:10 separated by semi-permeable membrane. GATA4 mRNA was detected by
RT-PCR; Immunocytochemistry, and Immunostaining were used to detect sarcomeric
alpha-actinin, desmin, cTnT, and cTnI protein level.
RESULTS: CD29 (98.64% +/- 0.80%) and CD44 (96.70% +/- 1.50%) were the major
surface markers of hBMSCs. After coculturing with semi-permeable membrane
separated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, the first contraction of single
cells was noted at day 7 and GATA4 expression was detected on these cells by
RT-PCR after 1 to 3 weeks coculture. Desmin, sarcomeric alpha-actinin, cTnI and
cTnT could be detected by immunocytochemistry and immunostaining on some of these
cells.
CONCLUSION: hBMSCs possess the potential to differentiate into myocardial cell
phenotype in the cardiac microenvironment. Direct contact with cardiomyocytes was
not necessary required for hBMSCs differentiation.

PMID: 19100098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Jan;36(1):85-7.

[Recent progress on the effect of GATA-4 on the cardiovascular system].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen MW, Liu TW, Pang YS.

PMID: 19099938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Circ Res. 2009 Jan 30;104(2):255-64, 10p following 264. doi:
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.188730. Epub 2008 Dec 18.

Pravastatin improves function in hibernating myocardium by mobilizing CD133+ and 
cKit+ bone marrow progenitor cells and promoting myocytes to reenter the growth
phase of the cardiac cell cycle.

Suzuki G(1), Iyer V, Cimato T, Canty JM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Department of Medicine,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Jan 30;104(2):144-6.

3-hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors have been reported to
increase circulating bone marrow progenitor cells and variably improve global
function in heart failure. The potential role of improved perfusion versus direct
effects of statins on cardiac myocytes has not been established. We chronically
instrumented swine with a left anterior descending artery (LAD) stenosis to
produce chronic hibernating myocardium with regional contractile dysfunction in
the absence of heart failure. Hemodynamics, function, perfusion, and
histopathology were assessed in pigs treated for 5 weeks with pravastatin (n=12) 
versus untreated controls (n=10). Regional LAD wall thickening was depressed
under baseline conditions (LAD 3.7+/-0.3 versus 6.6+/-0.3 in remote regions,
P<0.01). It remained unchanged in untreated animals but increased from 3.8+/-0.6 
to 5.2+/-0.5 mm after pravastatin (P<0.01). There was no increase in myocardial
perfusion at rest or during vasodilation. Pravastatin mobilized circulating
CD133(+)/cKit(+) bone marrow progenitor cells and increased myocardial tissue
levels (LAD CD133(+) cells from 140+/-33 to 884+/-167 cells/10(6) myocyte nuclei 
and cKit(+) cells from 223+/-49 to 953+/-123 cells/10(6) myocyte nuclei).
Pravastatin increased myocytes in mitosis (phospho-histone-H3; 9+/-5 to 43+/-7
nuclei/10(6) myocyte nuclei, P<0.05) and the growth phase of the cell cycle
(Ki67; 410+/-82 to 1261+/-235 nuclei/10(6) myocyte nuclei, P<0.05) in diseased
but not normal hearts. As a result, pravastatin increased LAD myocyte nuclear
density from 830+/-41 to 1027+/-55 nuclei/mm(2) (P<0.05). These data indicate
that, in the absence of impaired endothelial function and heart failure,
dysfunctional hibernating myocardium improves after pravastatin. This effect is
independent of myocardial perfusion and related to mobilization of
CD133(+)/cKit(+) bone marrow progenitor cells which stimulate myocyte
proliferation resulting in quantitative increases in myocyte nuclear density.

PMCID: PMC2666151
PMID: 19096024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Reprod Domest Anim. 2010 Apr;45(2):275-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2008.01281.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 15.

In vitro culture and differentiation of buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) spermatogonia.

Xie B(1), Qin Z, Huang B, Xie T, Yao H, Wei Y, Yang X, Shi D, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.

The objective of this study was to develop a culture system which could support
buffalo spermatogonia differentiation into spermatids in vitro. Testes from 3- to
5-month-old buffaloes were decapsulated and seminiferous tubules were
enzymatically dissociated to recover spermatogonia and sertoli cells. The cells
were cultured in modified Dulbecco modified Eagle medium supplemented with
different concentrations of foetal bovine serum, retinol, testosterone for 2
months at 37 degrees C. Spermatogonia and sertoli cells were identified with an
antibody against c-kit or GATA4, respectively. The viability of spermatogonia in 
the media supplemented with different concentrations of serum was all
significantly higher (p < 0.05) compared with that in the medium without serum.
A-paired or A-aligned spermatogonia and spermatogonial colonies (AP-positive)
were observed after 7-10 days of culture and spermatid-like cells with a
flagellum (6-8 microm) appeared after 30 days of culture. For cultured
conditions, retinol could not significantly promote the formation of
spermatid-like cells (p > 0.05), whereas supplementation of testosterone could
significantly promote (p < 0.05) the formation of spermatid-like cells after 41
days of culture. The expression of the spermatid-specific marker gene (PRM2) was 
identified after 30 days of culture by RT-PCR. Yet, the transition protein 1
(TP1, a haploid makers) was not detected. Meanwhile, spermatids developed in
vitro were also confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. These results suggest that
buffalo spermatogonia could differentiate into spermatids in vitro based on the
analysis of their morphology, PRM2 expression and Raman spectroscopy. Yet, the
normality of the spermatid-like cells was not supported by TP1 expression.

PMID: 19090820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):368-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.004. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Interaction of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 is critical for normal cardiac
development.

Maitra M(1), Schluterman MK, Nichols HA, Richardson JA, Lo CW, Srivastava D, Garg
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Congenital heart disease is the most common type of birth defect with an
incidence of 1%. Previously, we described a point mutation in GATA4 that
segregated with cardiac defects in a family with autosomal dominant disease. The 
mutation (G296S) exhibited biochemical deficits and disrupted a novel interaction
between Gata4 and Tbx5. To determine if Gata4 and Tbx5 genetically interact in
vivo, we generated mice heterozygous for both alleles. We found that nearly 100% 
of mice heterozygous for Gata4 and Tbx5 were embryonic or neonatal lethal and had
complete atrioventricular (AV) septal defects with a single AV valve and
myocardial thinning. Consistent with this phenotype, Gata4 and Tbx5 are
co-expressed in the developing endocardial cushions and myocardium. In mutant
embryos, cardiomyocyte proliferation deficits were identified compatible with the
myocardial hypoplasia. Similar to Gata4, Gata6 and Tbx5 are co-expressed in the
embryonic heart, and the transcription factors synergistically activate the
atrial natiuretic factor promoter. We demonstrate a genetic interaction between
Gata6 and Tbx5 with an incompletely penetrant phenotype of neonatal lethality and
thin myocardium. Gene expression analyses were performed on both sets of compound
heterozygotes and demonstrated downregulation of alpha-myosin heavy chain only in
Gata4/Tbx5 heterozygotes. These findings highlight the unique genetic
interactions of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 for normal cardiac morphogenesis in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2651674
PMID: 19084512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Endocrinology. 2009 Apr;150(4):1970-5. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1374. Epub 2008 Dec
12.

Thyrotropin-independent induction of thyroid endoderm from embryonic stem cells
by activin A.

Ma R(1), Latif R, Davies TF.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Research Unit, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, James J. Peters
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, New York,New York 10468, USA.
risheng.ma@mssm.edu

To model the differentiation of thyroid epithelial cells, we examined embryoid
bodies derived from undifferentiated murine embryonic stem cells treated with
activin A to induce endoderm differentiation, the germ layer from which thyroid
cells occur. The resulting endodermal cells were then further exposed to TSH
and/or IGF-I for up to 21 d. Oct-4 and REX1 expression, required to sustain stem 
cell self-renewal and pluripotency, were appropriately down-regulated, whereas
GATA-4, and alpha-fetoprotein, both endodermal-specific markers, increased as the
embryonic stem cells were exposed to activin A. By d 5 culture, TSH receptor
(TSHR) and sodium iodide symporter (NIS) gene and protein expression were
markedly induced. Cells isolated by the fluorescence-activated cell sorter
simultaneously expressed not only TSHR and NIS proteins but also PAX8 mRNA, an
expression pattern unique to thyroid cells and expected in committed thyroid
progenitor cells. Such expression continued until d 21 with no influence seen by 
the addition of TSH or IGF-I. The sequence of gene expression changes observed in
these experiments demonstrated the emergence of definitive thyroid endoderm. The 
activin A induction of thyroid-specific markers, NIS and TSHR, occurred in the
absence of TSH stimulation, and, therefore, the emergence of thyroid endoderm in 
vitro paralleled the emergence of thyroid cells in TSHR-knockout mice. Activin A 
is clearly a major regulator of thyroid endoderm.

PMCID: PMC2659285
PMID: 19074581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):19833-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808705105. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Transcription factor neuromancer/TBX20 is required for cardiac function in
Drosophila with implications for human heart disease.

Qian L(1), Mohapatra B, Akasaka T, Liu J, Ocorr K, Towbin JA, Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Del E. Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell
Research Center (NASCR), Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12561.

neuromancer/Tbx20 (nmr) genes are cardiac T-box transcription factors that are
evolutionarily conserved from flies to humans. Along with other known congenital 
heart disease genes, including tinman/Nkx2-5, dorsocross/Tbx5/6, and
pannier/Gata4/6, they are important for specification and morphogenesis of the
embryonic heart. The Drosophila heart has proven to be an excellent model to
study genes involved in establishing and maintaining the structural integrity of 
the adult heart, as well as genes involved in maintaining physiological function.
Using this model, we have identified nmr as a gene required in adult fly hearts
for the maintenance of both normal myofibrillar architecture and cardiac
physiology. Moreover, we have discovered synergistic interactions between nmr and
other cardiac transcription factors, including tinman/Nkx2-5, in regulating
cardiac performance, rhythmicity, and cardiomyocyte structure, reminiscent of
similar interactions in mice. This suggests a remarkably conserved role for this 
network of cardiac transcription factors in the genetic control of the adult
heart. In addition, nmr-tinman interactions also influence the expression of
potential downstream effectors, such as ion channels. Interestingly, genetic
screening of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and congenital heart disease
has revealed TBX20 variants in three sporadic and two familial cases that were
not found in controls. These findings suggest that the fly heart might serve as
an identifier of candidate genes involved in human heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2605007
PMID: 19074289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):19762-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808393105. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Beta-Catenin downregulation attenuates ischemic cardiac remodeling through
enhanced resident precursor cell differentiation.

Zelarayán LC(1), Noack C, Sekkali B, Kmecova J, Gehrke C, Renger A, Zafiriou MP, 
van der Nagel R, Dietz R, de Windt LJ, Balligand JL, Bergmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Campus-Buch and Campus Virchow-Klinikum,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Franz Volhard Klinik, Germany.

We analyzed the effect of conditional, alphaMHC-dependent genetic beta-catenin
depletion and stabilization on cardiac remodeling following experimental infarct.
beta-Catenin depletion significantly improved 4-week survival and left
ventricular (LV) function (fractional shortening: CT(Deltaex3-6): 24 +/- 1.9%;
beta-cat(Deltaex3-6): 30.2 +/- 1.6%, P < 0.001). beta-Catenin stabilization had
opposite effects. No significant changes in adult cardiomyocyte survival or
hypertrophy were observed in either transgenic line. Associated with the
functional improvement, LV scar cellularity was altered: beta-catenin-depleted
mice showed a marked subendocardial and subepicardial layer of small cTnT(pos)
cardiomyocytes associated with increased expression of cardiac lineage markers
Tbx5 and GATA4. Using a Cre-dependent lacZ reporter gene, we identified a
noncardiomyocyte cell population affected by alphaMHC-driven gene recombination
localized to these tissue compartments at baseline. These cells were found to be 
cardiac progenitor cells since they coexpressed markers of proliferation (Ki67)
and the cardiomyocyte lineage (alphaMHC, GATA4, Tbx5) but not cardiac Troponin T 
(cTnT). The cell population overlaps in part with both the previously described
c-kit(pos) and stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1)(pos) precursor cell population but not
with the Islet-1(pos) precursor cell pool. An in vitro coculture assay of highly 
enriched (>95%) Sca-1(pos) cardiac precursor cells from beta-catenin-depleted
mice compared to cells isolated from control littermate demonstrated increased
differentiation toward alpha-actin(pos) and cTnT(pos) cardiomyocytes after 10
days (CT(Deltaex3-6): 38.0 +/- 1.0% alpha-actin(pos); beta-cat(Deltaex3-6): 49.9 
+/- 2.4% alpha-actin(pos), P < 0.001). We conclude that beta-catenin depletion
attenuates postinfarct LV remodeling in part through increased differentiation of
GATA4(pos)/Sca-1(pos) resident cardiac progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2604963
PMID: 19073933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec 2;6(12):2911-27. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060306.

PcG proteins, DNA methylation, and gene repression by chromatin looping.

Tiwari VK(1), McGarvey KM, Licchesi JD, Ohm JE, Herman JG, Schübeler D, Baylin
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec;6(12):e313.

Many DNA hypermethylated and epigenetically silenced genes in adult cancers are
Polycomb group (PcG) marked in embryonic stem (ES) cells. We show that a large
region upstream ( approximately 30 kb) of and extending approximately 60 kb
around one such gene, GATA-4, is organized-in Tera-2 undifferentiated embryonic
carcinoma (EC) cells-in a topologically complex multi-loop conformation that is
formed by multiple internal long-range contact regions near areas enriched for
EZH2, other PcG proteins, and the signature PcG histone mark, H3K27me3. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated depletion of EZH2 in undifferentiated Tera-2
cells leads to a significant reduction in the frequency of long-range
associations at the GATA-4 locus, seemingly dependent on affecting the H3K27me3
enrichments around those chromatin regions, accompanied by a modest increase in
GATA-4 transcription. The chromatin loops completely dissolve, accompanied by
loss of PcG proteins and H3K27me3 marks, when Tera-2 cells receive
differentiation signals which induce a approximately 60-fold increase in GATA-4
expression. In colon cancer cells, however, the frequency of the long-range
interactions are increased in a setting where GATA-4 has no basal transcription
and the loops encompass multiple, abnormally DNA hypermethylated CpG islands, and
the methyl-cytosine binding protein MBD2 is localized to these CpG islands,
including ones near the gene promoter. Removing DNA methylation through genetic
disruption of DNA methyltransferases (DKO cells) leads to loss of MBD2 occupancy 
and to a decrease in the frequency of long-range contacts, such that these now
more resemble those in undifferentiated Tera-2 cells. Our findings reveal
unexpected similarities in higher order chromatin conformation between
stem/precursor cells and adult cancers. We also provide novel insight that
PcG-occupied and H3K27me3-enriched regions can form chromatin loops and
physically interact in cis around a single gene in mammalian cells. The loops
associate with a poised, low transcription state in EC cells and, with the
addition of DNA methylation, completely repressed transcription in adult cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC2592355
PMID: 19053175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Feb;42(2):149-60. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0089. Epub 2008 Nov 
13.

The effect of human GATA4 gene mutations on the activity of target gonadal
promoters.

Bouchard MF(1), Taniguchi H, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Québec City, Québec,
Canada G1V 4G2.

GATA transcription factors are crucial regulators of cell-specific gene
expression in many tissues including the gonads. Although clinical cases of
reproductive dysfunction have yet to be formally linked to GATA gene mutations,
they have begun to be reported in other systems. Heterozygous GATA4 mutations
have been associated with cases of congenital heart defects. Little is known,
however, about the effect of these mutations on gonadal gene transcription. Since
individuals carrying these mutations do not appear to suffer from gross
reproductive defects, we hypothesized that this might be due to the differential 
transcriptional properties of the mutant proteins on heart versus gonadal target 
genes. Five mutations (S52F, E215D, G295S, V266M, and E359X) were recreated in
the rat GATA4 protein. Several parameters were used to analyze the
transcriptional properties of the mutants: activation of known gonadal target
promoters (Star, Cyp19a1, and Inha), DNA binding, and interaction with GATA4
transcriptional partners. Three mutations (S52F, G295S, and E359X) reduced GATA4 
transcriptional activity on the different gonadal promoters. With the exception
of the G295S mutant, which showed a significant loss of DNA-binding affinity, the
decrease in activity of the other GATA4 mutants was not associated with a change 
in DNA binding. All GATA4 mutants retained their ability to interact and
cooperate with their major gonadal partners (NR5A1 and NR5A2) thereby
compensating in part for the loss in intrinsic GATA4 transcriptional activity.
Thus, unlike the heart, where the GATA4 mutations have deleterious effects, our
data suggest that they would have a lesser impact on gonadal gene transcription
and function.

PMID: 19008335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Syst Synth Biol. 2007 Dec;1(4):171-81. doi: 10.1007/s11693-008-9015-2. Epub 2008 
May 8.

Combined microarray analysis uncovers self-renewal related signaling in mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Zhu H(1), Yang H, Owen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mathematical Medicine and Biology, School of Mathematical Sciences,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK, Hao.Zhu@nottingham.ac.uk.

Due to the limited understanding of self-renewal and pluripotency related
signaling in stem cells, extracting information from genome-wide expression data 
is not only important but also challenging. With the combined use of two methods,
we analyzed a set of microarray data at 11 time points from three mouse embryonic
stem cell lines cultivated with and without leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) for 
14 days. Albeit the expression of individual genes in signaling pathways was not 
noticeably different between cells cultivated with and without LIF, at gene-set
level the expression of ERK/MAPK (but not JAK/STAT) and cell cycle related genes 
was found significantly enriched in cells cultivated with LIF. This indicates
that the Ras/Raf/ERK pathway, in addition to JAK/STAT, may also be a key player
to carry on external LIF signal into mouse embryonic stem cells to promote
self-renewal. When data at the first 7 time points were compared with data at the
last 4 time points, the expression of several cell cycle related gene sets was
apparently enriched in all three cell lines, indicating the active cell
proliferation in the first 2 days. Compared with the slight decay of
Oct4/Nanog/Sox2 during the 14 days, the expression of cell differentiation genes 
such as Gata4/6 underwent a drastic increase, which indicates that the
upregulated expression of cell differentiation genes may better reflect the loss 
of self renewal than the down regulated expression of the stemness indicators
Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog. Apart from differential expression and gene set enrichment 
analyses, a clustering algorithm was also used to classify genes into
co-expression clusters. The possible regulation of two clusters, whose expression
was most changed during cell culture from very low to very high, was explored.
The drastic changes of these genes, including Slc39a8 which was a potential
indicator of cell differentiation, in contrast the slight changes of self-renewal
genes, imply that differentiation may be the default fate of stem cells and
self-renewal may rely on a maintenance mechanism. When that mechanism weakens,
cell differentiation begins.

PMCID: PMC2553326
PMID: 19003442  [PubMed]


6. Cytotechnology. 2008 Jun;57(2):123-8. doi: 10.1007/s10616-007-9120-1. Epub 2008
Jan 11.

GATA4 inhibits expression of the tryptophan oxygenase gene by binding to the TATA
box in fetal hepatocytes.

Kaneoka H(1), Miyake K, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8603, Japan.

The glucocorticoid receptor regulates liver-specific expression of the tryptophan
oxygenase gene through glucocorticoid responsive elements located -0.45 and -1.2 
kb from the transcription start site. However, the hormone-mediated induction is 
restricted to adult hepatocytes, and fetal hepatocytes are unable to express the 
gene even in the presence of the receptor and glucocorticoid hormone. The
difference in sensitivity to the hormone between adult and fetal hepatocytes has 
not been well understood. In this study, we analyzed the structure of the
tryptophan oxygenase gene's promoter. The promoter has two TATA boxes, and
transcription starts from the downstream TATA box. We found that a transcription 
factor GATA4 bound to the downstream TATA box and may inhibit the binding of
TATA-binding protein, resulting in transcriptional repression even in the
presence of glucocorticoid in fetal hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC2553667
PMID: 19003156  [PubMed]


7. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Feb;42(2):119-29. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0095. Epub 2008 Nov 
5.

The nuclear receptors NUR77 and SF1 play additive roles with c-JUN through
distinct elements on the mouse Star promoter.

Martin LJ(1), Tremblay JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal and Child Health, CHUQ Research Centre, CHUL Room
T1-49, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.

The steroidogenic acute regulatory protein plays an essential role in steroid
biosynthesis in steroidogenic cells. It is involved in the transport of
cholesterol through the mitochondrial membrane where the first step of
steroidogenesis occurs. Star gene expression in testicular Leydig cells is
regulated by the pituitary LH through the cAMP signaling pathway. So far, several
transcription factors have been implicated in the regulation of Star promoter
activity in these cells. These include the nuclear receptors NUR77 and SF1, AP-1 
family members (particularly c-JUN), GATA4, C/EBPbeta, DLX5/6, and CREB. Some of 
these factors were also shown to act in a cooperative manner to further enhance
Star promoter activity. Here, we report that NUR77 and c-JUN have additive
effects on the Star promoter. These effects were abolished only when both
elements, NUR77 at -95 bp and AP-1 at -78 bp, were mutated. Consistent with this,
in vitro co-immunoprecipitation revealed that NUR77 and c-JUN interact and that
this interaction is mediated through part of the ligand binding domain of NUR77. 
Furthermore, we found that SF1 could cooperate with c-JUN on the mouse Star
promoter but this cooperation involved different regulatory elements.
Collectively, our data not only provide new insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control mouse Star transcription in Leydig cells but also reveal 
a novel mechanism for the regulation of NR4A1-dependent genes in tissues where
NUR77 and c-JUN factors are co-expressed.

PMID: 18987158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Jul-Aug;18(6):907-18. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0292.

Cardiac differentiation is driven by NKX2.5 and GATA4 nuclear translocation in
tissue-specific mesenchymal stem cells.

Armiñán A(1), Gandía C, Bartual M, García-Verdugo JM, Lledó E, Mirabet V, Llop M,
Barea J, Montero JA, Sepúlveda P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Cardiorregeneración, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe,
Valencia, Spain.

Myocardial infarction is a major public health problem that causes significant
mortality despite recent advances in its prevention and treatment. Therefore,
approaches based on adult stem cells represent a promising alternative to
conventional therapies for this life-threatening condition. Mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) are self-renewing pluripotent cells that have been isolated from
multiple tissues and differentiate to various cell types. Here we have analyzed
the capacity of MSCs from human bone marrow (BMSC), adipose tissue (ATSC), and
dental pulp (DPSC) to differentiate to cells with a cardiac phenotype.
Differentiation of MSCs was induced by long-term co-culture with neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes (CMs). Shortly after the establishment of MSC-CM co-cultures,
expression of connexin 43 and the cardiac-specific markers troponin I,
beta-myosin heavy chain, atrial natriuretic peptide, and alpha-sarcomeric actinin
was detected in BMSCs, ATSCs, and DPSCs. Expression of differentiation markers
increased over time in the co-cultures, reaching the highest levels at 4 weeks.
Translocation of the transcription factors NKX2.5 and GATA4 to the nucleus was
observed in all three cultures of MSCs during the differentiation process;
moreover, nuclear localization of NKX2.5 and GATA4 correlated with expression of 
alpha-sarcomeric actinin. These changes were accompanied by an increase in
myofibril organization in the resulting CM-like cells as analyzed by electron
microscopy. Thus, our results provide novel information regarding the
differentiation of tissue-specific MSCs to cardiomyocytes and support the
potential use of MSCs in cell-based cardiac therapies.

PMID: 18983250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003614. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

AMP-activated protein kinase-regulated activation of the PGC-1alpha promoter in
skeletal muscle cells.

Irrcher I(1), Ljubicic V, Kirwan AF, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The mechanisms by which PGC-1alpha gene expression is controlled in skeletal
muscle remains largely undefined. Thus, we sought to investigate the
transcriptional regulation of PGC-1alpha using AICAR, an activator of AMPK, that 
is known to increase PGC-1alpha expression. A 2.2 kb fragment of the human
PGC-1alpha promoter was cloned and sequence analysis revealed that this TATA-less
sequence houses putative consensus sites including a GC-box, a CRE, several IRSs,
a SRE, binding sites for GATA, MEF2, p 53, NF-kappaB, and EBox binding proteins. 
AMPK activation for 24 hours increased PGC-1alpha promoter activity with
concomitant increases in mRNA expression. The effect of AICAR on transcriptional 
activation was mediated by an overlapping GATA/EBox binding site at -495 within
the PGC-1alpha promoter based on gel shift analyses that revealed increases in
GATA/EBox DNA binding. Mutation of the EBox within the GATA/EBox binding site in 
the promoter reduced basal promoter activity and completely abolished the AICAR
effect. Supershift analyses identified USF-1 as a DNA binding transcription
factor potentially involved in regulating PGC-1alpha promoter activity, which was
confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Overexpression of either GATA-4 or USF-1 alone
increased the p851 PGC-1alpha promoter activity by 1.7- and 2.0-fold
respectively, while co-expression of GATA-4 and USF-1 led to an additive increase
in PGC-1alpha promoter activity. The USF-1-mediated increase in PGC-1alpha
promoter activation led to similar increases at the mRNA level. Our data identify
a novel AMPK-mediated regulatory pathway that regulates PGC-1alpha gene
expression. This could represent a potential therapeutic target to control
PGC-1alpha expression in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2570798
PMID: 18974883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2008 Nov;135(22):3731-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.024653. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Ovarian development in mice requires the GATA4-FOG2 transcription complex.

Manuylov NL(1), Smagulova FO, Leach L, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

We have demonstrated previously that mammalian sexual differentiation requires
both the GATA4 and FOG2 transcriptional regulators to assemble the functioning
testis. Here we have determined that the sexual development of female mice is
profoundly affected by the loss of GATA4-FOG2 interaction. We have also
identified the Dkk1 gene, which encodes a secreted inhibitor of canonical
beta-catenin signaling, as a target of GATA4-FOG2 repression in the developing
ovary. The tissue-specific ablation of the beta-catenin gene in the gonads
disrupts female development. In Gata4(ki/ki); Dkk1(-/-) or Fog2(-/-); Dkk1(-/-)
embryos, the normal ovarian gene expression pattern is partially restored.
Control of ovarian development by the GATA4-FOG2 complex presents a novel insight
into the cross-talk between transcriptional regulation and extracellular
signaling that occurs in ovarian development.

PMID: 18927154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):300-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.08.013.
Epub 2008 Sep 11.

WNT signaling promotes Nkx2.5 expression and early cardiomyogenesis via
downregulation of Hdac1.

Liu Z(1), Li T, Liu Y, Jia Z, Li Y, Zhang C, Chen P, Ma K, Affara N, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Hai Dian District, Beijing,
100191, China.

The cardiac transcription factor NKX2.5 plays a crucial role in cardiomyogenesis,
but its mechanism of regulation is still unclear. Recently, epigenetic regulation
has become increasingly recognized as important in differentiation and
development. In this study, we used P19CL6 cells to investigate the regulation of
Nkx2.5 expression by methylation and acetylation during cardiomyocyte
differentiation. During the early stage of differentiation, Nkx2.5 expression was
upregulated, but the methylation status of the Nkx2.5 promoter did not undergo
significant change; while the acetylation levels of histones H3 and H4 were
increased, accompanied by a significant reduction in Hdac1 expression.
Suppression of Hdac1 activity stimulated cardiac differentiation accompanied by
increased expression of cardiac-specific genes and cell cycle arrest.
Overexpression of Hdac1 inhibited cardiomyocyte formation and downregulated the
expressions of Gata4 and Nkx2.5. Mimicking induction of the WNT pathway inhibited
Hdac1 expression with upregulated Nkx2.5 expression. WNT3a and WNT3 downregulated
the expression of Hdac1, contrary to the effect of SFRP2 and GSK3beta.
Cotransfection of beta-catenin and Lef1 significantly downregulated the
expression of Hdac1. Our data suggest that WNT signaling pathway plays important 
roles in the regulation of Hdac1 during the early stage of cardiomyocyte
differentiation and that the downregulation of Hdac1 promotes cardiac
differentiation.

PMID: 18851995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 7;105(40):15529-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808357105. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Notch1 regulates the fate of cardiac progenitor cells.

Boni A(1), Urbanek K, Nascimbene A, Hosoda T, Zheng H, Delucchi F, Amano K,
Gonzalez A, Vitale S, Ojaimi C, Rizzi R, Bolli R, Yutzey KE, Rota M, Kajstura J, 
Anversa P, Leri A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Division of Cardiology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Notch receptor mediates cell fate decision in multiple organs. In the current
work we tested the hypothesis that Nkx2.5 is a target gene of Notch1 and raised
the possibility that Notch1 regulates myocyte commitment in the adult heart.
Cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) in the niches express Notch1 receptor, and the
supporting cells exhibit the Notch ligand Jagged1. The nuclear translocation of
Notch1 intracellular domain (N1ICD) up-regulates Nkx2.5 in CPCs and promotes the 
formation of cycling myocytes in vitro. N1ICD and RBP-Jk form a protein complex, 
which in turn binds to the Nkx2.5 promoter initiating transcription and myocyte
differentiation. In contrast, transcription factors of vascular cells are
down-regulated by Jagged1 activation of the Notch1 pathway. Importantly,
inhibition of Notch1 in infarcted mice impairs the commitment of resident CPCs to
the myocyte lineage opposing cardiomyogenesis. These observations indicate that
Notch1 favors the early specification of CPCs to the myocyte phenotype but
maintains the newly formed cells in a highly proliferative state. Dividing
Nkx2.5-positive myocytes correspond to transit amplifying cells, which condition 
the replicative capacity of the heart. In conclusion, Notch1 may have critical
implications in the control of heart homeostasis and its adaptation to pathologic
states.

PMCID: PMC2563067
PMID: 18832173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Endocrinology. 2009 Feb;150(2):946-56. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0573. Epub 2008 Oct
1.

Regulation of P450c17 expression in the early embryo depends on GATA factors.

Shi Y(1), Schonemann MD, Mellon SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Science, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0556, USA.

The enzyme P450c17 is required for glucocorticoid, sex steroid, and some
neurosteroid biosynthesis. Defective human P450c17 causes sexual infantilism and 
46,XY sex reversal but is compatible with life, whereas ablation of the
corresponding mouse gene causes embryonic lethality at around E7. Normal mouse
embryos express P450c17 protein and activity in the embryonic endoderm at E7.
Adult adrenal and gonadal steroidogenesis requires steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1),
but SF-1 is not expressed in the early mouse embryo. We show that P450c17 is
expressed in differentiated mouse parietal and visceral endoderm lineages, in
cultured mouse F9 embryonic carcinoma stem cells, in mouse embryonic stem cells, 
and in cultured mouse P19 stem cells. Bases -110 to -55 (which contain an SF-1
site and two potential GATA sites) of the rat cyp17 gene confer promoter activity
in F9 cells. Overexpression of SF-1 has no effect, whereas overexpression of
GATA4 in F9 cells increases transcription from -110/-55 fused to a reporter and
increases endogenous P450c17 mRNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that
GATA4 binds to -215/+55 of mouse cyp17. Stimulating F9 cells with retinoic acid
and cAMP differentiates them into visceral and parietal endoderm. Commensurate
with cell differentiation, quantitative PCR showed increased GATA4 and GATA6
mRNAs, temporally followed by increased P450c17 mRNA. Small interfering RNA
inhibition of GATA4 or GATA6 in undifferentiated or differentiated F9 cells
diminished endogenous cyp17 expression. Thus, P450c17 is expressed in mouse
embryonic stem cells, its expression increases upon differentiation to an early
embryonic endoderm lineage, and GATA4/6 are responsible for activation of P450c17
gene expression at this early stage of embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2646537
PMID: 18832096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Clin Invest. 2008 Nov;118(11):3609-18. doi: 10.1172/JCI36245. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Deletion of GSK-3beta in mice leads to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy secondary to
cardiomyoblast hyperproliferation.

Kerkela R(1), Kockeritz L, Macaulay K, Zhou J, Doble BW, Beahm C, Greytak S,
Woulfe K, Trivedi CM, Woodgett JR, Epstein JA, Force T, Huggins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Based on extensive preclinical data, glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) has been 
proposed to be a viable drug target for a wide variety of disease states, ranging
from diabetes to bipolar disorder. Since these new drugs, which will be more
powerful GSK-3 inhibitors than lithium, may potentially be given to women of
childbearing potential, and since it has controversially been suggested that
lithium therapy might be linked to congenital cardiac defects, we asked whether
GSK-3 family members are required for normal heart development in mice. We report
that terminal cardiomyocyte differentiation was substantially blunted in
Gsk3b(-/-) embryoid bodies. While GSK-3alpha-deficient mice were born without a
cardiac phenotype, no live-born Gsk3b(-/-) pups were recovered. The Gsk3b(-/-)
embryos had a double outlet RV, ventricular septal defects, and hypertrophic
myopathy, with near obliteration of the ventricular cavities. The hypertrophic
myopathy was caused by cardiomyocyte hyperproliferation without hypertrophy and
was associated with increased expression and nuclear localization of three
regulators of proliferation - GATA4, cyclin D1, and c-Myc. These studies, which
we believe are the first in mammals to examine the role of GSK-3alpha and
GSK-3beta in the heart using loss-of-function approaches, implicate GSK-3beta as 
a central regulator of embryonic cardiomyocyte proliferation and differentiation,
as well as of outflow tract development. Although controversy over the
teratogenic effects of lithium remains, our studies suggest that caution should
be exercised in the use of newer, more potent drugs targeting GSK-3 in women of
childbearing age.

PMCID: PMC2556242
PMID: 18830417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biol Cell. 2009 Jun;101(6):335-49. doi: 10.1042/BC20080108.

NFAT directly regulates Nkx2-5 transcription during cardiac cell differentiation.

Chen Y(1), Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore City 138673, Singapore.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: The transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of
activated T-cell) family comprises important regulators in immuno-responses and
mouse embryonic development, including early cardiovascular and heart valve
development. The mechanism involved, however, is not fully understood. Nkx2-5
(NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5) is one of the earliest genes
expressed in early cardiac progenitor cells and is essential for heart tube
development by control of a subset of cardiac muscle-specific genes. Previously
we found that downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I caused 
severe cardiac deficiencies during heart tube development in Xenopus embryos
associated with compromised Nkx2-5 expression. However, the heart defects and
Nkx2-5 expression could be rescued by a constitutively activated NFAT, suggesting
a possible link between NFAT and Nkx2-5 during early heart development.
RESULTS: In the present study, we demonstrate that NFAT regulates Nkx2-5
expression in both mouse ES (embryonic stem) cells and P19 cells, a mouse model
for embryonic differentiation. We found that there are six core NFAT-binding
elements in the 5' regulatory region of the Nkx2-5 gene. Although NFAT is able to
bind directly to all but one of these elements, it activates Nkx2-5 transcription
only via a specific binding site in the distal enhancer region. Interestingly,
the transcriptional activity of NFAT is largely dependent on the co-factor GATA
(GATA-binding transcription factor), which binds to an element adjacent to this
key NFAT-binding site. Furthermore, binding of the endogenous NFAT to this
particular site was observed during cardiac differentiation in mouse ES and P19
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that Nkx2-5 is a direct target of NFAT that
co-ordinates with other transcription factors such as GATA4 to regulate Nkx2-5
during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 18828760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dev Biol. 2008 Dec 1;324(1):76-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.004. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

Establishment of testis-specific SOX9 activation requires high-glucose metabolism
in mouse sex differentiation.

Matoba S(1), Hiramatsu R, Kanai-Azuma M, Tsunekawa N, Harikae K, Kawakami H,
Kurohmaru M, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

In mouse sex differentiation, SRY promotes Sertoli cell differentiation via SOX9 
action, resulting in testis formation. SRY/SOX9 also initiates various
testis-specific morphogenic events including glycogenesis in pre-Sertoli cells,
suggesting the importance of glucose storage for certain SRY/SOX9-downstream
events in gonadal sex determination. However, it remains unclear which cell types
and what molecular/cellular events require sex-dimorphic high-energy metabolic
rate. Here we show that the establishment of SOX9 activation itself is a
metabolically active process with sex-dimorphic high-energy requirements in
gonadal sex differentiation. The glucose-deprivation and metabolic rescue
experiments using genital ridge cultures of the XY/XX-wildtype and XX/Sry
transgenic embryos demonstrated that, among the various somatic cell types,
pre-Sertoli cells are the most sensitive to glucose starvation despite the
differences between XX/Sry and XY genotypes. Moreover, our data showed that, in
developing pre-Sertoli cells, the high-glucose metabolic state is required for
the establishment of SOX9 expression through an ECM (extracellular
matrix)-mediated feed-forward pathway. In contrast, the expression of SRY,
SF1/Ad4Bp, GATA4 and WT1, as well as initiation of early SOX9 expression, is
properly maintained in the glucose-deprived condition. Therefore, our results
imply the metabolic importance of the high-glucose condition for the
establishment of SOX9 activation in testis differentiation.

PMID: 18823970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Dec;10(4):495-502. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0030.

BMP4 induces primitive endoderm but not trophectoderm in monkey embryonic stem
cells.

Kobayashi M(1), Takada T, Takahashi K, Noda Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Monkey embryonic stem (ES) cells share similar characteristics to human ES cells 
and provide a primate model of allotransplantation, which allows to validate
efficacy and safety of cell transplantation therapy in regenerative medicine.
Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) is known to promote trophoblast
differentiation in human ES cells in contrast to mouse ES cells where BMP4
synergistically maintains self-renewal with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF),
which represents a significant difference in signal transduction of self-renewal 
and differentiation between murine and human ES cells. As the similarity of the
differentiation mechanism between monkey and human ES cells is of critical
importance for their use as a primate model system, we investigated whether BMP4 
induces trophoblast differentiation in monkey ES cells. Interestingly, BMP4 did
not induce trophoblast differentiation, but instead induced primitive endoderm
differentiation. Prominent downregulation of Sox2, which plays a pivotal role not
only in pluripotency but also placenta development, was observed in cells treated
with BMP4. In addition, upregulation of Hand1, Cdx2, and chorionic gonadotropin
beta (CG-beta), which are markers of trophoblast, was not observed. In contrast, 
BMP4 induced significant upregulation of Gata6, Gata4, and LamininB1, suggesting 
differentiation into the primitive endoderm, visceral endoderm, and parietal
endoderm, respectively. The threshold of BMP4 activity was estimated as about 10 
ng/mL. These findings suggest that BMP4 induced differentiation into the
primitive endoderm lineage but not into trophoblast in monkey ES cells.

PMID: 18823266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):2820-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21703.

Dynamic GATA6 expression in primitive endoderm formation and maturation in early 
mouse embryogenesis.

Cai KQ(1), Capo-Chichi CD, Rula ME, Yang DH, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Programs, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

The derivation of the primitive endoderm layer from the pluripotent cells of the 
inner cell mass is one of the earliest differentiation and morphogenic events in 
embryonic development. GATA4 and GATA6 are the key transcription factors in the
formation of extraembryonic endoderms, but their specific contribution to the
derivation of each endoderm lineage needs clarification. We further analyzed the 
dynamic expression and mutant phenotypes of GATA6 in early mouse embryos. GATA6
and GATA4 are both expressed in primitive endoderm cells initially. At embryonic 
day (E) 5.0, parietal endoderm cells continue to express both GATA4 and GATA6;
however, visceral endoderm cells express GATA4 but exhibit a reduced expression
of GATA6. By and after E5.5, visceral endoderm cells no longer express GATA6. We 
also found that GATA6 null embryos did not form a morphologically recognizable
primitive endoderm layer, and subsequently failed to form visceral and parietal
endoderms. Thus, the current study establishes that GATA6 is essential for the
formation of primitive endoderm, at a much earlier stage then previously
recognized, and expression of GATA6 discriminates parietal endoderm from visceral
endoderm lineages.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2739724
PMID: 18816845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1676-1686.e1. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.07.074. Epub 2008 Aug 3.

GATA4 is essential for jejunal function in mice.

Battle MA(1), Bondow BJ, Iverson MA, Adams SJ, Jandacek RJ, Tso P, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although the zinc-finger transcription factor GATA4 has been
implicated in regulating jejunal gene expression, the contribution of GATA4 in
controlling jejunal physiology has not been addressed.
METHODS: We generated mice in which the Gata4 gene was specifically deleted in
the small intestinal epithelium. Measurements of plasma cholesterol and
phospholipids, intestinal absorption of dietary fat and cholesterol, and gene
expression were performed on these animals.
RESULTS: Mice lacking GATA4 in the intestine displayed a dramatic block in their 
ability to absorb cholesterol and dietary fat. Comparison of the global gene
expression profiles of control jejunum, control ileum, and GATA4 null jejunum by 
gene array analysis revealed that GATA4 null jejunum lost expression of 53% of
the jejunal-specific gene set and gained expression of 47% of the set of genes
unique to the ileum. These alterations in gene expression included a decrease in 
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encoding lipid and cholesterol transporters as well as an 
increase in mRNAs encoding proteins involved in bile acid absorption.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that GATA4 is essential for jejunal function
including fat and cholesterol absorption and confirm that GATA4 plays a pivotal
role in determining jejunal vs ileal identity.

PMCID: PMC2844802
PMID: 18812176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):543-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.08.004. Epub
2008 Sep 18.

Sall4 regulates distinct transcription circuitries in different
blastocyst-derived stem cell lineages.

Lim CY(1), Tam WL, Zhang J, Ang HS, Jia H, Lipovich L, Ng HH, Wei CL, Sung WK,
Robson P, Yang H, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672
Singapore.

Stem cells self-renew or differentiate under the governance of a
stem-cell-specific transcriptional program, with each transcription factor
orchestrating the activities of a particular set of genes. Here we demonstrate
that a single transcription factor is able to regulate distinct core circuitries 
in two different blastocyst-derived stem cell lines, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
and extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cells. The transcription factor Sall4 is
required for early embryonic development and for ESC pluripotency. Sall4 is also 
expressed in XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 disrupts self-renewal and induces 
differentiation. Genome-wide analysis reveals that Sall4 is regulating different 
gene sets in ESCs and XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 targets in the respective
cell types induces differentiation. With Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, Sall4 forms a
crucial interconnected autoregulatory network in ESCs. In XEN cells, Sall4
regulates the key XEN lineage-associated genes Gata4, Gata6, Sox7, and Sox17. Our
findings demonstrate how Sall4 functions as an essential stemness factor for two 
different stem cell lines.

PMID: 18804426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2008 Nov 1;323(1):98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.08.013. Epub 2008
Aug 22.

Reassessment of Isl1 and Nkx2-5 cardiac fate maps using a Gata4-based reporter of
Cre activity.

Ma Q(1), Zhou B, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Ave,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Isl1 and Nkx2-5-expressing cardiovascular progenitors play pivotal roles in
cardiogenesis. Previously reported Cre-based fate-mapping studies showed that
Isl1 progenitors contribute predominantly to the derivatives of the second heart 
field, and Nkx2-5 progenitors contributed mainly to the cardiomyocyte lineage.
However, partial recombination of Cre reporter genes can complicate
interpretation of Cre fate-mapping experiments. We found that a Gata4-based
Cre-activated reporter was recombined by Isl1(Cre) and Nkx2-5(Cre) in a
substantially broader domain than previously reported using standard
Cre-activated reporters. The expanded Isl1 and Nkx2-5 cardiac fate maps were
remarkably similar, and included extensive contributions to cardiomyocyte,
endocardial, and smooth muscle lineages in all four cardiac chambers. These data 
indicate that Isl1 is expressed in progenitors of both primary and secondary
heart fields, and that Nkx2-5 is expressed in progenitors of cardiac endothelium 
and smooth muscle, in addition to cardiomyocytes. These results have important
implications for our understanding of cardiac lineage diversification in vivo,
and for the interpretation of Cre-based fate maps.

PMCID: PMC2655699
PMID: 18775691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Circ J. 2008;72 Suppl A:A13-6. Epub 2008 Sep 5.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the transition of cardiac hypertrophy to heart
failure.

Oka T(1), Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Heart failure is a condition in which the heart cannot supply enough blood to the
body's organs, and is a final common consequence of various heart diseases. In
the past 2 decades, much progress has been made in understanding the molecular
and cellular processes that contribute to cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure, 
leading to the development of effective therapies. However, heart failure remains
a leading cause of mortality worldwide and the precise molecular mechanisms that 
mediate the transition of cardiac hypertrophy to heart failure are largely
undefined. This review discusses the potential mechanisms of heart failure
progression focusing on (1) cardiac myocyte loss, (2) abnormalities of calcium
handling, and (3) myocardial ischemia and hypoxia. These factors are closely
related, and are considered to contribute to the pathogenesis of contractile
dysfunction and heart failure in a cooperative manner. Elucidation of the
molecular mechanisms underlying the transition of cardiac hypertrophy to heart
failure will lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies for heart
diseases.

PMID: 18772527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Sep;83(3):388-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.08.012. Epub
2008 Sep 4.

DYRK1A-dosage imbalance perturbs NRSF/REST levels, deregulating pluripotency and 
embryonic stem cell fate in Down syndrome.

Canzonetta C(1), Mulligan C, Deutsch S, Ruf S, O'Doherty A, Lyle R, Borel C,
Lin-Marq N, Delom F, Groet J, Schnappauf F, De Vita S, Averill S, Priestley JV,
Martin JE, Shipley J, Denyer G, Epstein CJ, Fillat C, Estivill X, Tybulewicz VL, 
Fisher EM, Antonarakis SE, Nizetic D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts & The London, Queen Mary's
School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of London, 4 Newark Street, London
E1 2AT, UK.

Down syndrome (DS) is the most common cause of mental retardation. Many neural
phenotypes are shared between DS individuals and DS mouse models; however, the
common underlying molecular pathogenetic mechanisms remain unclear. Using a
transchromosomic model of DS, we show that a 30%-60% reduced expression of
Nrsf/Rest (a key regulator of pluripotency and neuronal differentiation) is an
alteration that persists in trisomy 21 from undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) 
cells to adult brain and is reproducible across several DS models. Using
partially trisomic ES cells, we map this effect to a three-gene segment of HSA21,
containing DYRK1A. We independently identify the same locus as the most
significant eQTL controlling REST expression in the human genome. We show that
specifically silencing the third copy of DYRK1A rescues Rest levels, and we
demonstrate altered Rest expression in response to inhibition of DYRK1A
expression or kinase activity, and in a transgenic Dyrk1A mouse. We reveal that
undifferentiated trisomy 21 ES cells show DYRK1A-dose-sensitive reductions in
levels of some pluripotency regulators, causing premature expression of
transcription factors driving early endodermal and mesodermal differentiation,
partially overlapping recently reported downstream effects of Rest +/-. They
produce embryoid bodies with elevated levels of the primitive endoderm progenitor
marker Gata4 and a strongly reduced neuroectodermal progenitor compartment. Our
results suggest that DYRK1A-mediated deregulation of REST is a very early
pathological consequence of trisomy 21 with potential to disturb the development 
of all embryonic lineages, warranting closer research into its contribution to DS
pathology and new rationales for therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2556438
PMID: 18771760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009 Mar;11(3):589-600. doi: 10.1089/ARS.2008.2195.

Inhibition of ref-1 stimulates the production of reactive oxygen species and
induces differentiation in adult cardiac stem cells.

Gurusamy N(1), Mukherjee S, Lekli I, Bearzi C, Bardelli S, Das DK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 
Farmington, Connecticut 06030-1110, USA.

Redox effector protein-1 (Ref-1) plays an essential role in DNA repair and redox 
regulation of several transcription factors. In the present study, we examined
the role of Ref-1 in maintaining the redox status and survivability of adult
cardiac stem cells challenged with a subtoxic level of H2O2 under inhibition of
Ref-1 by RNA interference. Treatment of cardiac stem cells with a low
concentration of H2O2 induced Ref-1-mediated survival signaling through
phosphorylation of Akt. However, Ref-1 inhibition followed by H2O2 treatment
extensively induced the level of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
through activation of the components of NADPH oxidase, like p22( phox ), p47(
phox ), and Nox4. Cardiac differentiation markers (Nkx2.5, MEF2C, and GATA4), and
cell death by apoptosis were significantly elevated in Ref-1 siRNA followed by
H2O2-treated stem cells. Further, inhibition of Ref-1 increased the level of p53 
but decreased the phosphorylation of Akt, a molecule involved in survival
signaling. Treatment with ROS scavenger N-acetyl-L-cysteine attenuated Ref-1
siRNA-mediated activation of NADPH oxidase and cardiac differentiation. Taken
together, these results indicate that Ref-1 plays an important role in
maintaining the redox status of cardiac stem cells and protects them from
oxidative injury-mediated cell death and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2933566
PMID: 18717627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Development. 2008 Oct;135(19):3185-90. doi: 10.1242/dev.026443. Epub 2008 Aug 20.

GATA transcription factors integrate Wnt signalling during heart development.

Afouda BA(1), Martin J, Liu F, Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R, Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Programme, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Comment in
    Development. 2010 Jan;137(1):3; author reply 3-4.

Cardiogenesis is inhibited by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signalling and
stimulated by non-canonical Wnt11/JNK signalling, but how these two signalling
pathways crosstalk is currently unknown. Here, we show that Wnt/beta-catenin
signalling restricts cardiogenesis via inhibition of GATA gene expression, as
experimentally reinstating GATA function overrides beta-catenin-mediated
inhibition and restores cardiogenesis. Furthermore, we show that GATA
transcription factors in turn directly regulate Wnt11 gene expression, and that
Wnt11 is required to a significant degree for mediating the
cardiogenesis-promoting function of GATA transcription factors. These results
demonstrate that GATA factors occupy a central position between canonical and
non-canonical Wnt signalling in regulating heart muscle formation.

PMID: 18715946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Circulation. 2008 Aug 26;118(9):934-46. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.760488.
Epub 2008 Aug 12.

Quantitative control of adaptive cardiac hypertrophy by acetyltransferase p300.

Wei JQ(1), Shehadeh LA, Mitrani JM, Pessanha M, Slepak TI, Webster KA, Bishopric 
NH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami School of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Pharmacology, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acetyltransferase p300 is essential for cardiac development and is
thought to be involved in cardiac myocyte growth through MEF2- and
GATA4-dependent transcription. However, the importance of p300 in the modulation 
of cardiac growth in vivo is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pressure overload induced by transverse aortic coarctation, 
postnatal physiological growth, and human heart failure were associated with
large increases in p300. Minimal transgenic overexpression of p300 (1.5- to
3.5-fold) induced striking myocyte and cardiac hypertrophy. Both mortality and
cardiac mass were directly related to p300 protein dosage. Heterozygous loss of a
single p300 allele reduced pressure overload-induced hypertrophy by approximately
50% and rescued the hypertrophic phenotype of p300 overexpressers. Increased p300
expression had no effect on total histone deacetylase activity but was associated
with proportional increases in p300 acetyltransferase activity and acetylation of
the p300 substrates histone 3 and GATA-4. Remarkably, a doubling of p300 levels
was associated with the de novo acetylation of MEF2. Consistent with this, genes 
specifically upregulated in p300 transgenic hearts were highly enriched for MEF2 
binding sites.
CONCLUSIONS: Small increments in p300 are necessary and sufficient to drive
myocardial hypertrophy, possibly through acetylation of MEF2 and upstream of
signals promoting phosphorylation or nuclear export of histone deacetylases. We
propose that induction of myocardial p300 content is a primary rate-limiting
event in the response to hemodynamic loading in vivo and that p300 availability
drives and constrains adaptive myocardial growth. Specific reduction of p300
content or activity may diminish stress-induced hypertrophy and forestall the
development of heart failure.

PMCID: PMC2726266
PMID: 18697823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 1;322(1):179-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.022. Epub 2008
Jul 26.

GATA4 mediates gene repression in the mature mouse small intestine through
interactions with friend of GATA (FOG) cofactors.

Beuling E(1), Bosse T, aan de Kerk DJ, Piaseckyj CM, Fujiwara Y, Katz SG, Orkin
SH, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 3000DR, The
Netherlands.

GATA4, a transcription factor expressed in the proximal small intestine but not
in the distal ileum, maintains proximal-distal distinctions by multiple processes
involving gene repression, gene activation, and cell fate determination. Friend
of GATA (FOG) is an evolutionarily conserved family of cofactors whose members
physically associate with GATA factors and mediate GATA-regulated repression in
multiple tissues. Using a novel, inducible, intestine-specific Gata4 knock-in
model in mice, in which wild-type GATA4 is specifically inactivated in the small 
intestine, but a GATA4 mutant that does not bind FOG cofactors (GATA4ki)
continues to be expressed, we found that ileal-specific genes were significantly 
induced in the proximal small intestine (P<0.01); in contrast, genes restricted
to proximal small intestine and cell lineage markers were unaffected, indicating 
that GATA4-FOG interactions contribute specifically to the repression function of
GATA4 within this organ. Fog1 mRNA displayed a proximal-distal pattern that
parallels that of Gata4, and FOG1 protein was co-expressed with GATA4 in
intestinal epithelial cells, implicating FOG1 as the likely mediator of GATA4
function in the small intestine. Our data are the first to indicate FOG function 
and expression in the mammalian small intestine.

PMCID: PMC3031907
PMID: 18692040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Cardiol. 2009 May 29;134(3):384-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.03.043. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is involved in erythropoietin-induced
cardioprotection against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Shan X(1), Xu X, Cao B, Wang Y, Guo L, Zhu Q, Li J, Que L, Chen Q, Ha T, Li C, Li
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical University, China.

BACKGROUND: Erythropoietin (EPO) can reduce myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)
injury. However, the cellular mechanisms have not been elucidated entirely. The
present study was to investigate whether transcription factor GATA-4 could be
involved in EPO-induced cardioprotection when it was administered after ischemia,
immediately before reperfusion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Male Balb/c mice treated with or without EPO were subjected 
to ischemia (45 min) followed by reperfusion (4 h). TTC staining showed that the 
infarct size in EPO-treated mice was significantly reduced compared with
untreated I/R mice (P<0.05). Echocardiography examination suggested that EPO
administration significantly improved cardiac function following I/R. TUNEL assay
indicated that EPO treatment decreased apoptosis. EPO administration also
significantly increased the level of nuclear GATA-4 phosphorylation in the
myocardium which was positively correlated with the reduction of myocardial
infarction. In vitro hypoxia/re-oxygenation study showed that EPO treatment
increased the levels of phospho-GATA-4 and decreased cardiomyocyte apoptosis.
More significantly, blocking GATA-4 by transfection of a dominant-negative form
of GATA-4 (dnGATA-4) abolished EPO-induced cardioprotective effects.
CONCLUSION: EPO administration after ischemia, just before reperfusion induced
cardioprotection and stimulated GATA-4 phosphorylation. Activation of GATA-4 may 
be one of the mechanisms by which EPO induced protection against myocardial I/R
injury.

PMID: 18672303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Nov-Dec;51(6):527-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.06.005. Epub
2008 Jul 11.

GATA4 mutations in 486 Chinese patients with congenital heart disease.

Zhang W(1), Li X, Shen A, Jiao W, Guan X, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Center, Beijing Children's Hospital affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Xi Cheng District, Beijing, China.

Recent studies have reported germline mutations in GATA4 gene in some types of
congenital heart disease (CHD). However, the prevalence of GATA4 mutations in CHD
and the correlation between the GATA4 genotype and CHD phenotype have not been
extensively studied. We screened germline mutations in the coding exons and the
flanking intron sequences of the GATA4 gene in 486 CHD patients by denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), and confirmed the mutations by
sequencing. Nine distinct mutations including one small deletion mutation
(46delS), two small insertion mutations (118-119insA and 125-126insAA), and six
non-synonymous mutations (A6V, P163S, E359K, P407Q, S429T and A442V) were
identified in 12 of the 486 patients (nine with ventricular septal defect, two
with Tetralogy of Fallot, and one with endocardial cushion defect). Of them, two 
patients carrying E359K mutation were from two generations in one family with
ventricular septal defect (VSD). Interestingly, a nucleotide insertion of
c.1146+25insA in exon 6 was detected in five VSD patients, but not in 486 normal 
healthy controls. Our findings are useful in understanding the prevalence of
GATA4 mutations and the correlation between the GATA4 genotype and the CHD
phenotype in Chinese patients.

PMID: 18672102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 28;8:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-74.

GATA4 and GATA5 are essential for heart and liver development in Xenopus embryos.

Haworth KE(1), Kotecha S, Mohun TJ, Latinkic BV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff, CF10 3US,
Wales, UK. haworthk@cardiff.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: GATA factors 4/5/6 have been implicated in the development of the
heart and endodermal derivatives in vertebrates. Work in zebrafish has indicated 
that GATA5 is required for normal development earlier than GATA4/6. However, the 
GATA5 knockout mouse has no apparent embryonic phenotype, thereby questioning the
importance of the gene for vertebrate development.
RESULTS: In this study we show that in Xenopus embryos GATA5 is essential for
early development of heart and liver precursors. In addition, we have found that 
in Xenopus embryos GATA4 is important for development of heart and liver
primordia following their specification, and that in this role it might interact 
with GATA6.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that GATA5 acts earlier than GATA4 to regulate
development of heart and liver precursors, and indicate that one early direct
target of GATA5 is homeobox gene Hex.

PMCID: PMC2526999
PMID: 18662378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5635-42. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0148. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

GATA-4 regulates Bcl-2 expression in ovarian granulosa cell tumors.

Kyrönlahti A(1), Rämö M, Tamminen M, Unkila-Kallio L, Butzow R, Leminen A, Nemer 
M, Rahman N, Huhtaniemi I, Heikinheimo M, Anttonen M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki,
00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Excessive cell proliferation and decreased apoptosis have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCTs). We hypothesized that
transcription factor GATA-4 controls expression of the antiapoptotic factor Bcl-2
and the cell cycle regulator cyclin D2 in normal and neoplastic granulosa cells. 
To test this hypothesis, a tissue microarray based on 80 GCTs was subjected to
immunohistochemistry for GATA-4, Bcl-2, and cyclin D2, and the data were
correlated to clinical and histopathological parameters. In addition,
quantitative RT-PCR for GATA-4, Bcl-2, and cyclin D2 was performed on 21 human
GCTs. A mouse GCT model was used to complement these studies. The role of GATA-4 
in the regulation of Bcl2 and ccdn2 (coding for cyclin D2) was studied by
transactivation assays, and by disrupting GATA-4 function with dominant negative 
approaches in mouse and human GCT cell lines. We found that GATA-4 expression
correlated with Bcl-2 and cyclin D2 expression in human and murine GCTs.
Moreover, GATA-4 enhanced Bcl-2 and cyclin D2 promoter activity in murine GCT
cells. Whereas GATA-4 overexpression up-regulated and dominant negative GATA-4
suppressed Bcl-2 expression in human GCT cells, the effects on cyclin D2 were
negligible. Our results reveal a previously unknown relationship between GATA-4
and Bcl-2 in mammalian granulosa cells and GCTs, and suggest that GATA-4
influences granulosa cell fate by transactivating Bcl-2.

PMID: 18653721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5557-67. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0484. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

GATA4 reduction enhances 3',5'-cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate-stimulated
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein messenger ribonucleic acid and
progesterone production in luteinized porcine granulosa cells.

Hui YY(1), Lavoie HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

Previous studies with cultured granulosa cells implicated GATA4 in gonadotropin
regulation of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR) gene. Caveats to 
these prior studies exist. First, GATA4 levels are reduced in granulosa-luteal
cells after the LH surge when GATA6 expression is relatively high. Second, STAR
mRNA expression is negligible in granulosa cells until after the LH surge. Both
exogenous GATA4 and GATA6 can transactivate STAR gene promoter constructs. We
used an RNA interference (RNAi) approach to determine the contributions of GATA4 
and GATA6 to cAMP analog regulation of the endogenous STAR gene in luteinizing
granulosa cells. STAR mRNA was stimulated by cAMP under control RNAi conditions. 
Surprisingly, GATA4 reduction by its respective RNAi approximately doubled the
cAMP induction of STAR mRNA. At 24 h cAMP treatment, this augmentation was
abolished by co-down-regulation of GATA4+GATA6. GATA6 down-regulation by itself
did not alter STAR mRNA levels. GATA4+GATA6 co-down-regulation elevated basal
CYP11A mRNA at 24 h treatment but did not affect its induction by cAMP. Basal
levels of HSD3B mRNA were reduced by GATA4 RNAi conditions leading to a greater
fold induction of its mRNA by cAMP. Fold cAMP-stimulated progesterone production 
was enhanced by GATA4 down-regulation but not by GATA4+GATA6 co-down-regulation. 
These data implicate GATA6 as the facilitator in cAMP-stimulated STAR mRNA and
downstream progesterone accumulation under reduced GATA4 conditions. Data also
demonstrate that basal levels of GATA4/6 are not required for cAMP induction of
the STAR gene. The altered ratio of GATA4 to GATA6 after ovulation may allow
GATA6 to enhance STAR mRNA accumulation.

PMCID: PMC2584590
PMID: 18653717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;41(3):546-53. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.007. Epub 2008 Jul 4.

Retinoic acid receptors and GATA transcription factors activate the transcription
of the human lecithin:retinol acyltransferase gene.

Cai K(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

Lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (LRAT) catalyzes the esterification of retinol
(vitamin A). Retinyl esters and LRAT protein levels are reduced in many types of 
cancer cells. We present data that both the LRAT and retinoic acid receptor
beta(2) (RARbeta(2)) mRNA levels in the human prostate cancer cell line PC-3 are 
lower than those in cultured normal human prostate epithelial cells (PrEC). The
activity of the human LRAT promoter (2.0 kb) driving a luciferase reporter gene
in PC-3 cells is less than 40% of that in PrEC cells. Retinoic acid (RA)
treatment increased this LRAT promoter-luciferase activity in PrEC cells, but not
in PC-3 cells. Deletion of various regions of the human LRAT promoter
demonstrated that a 172-bp proximal promoter region is essential for LRAT
transcription and confers RA responsiveness in PrEC cells. This 172-bp region,
contained within the 186 bp pLRAT/luciferase construct, has five putative GATA
binding sites. Cotransfection of RARbeta(2) or RARgamma and the transcription
factor GATA-4 increased LRAT (pLRAT186) promoter activity in both PrEC and PC-3
cells. In addition, we found that both retinoic acid and retinol induced
transcripts for the STRA6 gene, which encodes a membrane receptor involved in
retinol (vitamin A) uptake, in PrEC cells but not in PC-3 cells. In summary, our 
data show that the transcriptional regulation of the human LRAT gene is aberrant 
in human prostate cancer cells and that GATA transcription factors are involved
in the transcriptional activation of LRAT in PrEC cells.

PMCID: PMC2628449
PMID: 18652909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Sep;295(3):H1206-H1215. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00319.2008. Epub 2008 Jul 18.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in high-fat diet-induced obesity: role of suppression
of forkhead transcription factor and atrophy gene transcription.

Fang CX(1), Dong F, Thomas DP, Ma H, He L, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine, University of
Wyoming College of Health Sciences, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

Cellular hypertrophy is regulated by coordinated pro- and antigrowth machineries.
Foxo transcription factors initiate an atrophy-related gene program to counter
hypertrophic growth. This study was designed to evaluate the role of Akt, the
forkhead transcription factor Foxo3a, and atrophy genes muscle-specific RING
finger (MuRF)-1 and atrogin-1 in cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction 
associated with high-fat diet-induced obesity. Mice were fed a low- or high-fat
diet for 6 mo along with a food-restricted high-fat weight control group.
Echocardiography revealed decreased fractional shortening and increased
end-systolic diameter and cardiac hypertrophy in high-fat obese but not in weight
control mice. Cardiomyocytes from high-fat obese but not from weight control mice
displayed contractile and intracellular Ca2+ defects including depressed maximal 
velocity of shortening/relengthening, prolonged duration of
shortening/relengthening, and reduced intracellular Ca2+ rise and clearance.
Caspase activities were greater in high-fat obese but not in weight control mouse
hearts. Western blot analysis revealed enhanced basal Akt and Foxo3a
phosphorylation and reduced insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and Foxo3a 
without changes in total protein expression of Akt and Foxo3a in high-fat obese
hearts. RT-PCR and immunoblotting results displayed reduced levels of the
atrogens atrogin-1 and MuRF-1, the upregulated hypertrophic markers GATA4 and
ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha, as well as the unchanged calcineurin 
and proteasome ubiquitin in high-fat obese mouse hearts. Transfection of H9C2
myoblast cells with dominant-negative Foxo3a adenovirus mimicked palmitic acid
(0.8 mM for 24 h)-induced GATA4 upregulation without an additive effect.
Dominant-negative Foxo3a-induced upregulation of pAkt and repression of
phosphatase and tensin homologue were abrogated by palmitic acid. These results
suggest a cardiac hypertrophic response in high-fat diet-associated obesity at
least in part through inactivation of Foxo3a by the Akt pathway.

PMCID: PMC2544483
PMID: 18641278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Differentiation. 2008 Nov;76(9):931-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-0436.2008.00272.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 1.

Retinoic acid maintains self-renewal of murine embryonic stem cells via a
feedback mechanism.

Wang R(1), Liang J, Yu HM, Liang H, Shi YJ, Yang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell
mass (ICM) that are able to self-renew or undergo differentiation depending on a 
complex interplay of extracellular signals and intracellular factors. However,
the feedback regulation of differentiation-dependent ESC self-renewal is poorly
understood. Retinoic acid (RA), a derivative of vitamin A, plays a critical role 
in ESC differentiation and embryogenesis. In the present study, we demonstrate
that short-term treatment of murine (m) ESCs with RA during the early
differentiation stage prevented spontaneous differentiation of mESCs. The
RA-treated cells maintained self-renewal capacity and could differentiate into
neuronal cells, cardiomyocytes, and visceral endoderm cells derived from three
germ layers. The differentiation-inhibitory effect of RA was mimicked by
conditioned medium from RA-treated ESCs and was accompanied with up-regulated
expression of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), Wnt3a, Wnt5a, and Wnt6. Such
RA-induced prevention of ESC differentiation was attenuated by a neutralizing
antibody against LIF or by a specific Wnt antagonist Fz8-Fc and was totally
reversed in the presence of both of them. Furthermore, knock-down of
beta-catenin, a component of the Wnt signaling pathway, by small interfering RNA 
counteracted the effect of RA. In addition, RA treatment enhanced expression of
endodermal markers GATA4 and AFP but inhibited expression of primitive ectodermal
marker Fgf-5 and mesodermal marker Brachyury. These findings reveal a novel role 
of RA in ESC self-renewal and provide new insight into the regulatory mechanism
of differentiation-dependent self-renewal of ESCs, in which Wnt proteins and LIF 
induced by RA have the synergistic action. The short-term treatment of ESCs with 
RA also offers a unique model system for study of the regulatory mechanism that
controls self-renewal and specific germ-layer differentiation of ESCs.

PMID: 18637026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Adv Mater. 2008 Jul 17;20(14):2760-5. doi: 10.1002/adma.200702967. Epub 2008 Jun 
5.

Electric-Pulse-driven Electronic Phase Separation, Insulator-Metal Transition,
and Possible Superconductivity in a Mott Insulator.

Vaju C(1), Cario L, Corraze B, Janod E, Dubost V, Cren T, Roditchev D,
Braithwaite D, Chauvet O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Matériaux Jean Rouxel (IMN) Université de Nantes, CNRS 2 rue de
la Houssinière, BP 32229, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3 (France).

Experimental evidence of a nonvolatile electric-pulse-induced insulator-to-metal 
transition and possible superconductivity in the Mott insulator GaTa4 Se8 is
reported. Scanning tunneling microscopy experiments show that this unconventional
response of the system to short electric pulses arises from a nanometer-scale
electronic phase separation generated in the bulk material.

Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25213903  [PubMed]


37. Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):507-17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.778795.
Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Generation of functional murine cardiac myocytes from induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Mauritz C(1), Schwanke K, Reppel M, Neef S, Katsirntaki K, Maier LS, Nguemo F,
Menke S, Haustein M, Hescheler J, Hasenfuss G, Martin U.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial Organs,
Carl-Neuberg Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):472-5.

BACKGROUND: The recent breakthrough in the generation of induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells, which are almost indistinguishable from embryonic stem (ES) cells,
facilitates the generation of murine disease- and human patient-specific stem
cell lines. The aim of this study was to characterize the cardiac differentiation
potential of a murine iPS cell clone in comparison to a well-established murine
ES cell line.
METHODS AND RESULTS: With the use of a standard embryoid body-based
differentiation protocol for ES cells, iPS cells as well as ES cells were
differentiated for 24 days. Although the analyzed iPS cell clone showed a delayed
and less efficient formation of beating embryoid bodies compared with the ES cell
line, the differentiation resulted in an average of 55% of spontaneously
contracting iPS cell embryoid bodies. Analyses on molecular, structural, and
functional levels demonstrated that iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes show typical 
features of ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated expression of marker genes typical for
mesoderm, cardiac mesoderm, and cardiomyocytes including Brachyury, mesoderm
posterior factor 1 (Mesp1), friend of GATA2 (FOG-2), GATA-binding protein 4
(GATA4), NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5 (Nkx2.5), T-box 5 (Tbx5),
T-box 20 (Tbx20), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), myosin light chain 2 atrial
transcripts (MLC2a), myosin light chain 2 ventricular transcripts (MLC2v),
alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC), and cardiac troponin T in differentiation
cultures of iPS cells. Immunocytology confirmed expression of
cardiomyocyte-typical proteins including sarcomeric alpha-actinin, titin, cardiac
troponin T, MLC2v, and connexin 43. iPS cell cardiomyocytes displayed spontaneous
rhythmic intracellular Ca(2+) fluctuations with amplitudes of Ca(2+) transients
comparable to ES cell cardiomyocytes. Simultaneous Ca(2+) release within clusters
of iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes indicated functional coupling of the cells.
Electrophysiological studies with multielectrode arrays demonstrated
functionality and presence of the beta-adrenergic and muscarinic signaling
cascade in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: iPS cells differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes. In contrast 
to ES cells, iPS cells allow derivation of autologous functional cardiomyocytes
for cellular cardiomyoplasty and myocardial tissue engineering.

PMID: 18625890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Circ Res. 2008 Jul 3;103(1):1-3. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180216.

New insights into the open artery hypothesis.

Kloner RA, Hwang H.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Jul 3;103(1):98-106.

PMID: 18596259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(17):5420-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00717-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
30.

GATA4 is a direct transcriptional activator of cyclin D2 and Cdk4 and is required
for cardiomyocyte proliferation in anterior heart field-derived myocardium.

Rojas A(1), Kong SW, Agarwal P, Gilliss B, Pu WT, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech Hall, 600 16th Street, Mail Code 2240, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The anterior heart field (AHF) comprises a population of mesodermal progenitor
cells that are added to the nascent linear heart to give rise to the majority of 
the right ventricle, interventricular septum, and outflow tract in mammals and
birds. The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 functions as an integral member
of the cardiac transcription factor network in the derivatives of the AHF. In
addition to its role in cardiac differentiation, GATA4 is also required for
cardiomyocyte replication, although the transcriptional targets of GATA4 required
for proliferation have not been previously identified. In the present study, we
disrupted Gata4 function exclusively in the AHF and its derivatives. Gata4 AHF
knockout mice die by embryonic day 13.5 and exhibit hypoplasia of the right
ventricular myocardium and interventricular septum and display profound
ventricular septal defects. Loss of Gata4 function in the AHF results in
decreased myocyte proliferation in the right ventricle, and we identified
numerous cell cycle genes that are dependent on Gata4 by microarray analysis. We 
show that GATA4 is required for cyclin D2, cyclin A2, and Cdk4 expression in the 
right ventricle and that the Cyclin D2 and Cdk4 promoters are bound and activated
by GATA4 via multiple consensus GATA binding sites in each gene's proximal
promoter. These findings establish Cyclin D2 and Cdk4 as direct transcriptional
targets of GATA4 and support a model in which GATA4 controls cardiomyocyte
proliferation by coordinately regulating numerous cell cycle genes.

PMCID: PMC2519727
PMID: 18591257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Vet Pathol. 2008 Jul;45(4):439-42. doi: 10.1354/vp.45-4-439.

Cytochrome b5 expression in gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical neoplasms of the
domestic ferret (Mustela putorius furo).

Wagner S(1), Kiupel M, Peterson RA 2nd, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Whereas the adrenal glands of healthy ferrets produce only limited amounts of
androgenic steroids, adrenocortical neoplasms that arise in neutered ferrets
typically secrete androgens or their derivative, estrogen. The 17,20-lyase
activity of cytochrome P450 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (P450c17) must
increase to permit androgen biosynthesis in neoplastic adrenal tissue. We
screened ferret adrenocortical tumor specimens for expression of cytochrome b(5) 
(cyt b(5)), an allosteric regulator that selectively enhances the 17,20-lyase
activity of P450c17. Cyt b(5) immunoreactivity was evident in 24 of 25 (96%)
adrenocortical adenomas/carcinomas from ferrets with signs of ectopic sex steroid
production. Normal adrenocortical cells lacked cyt b(5), which may account for
the low production of adrenal androgens in healthy ferrets. Other markers
characteristic of gonadal somatic cells, such as luteinizing hormone receptor,
aromatase, and GATA4, were coexpressed with cyt b(5) in some of the tumors. We
concluded that cyt b(5) is upregulated during gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical 
neoplasia and is a marker of androgen synthetic potential in these tumors.

PMCID: PMC2497446
PMID: 18587089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 24;8:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-67.

GATA4/FOG2 transcriptional complex regulates Lhx9 gene expression in murine heart
development.

Smagulova FO(1), Manuylov NL, Leach LL, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
fatimas_369@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: GATA4 and FOG2 proteins are required for normal cardiac development
in mice. It has been proposed that GATA4/FOG2 transcription complex exercises its
function through gene activation as well as repression; however, targets of
GATA4/FOG2 action in the heart remain elusive.
RESULTS: Here we report identification of the Lhx9 gene as a direct target of the
GATA4/FOG2 complex. We demonstrate that the developing mouse heart normally
expresses truncated isoforms of Lhx9 - Lhx9alpha and Lhx9beta, and not the
Lhx9-HD isoform that encodes a protein with an intact homeodomain. At E9.5
Lhx9alpha/beta expression is prominent in the epicardial primordium, septum
transversum while Lhx9-HD is absent from this tissue; in the E11.5 heart
LHX9alpha/beta-positive cells are restricted to the epicardial mesothelium.
Thereafter in the control hearts Lhx9alpha/beta epicardial expression is promptly
down-regulated; in contrast, mouse mutants with Fog2 gene loss fail to repress
Lhx9alpha/beta expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation from the E11.5 hearts
demonstrated that Lhx9 is a direct target for GATA4 and FOG2. In transient
transfection studies the expression driven by the cis-regulatory regions of Lhx9 
was repressed by FOG2 in the presence of intact GATA4, but not the GATA4ki mutant
that is impaired in its ability to bind FOG2.
CONCLUSION: In summary, the Lhx9 gene represents the first direct target of the
GATA4/FOG2 repressor complex in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC2447832
PMID: 18577233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):H699-707. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.01204.2007. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

GATA4 is a survival factor in adult cardiac myocytes but is not required for
alpha1A-adrenergic receptor survival signaling.

Huang Y(1), Wright CD, Kobayashi S, Healy CL, Elgethun M, Cypher A, Liang Q,
O'Connell TD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Sanford Research/Univ. of South Dakota, Dept. 
of Internal Medicine, Univ. of South Dakota, 1100 E. 21st St., Ste. 700, Sioux
Falls, SD 57105, USA.

Recently, we defined an alpha1A-adrenergic receptor-ERK (alpha1A-AR-ERK) survival
signaling pathway in adult cardiac myocytes. Previous studies in neonatal cardiac
myocytes indicated that the cardiac-specific transcription factor GATA4 is a
downstream mediator of alpha1-ERK signaling and that phosphorylation of GATA4 by 
ERK increases DNA binding and transcriptional activity. Therefore, we examined
GATA4 as a potential downstream effector of alpha1A-ERK survival signaling in
adult cardiac myocytes. We measured norepinephrine (NE)-induced cell death in
cultured cardiac myocytes lacking alpha1-ARs (cultured from alpha1A/B-AR
double-knockout mice, alpha1ABKO mice) that are susceptible to cell death induced
by several proapoptotic stimuli, including NE. Our results show that
overexpression of GATA4 is sufficient to protect alpha1ABKO cardiac myocytes from
NE-induced cell death. However, we found that the alpha1A-subtype did not induce 
phosphorylation or increase the activity of GATA4 in adult mouse cardiac myocytes
in culture or in vivo. Furthermore, we examined the effect of siRNA-mediated
knockdown of GATA4 on alpha1A-survival signaling. In alpha1B-knockout cardiac
myocytes, which express only the alpha1A-subtype and are protected from
NE-induced cell death, GATA4 knockdown did not reverse alpha1A-survival signaling
in response to NE. In summary, we found that GATA4 acted as a survival factor by 
preventing cell death in alpha1ABKO cardiac myocytes, but GATA4 was not activated
by alpha1-AR stimulation and was not required for alpha1A-survival signaling in
adult cardiac myocytes. This also identifies an important mechanistic difference 
in alpha1-signaling between adult and neonatal cardiac myocytes.

PMCID: PMC2519221
PMID: 18552157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Allergy. 2008 Sep;63(9):1136-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2008.01677.x. Epub 2008
Jun 10.

Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma suppresses mast
cell maturation involved in allergic diseases.

Tachibana M(1), Wada K, Katayama K, Kamisaki Y, Maeyama K, Kadowaki T, Blumberg
RS, Nakajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells play a central role in allergic and inflammatory diseases.
Several reports indicated role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPARgamma) on mast cell function. However, there is no report about the
role of PPARgamma on differentiation of mast cells from the progenitors. In this 
study, we investigated the role of PPARgamma in regulating bone marrow-derived
mast cell maturation and the therapeutic implications for mast cell-related
diseases such as atopic or contact dermatitis.
METHODS: We used in vitro cell culture system for mast cell differentiation from 
bone marrow-progenitors using specific ligands and lentiviral-mediated short
hairpin RNA of PPARgamma, and in vivo murine dermatitis models.
RESULTS: Activation of PPARgamma inhibited the maturation of bone marrow
progenitors into connective tissue-type mast cells (CTMCs) through up-regulation 
of GATA-4 and GATA-6 resulting in a decrease in expression of histidine
decarboxylase and mast cell histamine content. In comparison, the differentiation
of bone marrow progenitors into CTMCs was significantly accelerated by the
knockdown of PPARgamma expression by lentiviral-mediated short hairpin RNA.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ligand administration to mice
inhibited the maturation of mast cells resulting in attenuation of atopic and
contact dermatitis via diminishment of the number of mature mast cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that PPARgamma is one of master regulators on
mast cell maturation and potentially useful for the therapy in various disorders 
involving mast cell activation.

PMCID: PMC4023568
PMID: 18547288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Circ Res. 2008 Jul 3;103(1):98-106. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.177568. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Mechanisms by which late coronary reperfusion mitigates postinfarction cardiac
remodeling.

Nakagawa M(1), Takemura G, Kanamori H, Goto K, Maruyama R, Tsujimoto A, Ohno T,
Okada H, Ogino A, Esaki M, Miyata S, Li L, Ushikoshi H, Aoyama T, Kawasaki M,
Nagashima K, Fujiwara T, Minatoguchi S, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Jul 3;103(1):1-3.

Although recanalization of the infarct-related artery late after myocardial
infarction (MI) is known to reduce both cardiac remodeling and mortality, the
mechanisms responsible are not yet fully understood. We compared infarcted rat
hearts in which the infarct-related coronary artery was opened 24 hours after
infarction (late reperfusion [LR] group) with those having a permanently occluded
artery. Left ventricular dilatation and dysfunction were significantly mitigated 
in the LR group 1, 2, and 4 weeks post-MI. Attributable, in large part, to the
greater number of cells present, the infarcted wall was significantly thicker in 
the LR group, which likely reduced wall stress and mitigated cardiac dysfunction.
Granulation tissue cell proliferation was increased to a greater degree in the LR
group 4 days post-MI, whereas the incidence of apoptosis was significantly lower 
throughout the subacute stage (4 days, 1 week, and 2 weeks post-MI), further
suggesting preservation of granulation tissue cells contributes to the thick,
cell-rich scar. Functionally, myocardial debris was more rapidly removed from the
infarcted areas in the LR group during subacute stages, and stouter collagen was 
more rapidly synthesized in those areas. Direct acceleration of Fas-mediated
apoptosis by hypoxia was confirmed in vitro using infarct tissue-derived
myofibroblasts. In salvaged cardiomyocytes, degenerative changes, but not
apoptosis, were mitigated in the LR group, accompanied by restoration of GATA-4
and sarcomeric protein expression. Along with various mechanisms proposed
earlier, the present findings appear to provide an additional pathophysiological 
basis for the benefits of late reperfusion.

PMID: 18519944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Jun;15(2):635-48. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0015.

Targeted therapy for adrenocortical tumors in transgenic mice through their LH
receptor by Hecate-human chorionic gonadotropin beta conjugate.

Vuorenoja S(1), Rivero-Müller A, Ziecik AJ, Huhtaniemi I, Toppari J, Rahman NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520
Turku, Finland.

Novel strategies are needed for the treatment of adrenocortical tumors that are
usually resistant to chemotherapy. Hecate, a 23-amino acid lytic peptide, was
conjugated to the 15-amino acid (81-95) fragment of the human chorionic
gonadotropin beta (CGbeta) chain, which would selectively kill cancer cells
expressing the LH receptor (LHR) sparing the normal ones with LHR. To prove the
principle that Hecate-CGbeta conjugate may eradicate tumors ectopically
expressing plasma membrane receptors, transgenic (TG) inhibin alpha-subunit
promoter (inhalpha)/Simian Virus 40 T-antigen mice, expressing LHR in their
adrenal gland tumors, were used as the experimental model. Wild-type control
littermates and TG mice with adrenal tumors were treated with either Hecate or
Hecate-CGbeta conjugate at the age of 6.5 months for 3 weeks and killed 7 days
after the last treatment. The Hecate-CGbeta conjugate reduced the adrenal tumor
burden significantly in TG male but not in female mice, in comparison with
Hecate-treated mice. Hecate-CGbeta conjugate treatment did not affect normal
adrenocortical function as the serum corticosterone level between Hecate and
Hecate-CGbeta conjugate groups were similar. The mRNA and protein expressions of 
GATA-4 and LHR colocalized only in tumor area, and a significant downregulation
of gene expression was found after the Hecate-CGbeta conjugate in comparison with
Hecate- and/or non-treated adrenal tumors by western blotting. This finding
provides evidence for a selective destruction of the tumor cells by the
Hecate-CGbeta conjugate. Hereby, our findings support the principle that
Hecate-CGbeta conjugate is able to specifically destroy tumor cells that
ectopically express LHR.

PMID: 18509010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Basic Res Cardiol. 2008 Nov;103(6):514-24. doi: 10.1007/s00395-008-0729-9. Epub
2008 May 23.

TGF-beta1 enhances cardiomyogenic differentiation of skeletal muscle-derived
adult primitive cells.

Abdel-Latif A(1), Zuba-Surma EK, Case J, Tiwari S, Hunt G, Ranjan S, Vincent RJ, 
Srour EF, Bolli R, Dawn B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Louisville, 550 S. Jackson St., ACB, 3rd
floor, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The optimal medium for cardiac differentiation of adult primitive cells remains
to be established. We quantitatively compared the efficacy of IGF-1, dynorphin B,
insulin, oxytocin, bFGF, and TGF-beta1 in inducing cardiomyogenic
differentiation. Adult mouse skeletal muscle-derived Sca1+/CD45-/c-kit-/Thy-1+
(SM+) and Sca1-/CD45-/c-kit-/Thy-1+ (SM-) cells were cultured in basic medium
(BM; DMEM, FBS, IGF-1, dynorphin B) alone and BM supplemented with insulin,
oxytocin, bFGF, or TGF-beta1. Cardiac differentiation was evaluated by the
expression of cardiac-specific markers at the mRNA (qRT-PCR) and protein
(immunocytochemistry) levels. BM+TGF-beta1 upregulated mRNA expression of Nkx2.5 
and GATA-4 after 4 days and Myl2 after 9 days. After 30 days, BM+TGF-beta1
induced the greatest extent of cardiac differentiation (by morphology and
expression of cardiac markers) in SM- cells. We conclude that TGF-beta1 enhances 
cardiomyogenic differentiation in skeletal muscle-derived adult primitive cells. 
This strategy may be utilized to induce cardiac differentiation as well as to
examine the cardiomyogenic potential of adult tissue-derived stem/progenitor
cells.

PMCID: PMC4270753
PMID: 18500484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Endocrine. 2008 Jun;33(3):254-60. doi: 10.1007/s12020-008-9081-y.

Oocytes of baboon fetal primordial ovarian follicles express estrogen receptor
beta mRNA.

Bocca SM(1), Billiar RB, Albrecht ED, Pepe GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics,, The Jones Institute for Reproductive Medicine,
Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA 23501, USA.

In fetal ovaries of estrogen-suppressed baboons, we have previously shown that
follicle numbers were 50% lower than in estrogen-replete animals and contained
oocytes with a reduced number of microvilli. In the baboon fetal ovary, although 
estrogen receptor (ER)alpha and beta have been detected by immunocytochemistry in
granulosa cells, it is not known whether oocytes express ER. Because the actions 
of estrogen are mediated by interaction with cell-specific receptors, the current
study determined whether ERalpha/beta mRNA were expressed in oocytes of baboon
fetal ovaries obtained on day 165 (term = day 184) of gestation. Oocyte nuclei
and cytoplasm from primordial follicles were isolated by laser capture
microdissection and ERalpha, ERbeta, GATA-4 (granulosa cell specific marker)
mRNAs, and 18S rRNA determined by RT-PCR and products verified by sequencing.
ERbeta mRNA was expressed in oocytes of 5 of 5 fetuses. In contrast, fetal
oocytes did not express ERalpha mRNA. Although 18S rRNA was expressed in all
oocytes, GATA-4 mRNA was not detected in oocytes and only detected in granulosa
cells confirming purity of oocytes sampled. We conclude that oocytes of the fetal
baboon ovary express ERbeta mRNA, thereby providing a mechanism by which estrogen
regulates oocyte function, e.g. microvillus development.

PMCID: PMC2753385
PMID: 18484193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Jun;44(6):979-82. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.03.018. Epub
2008 Apr 3.

Alcoholic cardiomyopathy: acetaldehyde, insulin insensitization and ER stress.

Cai L.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Jun;44(6):992-1001.

PMID: 18479704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Apr 29;9:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-44.

A GATA4/WT1 cooperation regulates transcription of genes required for mammalian
sex determination and differentiation.

Miyamoto Y(1), Taniguchi H, Hamel F, Silversides DW, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Quebec (CRCHUQ), Quebec City, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.
yokomiyamo@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: In mammals, sex determination is genetically controlled. The SRY
gene, located on Y chromosome, functions as the dominant genetic switch for
testis development. The SRY gene is specifically expressed in a subpopulation of 
somatic cells (pre-Sertoli cells) of the developing urogenital ridge for a brief 
period during gonadal differentiation. Despite this tight spatiotemporal
expression pattern, the molecular mechanisms that regulate SRY transcription
remain poorly understood. Sry expression has been shown to be markedly reduced in
transgenic mice harboring a mutant GATA4 protein (a member of the GATA family of 
transcription factors) disrupted in its ability to interact with its
transcriptional partner FOG2, suggesting that GATA4 is involved in SRY gene
transcription.
RESULTS: Although our results show that GATA4 directly targets the pig SRY
promoter, we did not observe similar action on the mouse and human SRY promoters.
In the mouse, Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) is an important regulator of both Sry and
Müllerian inhibiting substance (Amh/Mis) expression and in humans, WT1 mutations 
are associated with abnormalities of sex differentiation. GATA4 transcriptionally
cooperated with WT1 on the mouse, pig, and human SRY promoters. Maximal GATA4/WT1
synergism was dependent on WT1 but not GATA4 binding to their consensus
regulatory elements in the SRY promoter and required both the zinc finger and
C-terminal regions of the GATA4 protein. Although both isoforms of WT1 synergized
with GATA4, synergism was stronger with the +KTS rather than the -KTS isoform.
WT1/GATA4 synergism was also observed on the AMH promoter. In contrast to SRY,
WT1/GATA4 action on the mouse Amh promoter was specific for the -KTS isoform and 
required both WT1 and GATA4 binding.
CONCLUSION: Our data therefore provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms
that contribute to the tissue-specific expression of the SRY and AMH genes in
both normal development and certain syndromes of abnormal sex differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2387164
PMID: 18445271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Med Genet. 2008 May;45(5):320. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.057117.

We need a detailed phenome in the phenomenon of genetics and congenital heart
disease.

Posch MG, Berger F, Perrot A, Ozcelik C.

Comment on
    J Med Genet. 2007 Dec;44(12):779-83.

PMID: 18443152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Exp Hematol. 2008 May;36(5):624-41. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.12.016.

Retinoic acid receptor gamma activates receptor tyrosine kinase Tie1 gene
transcription through transcription factor GATA4 in F9 stem cells.

Su D(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York NY 10065, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: The retinoic acid receptors (RARs) alpha, beta2, and gamma regulate
specific subsets of target genes during all-trans retinoic acid (RA) induced
differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. The Tie1 gene exhibited reduced
expression in RA-treated F9 RARgamma-/- cells as compared to wild-type (WT) by
microarray analysis. Our goal was to analyze the Tie1 gene, which encodes a
surface receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in the hematovascular system.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed Tie1, Tie2, Flk1, Runx1, Peg/Mest2, and
angiopoietin-1 and 2 mRNA levels and Tie1 promoter activity.
RESULTS: We showed that RARgamma, but not RARalpha or RARbeta2, is required for
Tie1 promoter activation by RA. Treatment with a RARgamma selective agonist plus 
a retinoid X receptor agonist (LGD1069) increased Tie1 mRNA levels by 11- +/-
2.5-fold 48 hours after RA addition in F9 WT, but not in F9 RARgamma-/- cells, by
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Multiple putative
GATA elements were identified in the Tie1 proximal promoter. RA increased GATA4
transcripts by 12- +/- 1-fold in F9 WT at 48 hours, but not in F9 RARgamma-/-
cells. In addition, transfection of a GATA4 expression vector increased Tie1
promoter/luciferase activity in both RA-treated F9 WT and RARgamma-/- cells. Tie1
promoter deletion analyses indicated that a region of the promoter that possessed
multiple GATA sites mediated the RA-associated Tie1 transcriptional increase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that GATA4 plays a role in the
RA/RARgamma-associated transcriptional activation of the Tie1 promoter. An
understanding of RAR specificity in RA signaling should result in insights into
hematopoietic stem cell signaling and potentially in improved therapies for
several human diseases.

PMID: 18439490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):3917-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02154-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha contributes to thyroid hormone homeostasis by
cooperatively regulating the type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase gene with GATA4 and 
Kruppel-like transcription factor 9.

Ohguchi H(1), Tanaka T, Uchida A, Magoori K, Kudo H, Kim I, Daigo K, Sakakibara
I, Okamura M, Harigae H, Sasaki T, Osborne TF, Gonzalez FJ, Hamakubo T, Kodama T,
Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase (Dio1), a selenoenzyme catalyzing the
bioactivation of thyroid hormone, is highly expressed in the liver. Dio1 mRNA and
enzyme activity levels are markedly reduced in the livers of hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha)-null mice, thus accounting for its liver-specific
expression. Consistent with this deficiency, serum T4 and rT3 concentrations are 
elevated in these mice compared with those in HNF4alpha-floxed control
littermates; however, serum T3 levels are unchanged. Promoter analysis of the
mouse Dio1 gene demonstrated that HNF4alpha plays a key role in the
transactivation of the mouse Dio1 gene. Deletion and substitution mutation
analyses demonstrated that a proximal HNF4alpha site (direct repeat 1
[TGGACAAAGGTGC]; HNF4alpha-RE) is crucial for transactivation of the mouse Dio1
gene by HNF4alpha. Mouse Dio1 is also stimulated by thyroid hormone signaling,
but a direct role for thyroid hormone receptor action has not been reported. We
also showed that thyroid hormone-inducible Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9)
stimulates the mouse Dio1 promoter very efficiently through two CACCC sequences
that are located on either side of HNF4alpha-RE. Furthermore, KLF9 functions
together with HNF4alpha and GATA4 to synergistically activate the mouse Dio1
promoter, suggesting that Dio1 is regulated by thyroid hormone in the mouse
through an indirect mechanism requiring prior KLF9 induction. In addition, we
showed that physical interactions between the C-terminal zinc finger domain (Cf) 
of GATA4 and activation function 2 of HNF4alpha and between the basic domain
adjacent to Cf of GATA4 and a C-terminal domain of KLF9 are both required for
this synergistic response. Taken together, these results suggest that HNF4alpha
regulates thyroid hormone homeostasis through transcriptional regulation of the
mouse Dio1 gene with GATA4 and KLF9.

PMCID: PMC2423126
PMID: 18426912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008 Apr 11;8:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-8-9.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in normal and neoplastic human
gastrointestinal mucosa.

Haveri H(1), Westerholm-Ormio M, Lindfors K, Mäki M, Savilahti E, Andersson LC,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
hanna.haveri@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Human gastrointestinal mucosa regenerates vigorously throughout life,
but the factors controlling cell fate in mature mucosa are poorly understood.
GATA transcription factors direct cell proliferation and differentiation in many 
organs, and are implicated in tumorigenesis. GATA-4 and GATA-6 are considered
crucial for the formation of murine gastrointestinal mucosa, but their role in
human gastrointestinal tract remains unexplored. We studied in detail the
expression patterns of these two GATA factors and a GATA-6 down-stream target,
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), in normal human gastrointestinal mucosa. Since these
factors are considered important for proliferation and differentiation, we also
explored the possible alterations in their expression in gastrointestinal
neoplasias. The expression of the carcinogenesis-related protein Indian hedgehog 
was also investigated in comparison to GATA factors.
METHODS: Samples of normal and neoplastic gastrointestinal tract from children
and adults were subjected to RNA in situ hybridization with 33P labelled probes
and immunohistochemistry, using an avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase system. The
pathological tissues examined included samples of chronic and atrophic gastritis 
as well as adenomas and adenocarcinomas of the colon and rectum.
RESULTS: GATA-4 was abundant in the differentiated epithelial cells of the
proximal parts of the gastrointestinal tract but was absent from the distal
parts. In contrast, GATA-6 was expressed throughout the gastrointestinal
epithelium, and in the distal gut its expression was most intense at the bottom
of the crypts, i.e. cells with proliferative capacity. Both factors were also
present in Barrett's esophagus and metaplasia of the stomach. GATA-6 expression
was reduced in colon carcinoma. Ihh expression overlapped with that of GATA-6
especially in benign gastrointestinal neoplasias.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest differential but overlapping functions for GATA-4
and GATA-6 in the normal gastrointestinal mucosa. Furthermore, GATA-4, GATA-6 and
Ihh expression is altered in premalignant dysplastic lesions and reduced in overt
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2323380
PMID: 18405344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):614-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.013. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Loss of both GATA4 and GATA6 blocks cardiac myocyte differentiation and results
in acardia in mice.

Zhao R(1), Watt AJ, Battle MA, Li J, Bondow BJ, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Despite significant advances in identifying signaling molecules that induce
cardiogenesis in mammals, the transcription factors that control the onset of
cardiac myocyte gene expression have remained elusive. Candidates include the
zinc finger transcription factors GATA binding proteins 4 and 6 (GATA4, GATA6).
The individual loss of either protein in mice results in lethality prior to the
onset of heart development due to defects in the extra-embryonic endoderm;
however, when this extra-embryonic deficiency is circumvented using tetraploid
embryo complementation, cardiac myocyte differentiation initiates normally. Here 
we show that these factors have redundant roles in controlling the onset of
cardiac myocyte differentiation. As a consequence, Gata4(-/-)Gata6(-/-) embryos
completely lack hearts, although second heart field progenitor cells are still
generated. Our data support a model whereby GATA4 or GATA6 are essential for
expression of the network of transcription factors that regulate the onset of
cardiac myocyte gene expression during mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC2423416
PMID: 18400219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun;313(1-2):167-78. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9754-0. Epub 
2008 Apr 9.

Lipopolysaccharide induces cellular hypertrophy through calcineurin/NFAT-3
signaling pathway in H9c2 myocardiac cells.

Liu CJ(1), Cheng YC, Lee KW, Hsu HH, Chu CH, Tsai FJ, Tsai CH, Chu CY, Liu JY,
Kuo WW, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan.

Evidences suggest that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) participates in the inflammatory 
response in the cardiovascular system; however, it is unknown if LPS is
sufficient to cause the cardiac hypertrophy. In the present study, we treated
H9c2 myocardiac cells with LPS to explore whether LPS causes cardiac hypertrophy,
and to identify the precise molecular and cellular mechanisms behind hypertrophic
responses. Here we show that LPS challenge induces pathological hypertrophic
responses such as the increase in cell size, the reorganization of actin
filaments, and the upregulation of hypertrophy markers including atrial
natriuretic peptide (ANP) and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) in H9c2 cells. LPS
treatment significantly promotes the activation of GATA-4 and the nuclear
translocation of NFAT-3, which act as transcription factors mediating the
development of cardiac hypertrophy. After administration of inhibitors including 
U0126 (ERK1/2 inhibitor), SB203580 (p38 MAPK inhibitor), SP600125 (JNK1/2
inhibitor), CsA (calcineurin inhibitor), FK506 (calcineurin inhibitor), and QNZ
(NFkappaB inhibitor), LPS-induced hypertrophic characteristic features, such as
increases in cell size, actin fibers, and levels of ANP and BNP, and the nuclear 
localization of NFAT-3 are markedly inhibited only by calcineurin inhibitors, CsA
and FK506. Collectively, these results suggest that LPS leads to myocardiac
hypertrophy through calcineurin/NFAT-3 signaling pathway in H9c2 cells. Our
findings further provide a link between the LPS-induced inflammatory response and
the calcineurin/NFAT-3 signaling pathway that mediates the development of cardiac
hypertrophy.

PMID: 18398669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Jan-Feb;18(1):27-36. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0239.

Migration and differentiation of human umbilical cord stem cells after heart
injury in chicken embryos.

Torre-Pérez N(1), Montero JA, Zuzarte-Luis V, García-Porrero JA, Rubio N, Blanco 
J, Nistal JF, Hurlé JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Hospital Universitario Marques de
Valdecilla, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

Here we have analyzed the behavior and fate of stem cells from human umbilical
cord blood (scHUCBs) when grafted into the myocardial wall of normal and damaged 
hearts of chicken embryos. We started by characterizing the scHUCBs before
grafting and we found that they express precardiogenic genes including Nkx2.5,
GATA4, MEF-2, and SERCA2a together with undifferentiation markers as CD34 or
c-kit. In grafting experiments using scHUCBs labeled with DiI we observed that
these cells were not rejected by the host and survived when implanted in chicken 
hearts, being able to migrate through the myocardial wall. By 3 days after
grafting we found labeled cells with morphological characters of myocardiocytes
in concordance with the identification of the expression of human genes for
myosin light chain 2a (Mlc2a) and myosin heavy chain-beta (Mhc beta) in the
chicken heart. When a small injury was applied to the heart wall, grafted scHUCBs
were vigorously attracted by the damaged myocardium. This directed migration was 
only sustained for 12 h after injury, time period required for healing of the
damaged heart wall. The rate of myocardial differentiation of scHUCBs in damaged 
hearts was not significantly increased with respect to that found when implanted 
in healthy hearts. However, we found stimulation of endothelial differentiation
in injured hearts deduced by the increased expression of human genes for platelet
endothelial cell-adhesion molecule 1 or vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 and the presence of DiI-labeled endothelial cells. Together all these 
findings support the embryonic chicken heart as a feasible model for
experimentation in stem cell therapy and emphasize the relevance of the
physiological conditions of the myocardial host tissue for engraftment and
differentiation of exogenously applied scHUCBs.

PMID: 18393637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 May 1;146A(9):1158-65. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32205.

Two patients with atypical interstitial deletions of 8p23.1: mapping of
phenotypical traits.

Páez MT(1), Yamamoto T, Hayashi K, Yasuda T, Harada N, Matsumoto N, Kurosawa K,
Furutani Y, Asakawa S, Shimizu N, Matsuoka R.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences (IREIIMS), Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Chromosomal 8p23 deletion syndrome is recognized as a malformation syndrome with 
clinical symptoms of facial anomalies, microcephaly, mental retardation, and
congenital heart defects. The responsible gene for the heart defects in this
syndrome has been identified as GATA4 on 8p23.1. Two patients with interstitial
deletions of 8p23.1 were investigated; one patient showed moderate developmental 
delay and Ebstein anomaly, and the other showed mild delay and typical
atrioventricular septum defect. The precise deletion sizes, 17 and 2.9 Mb, were
determined by FISH analyses using BAC clones as probes. The latter deletion was
the smallest deletion including GATA4 in the previously reported patients, and
the critical regions and genes for clinical manifestation of 8p23 deletion
syndrome, including facial anomalies, microcephaly, behavioral abnormality, and
developmental delay, were discussed.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18393291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Apr;25(2):159-63.

[Effects of histone acetylation on differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Zhu J, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, 400014 P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of histone acetylation modification on the
regulation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiation into cardiomyocytes
in myocardium microenvironment, by detecting the acetylase activity, expression
of histone acetylation gene Gcn5 and myocardial gene GATA4 in myocardium
transplanted by MSCs transfected with plasmid ZJ3.
METHODS: Extracted the plasmid containing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against Gcn5 
gene (ZJ3) and transfected it into MSCs. After 24 hours, the MSCs were
transplanted into the rat myocardium tissues and the acetylase activity, the
expression of acetylation gene and myocardium development gene were detected
after two weeks.
RESULTS: The acetylase activity in the experimental group was significantly lower
than all control groups; Gcn5 and GATA4 expression in myocardium of experimental 
group had significant reduction compared with the control groups.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of histone acetylation in the MSC cells can inhibit the
transcription process of specialized myocardium in the myocardium
microenvironment. The result establishes foundation for researches of histone
acetylation and mechanisms of MSCs differentiation.

PMID: 18393236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Sex Dev. 2007;1(5):286-92. doi: 10.1159/000108930.

A cellular study of human testis development.

Ostrer H(1), Huang HY, Masch RJ, Shapiro E.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Department of Pediatrics, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. harry.ostrer@med.nyu.edu

This study catalogs the cellular events underlying the formation of a human
testis. These events were identified by immunocytochemistry using antibodies that
served as markers for specific cell types, then contrasted with the events
occurring in the developing mouse testis. The presence of germ cells in the
embryonic gonadal ridge and of coelomic epithelial cells that give rise to
Sertoli cells was observed at 7 weeks. This was followed by the appearance of
Sertoli cells in testicular tubules and of Leydig cells at 9 weeks and by the
appearance of vascular endothelial cells and peritubular myoid cells at 12 weeks.
Overall the temporal sequence of events in humans was similar, albeit longer,
than what occurs in mice. Notably, Leydig cell differentiation occurs earlier in 
the sequence of events and germ cell maturation occurs during fetal life. The
candidate testis-determining genes, FGF9, GATA4, FOG2, EMX2, and CBX2 were
expressed at 7 weeks suggesting a role in early gonadal development, such as that
observed in mice. In addition, expression of FGF9 in germ cells following testis 
determination suggests a role in germ cell maturation.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Sex Dev. 2007;1(4):238-54. doi: 10.1159/000104774.

WT1-mediated gene regulation in early urogenital ridge development.

Klattig J(1), Sierig R, Kruspe D, Makki MS, Englert C.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany.

The Wilms tumor protein WT1 is involved in the development of several organs,
including the gonads. WT1 mutations in humans lead to syndromes associated with
impaired sexual development and Wt1 knockout mice show regression of gonad
anlagen. As a transcription factor, WT1 fulfills its function by regulating a set
of target genes. With respect to gonad development only few in vivo WT1 targets, 
e.g. steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) have been identified so far. To get a
comprehensive view of WT1 targets in the gonad, we compared gene expression in
urogenital ridges of wild-type and Wt1(-/-) embryos. We found almost 150 genes
differentially expressed higher than factor three, using microarray analysis. To 
confirm these results we performed quantitative real-time RT-PCR for many genes
and observed a high degree of concordance between microarray and real-time RT-PCR
results. Employing in situ hybridization we found 'WT1 activated genes' to be
expressed in gonads, mesonephroi and coelomic epithelium--those parts of the
urogenital ridge with Wt1 expression. Interestingly, many of the differentially
expressed genes are known to show sex-specific expression at later time-points.
These results provide a basis for investigation of developmental pathways in the 
urogenital ridge downstream of WT1 and for identification of new candidate genes 
involved in early urogenital ridge development. For example we provide a first
potential target of WT1 in the coelomic epithelium--Muc16, and a gene regulated
by the WT1 target SF1--Gata4.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Sex Dev. 2007;1(3):152-60. doi: 10.1159/000102104.

Combined haploinsufficiency of SF-1 and GATA4 does not reveal a genetic
interaction in mouse gonadal development.

Pelusi C(1), Zhao L, Stallings NR, Parker KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Tex. 
75390, USA.

The nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1 or NR5A1) and the zinc finger
protein GATA4 mediate key events in the early steps of gonadal development and
sex differentiation, presumably by activating the expression of essential target 
genes. An important SF-1 target in male sex differentiation is the gene encoding 
the anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), which induces regression of the Müllerian ducts
in the developing male embryo. In cell transfection studies, there is apparent
cooperation between GATA4 and SF-1 in the regulation of both human and mouse Amh 
promoters. We hypothesized that compound haploinsufficiency of both SF-1 and
GATA4, by reducing their synergism, might cause a more severe phenotype than that
seen in mice that were heterozygous for either SF-1 or Gata4 alone. Surprisingly,
in adult and embryonic mice, compound haploinsufficiency of SF-1 and GATA4 caused
no gonadal or reproductive abnormalities beyond those seen in SF-1(+/-) mice.
Thus, although cooperation between SF-1 and GATA4 very likely is important for
regulation of their target genes, such synergy was not revealed in our in vivo
studies of gonadal development and function.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4052-67. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02100-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
7.

Distinct expression and function of alternatively spliced Tbx5 isoforms in cell
growth and differentiation.

Georges R(1), Nemer G, Morin M, Lefebvre C, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

Mutations in the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome, an
autosomal dominant disease characterized by a wide spectrum of cardiac and upper 
limb defects with variable expressivity. Tbx5 haploinsufficiency has been
suggested to be the underlying mechanism, and experimental models are consistent 
with a dosage-sensitive requirement for Tbx5 in heart development. Here, we
report that Tbx5 levels are regulated through alternative splicing that
generates, in addition to the known 518-amino-acid protein, a C-terminal
truncated isoform. This shorter isoform retains the capacity to bind DNA, but its
interaction with Tbx5 collaborators such as GATA-4 is altered. In vivo, the two
spliced isoforms are oppositely regulated in a temporal and growth
factor-dependent manner and are present in distinct DNA-binding complexes. The
expression of the long isoform correlates with growth stimulation, and its
reexpression in postnatal transgenic mouse hearts promotes hypertrophy.
Conversely, the upregulation of the short but not the long isoform in C2C12
myoblasts leads to growth arrest and cell death. The results provide novel
insight into posttranscriptional Tbx5 regulation and point to an important role
not only in cell differentiation but also in cell proliferation and organ growth.
The data may help analyze genotype-phenotype relations in patients with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2423137
PMID: 18391012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 30;370(2):371-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.107. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

GATA-4 modulates C/EBP-dependent transcriptional activation of acute phase
protein genes.

Turgeon N(1), Rousseau D, Roy E, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke, 3001 12eme avenue nord,
Sherbrooke, Que., Canada.

C/EBP transcription factors are involved in the regulation of the intestinal
epithelial cell response to inflammatory stimuli. GATA transcription factors
modulate C/EBP-dependent transcriptional activation in various cell types. We
thus determined whether GATA-4 whose expression is restricted to epithelial
cells, modulate C/EBP transcriptional activity and C/EBP-dependent acute phase
protein expression in intestinal epithelial cells. Interaction between C/EBPdelta
and GATA-4 required both C/EBPdelta leucine zipper and basic DNA-binding domains,
and the GATA-4 C-terminal region. C/EBP isoforms and GATA-4 synergistically
activated the alpha-acid glycoprotein gene while GATA-4 repressed thiostatin and 
haptoglobin C/EBP-dependent transactivation. In GATA-4 expressing intestinal
epithelial cells, GATA-4 led to decreased C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta protein
levels, and decreased thiostatin expression in response to IL-1beta and
dexamethasone. This correlated with decreased C/EBPdelta recruitment to the
thiostatin promoter, as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. In
contrast, increased AGP expression in response to dexamethasone correlated with
increased basal histone H4 acetylation. Thus, GATA-4 may be involved in the
establishment of specific intestinal epithelial cell C/EBP-dependent and
C/EBP-independent transcriptional responses.

PMID: 18387357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Jun;44(6):992-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.02.276.
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Cardiac overexpression of alcohol dehydrogenase exacerbates chronic ethanol
ingestion-induced myocardial dysfunction and hypertrophy: role of insulin
signaling and ER stress.

Li SY(1), Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine, University of
Wyoming School of Pharmacy, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Jun;44(6):979-82.

Chronic alcohol intake leads to alcoholic cardiomyopathy characterized by cardiac
hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction possibly related to the toxicity of the
ethanol metabolite acetaldehyde. This study examined the impact of augmented
acetaldehyde exposure on myocardial function, geometry, and insulin signaling via
cardiac-specific overexpression of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). ADH transgenic
and wild-type FVB mice were placed on a 4% alcohol diet for 12 weeks.
Echocardiographic, glucose tolerance, glucose uptake, insulin signaling, and ER
stress indices were evaluated. Mice consuming alcohol exhibited glucose
intolerance, dampened cardiac glucose uptake, cardiac hypertrophy and contractile
dysfunction, all of which with the exception of whole body glucose tolerance were
exaggerated by the ADH transgene. Cardiomyocytes from ethanol-fed mice exhibited 
depressed insulin-stimulated phosphorylation insulin receptor (tyr1146) and IRS-1
(tyrosine) as well as enhanced serine phosphorylation of IRS-1. ADH-augmented
alcohol-induced effect of IRS-1 phosphorylation (tyrosine/serine). Neither
alcohol nor adh affected expression of insulin receptor and IRS-1. Alcohol
reduced phosphorylation of Akt and GSK-3beta as well as GSK-3beta expression and 
the effect was exaggerated by ADH. The transcriptional factors GATA4, c-jun and
c-jun phosphorylation were upregulated by alcohol, which was amplified by ADH.
The ratios of phospho-c-Jun/c-Jun and phospho-GATA4/GATA4 remained unchanged.
Chronic alcohol intake upregulated expression of the endoplasmic reticulum stress
markers eIF2alpha, IRE-1alpha, GRP78 and gadd153, the effect of which was
exaggerated by ADH. These data suggest that elevated cardiac acetaldehyde
exposure via ADH may exacerbate alcohol-induced myocardial dysfunction,
hypertrophy, insulin insensitivity and ER stress, indicating a key role of ADH
gene in alcohol-induced cardiac dysfunction and insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC2501109
PMID: 18377926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):1133-43. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21496.

Novel pre- and post-gastrulation expression of Gata4 within cells of the inner
cell mass and migratory neural crest cells.

Pilon N(1), Raiwet D, Viger RS, Silversides DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Montreal, St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada.

GATA4 is a transcription factor known to be important for the development of many
organs such as the heart, intestine, and gonads. However, information regarding
the control of its expression is only now beginning to emerge. To further
understand the regulation of Gata4 expression during mouse embryonic development,
we have generated a novel knockin allele allowing expression of the Cre
recombinase under the control of Gata4 regulatory sequences. When these
Gata4(Cre/+) mice were crossed with the Cre reporter mouse R26R-YFP, we
surprisingly found widespread mosaic YFP expression in e10.0 embryos. This
particular expression pattern was traced back to the e5.5 stage via a cell
lineage study, suggesting activation of transcription at the Gata4 locus around
the blastocyst stage. In accordance with this hypothesis, we found that Gata4 is 
expressed in cultured embryonic stem (ES) cells and within the inner cell mass
(ICM) of e4.5 blastocysts. Interestingly, such early Gata4 transcription can be
recapitulated in transgenic reporter studies using 5 kb of the proximal rat Gata4
promoter. During mouse development, these 5-kb regulatory sequences were
previously reported to direct reporter gene expression to Sertoli cells of the
testes [Mazaud Guittot et al. (2007) Biol Reprod 76:85-95]. We now show that
these regulatory sequences can also drive robust fluorescent reporter gene
expression in migratory neural crest cells. Comparisons to Wnt1-Cre-mediated YFP 
labelling of neural crest cells suggest that most of the migratory neural crest
cells are labelled in e9.5 to e11.5 Gata4p[5kb]-RFP or -GFP embryos. Analysis of 
GFP transcription via whole-mount in situ hybridization in e10.5 and e11.5
embryos demonstrated that the 5-kb Gata4 promoter is preferentially active in
cells of the boundary caps at the dorsal root entry zone and motor exit points
flanking the neural tube. RT-PCR gene expression analysis of FACS-purified
GFP-positive cells from e9.5 Gata4p[5kb]-GFP embryos revealed co-expression of
Gata4 with many neural crest stem cell markers. Together with sphere-forming and 
differentiation cell culture assays, our results indicate that the Gata4 promoter
is active within at least a subset of the neural crest stem cells. Taken
altogether, our studies have revealed new Gata4 expression patterns during mouse 
embryonic development, which are controlled by its 5-kb proximal 5' flanking
sequences.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18351674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nagoya J Med Sci. 2007 Oct;69(3-4):133-7.

In vitro developmental model of the gastrointestinal tract from mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Torihashi S(1), Kuwahara M, Kurahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Physical and Occupational Therapy, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-1-20 Daiko-minami, Higashi-ku, Nagoya 461-8673, Japan.
storiha@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent and retain their potential to
form cells, tissues and organs originated from three embryonic germ layers.
Recently, we developed in vitro organ--gut-like structures--from mouse ES cells. 
They had basically similar morphological features to a mouse gastrointestinal
tract in vivo composed of three distinct layers (i.e., epithelium, connective
tissue and musculature). Gut-like structures showed spontaneous contractions
derived from pacemaker cells (interstitial cells of Cajal) in the musculature. We
also examined their formation process and expression pattern of transcription
factors crucial for gut organogenesis such as Id2, Sox17, HNF3beta/Foxa2 and
GATA4. We found that they mimic the development of embryonic gut in vivo and
showed a similar expression pattern of common transcription factors. They also
maintain their developmental potential after transplantation to a renal capsule. 
Therefore, gut-like structures are suitable for in vitro models of
gastrointestinal tracts and their development. In addition, we pointed out
several unique features different from gut in vivo that provide useful and
advantageous tools to investigate the developmental mechanism of the
gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 18351232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jun 11;287(1-2):20-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.01.024.
Epub 2008 Feb 8.

GATA-4 upregulates glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide expression in
cells of pancreatic and intestinal lineage.

Jepeal LI(1), Boylan MO, Michael Wolfe M.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

A thorough examination of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP)
expression has been hampered by difficulty in isolating widely dispersed,
GIP-producing enteroendocrine K-cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms
governing the regulation of GIP expression, 14 intestinal and pancreatic cell
lines were assessed for their suitability for studies examining GIP expression.
Both STC-1 cells and the pancreatic cell line betaTC-3 were found to express GIP 
mRNA and secrete biologically active GIP. However, levels of GIP mRNA and
bioactive peptide and the activity of transfected GIP reporter constructs were
significantly lower in betaTC-3 than STC-1 cells. When betaTC-3 cells were
analyzed for transcription factors known to be important for GIP expression,
PDX-1 and ISL-1, but not GATA-4, were detected. Double staining for GIP-1 and
GATA-4 in mouse duodenum demonstrated GATA-4 expression in intestinal K-cells.
Exogenous expression of GATA-4 in betaTC-3 cells led to marked increases in both 
GIP transcription and secretion. Lastly suppression of GATA-4 via RNA
interference, in GTC-1 cells, a subpopulation of STC-1 cells with high endogenous
GIP expression resulted in a marked an attenuation of GIP promoter activity. Our 
data support the hypothesis that GATA-4 may function to augment or enhance GIP
expression rather than act as an initiator of GIP transcription.

PMCID: PMC2707930
PMID: 18343025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4763-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708451105. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Zebrafish early cardiac connexin, Cx36.7/Ecx, regulates myofibril orientation and
heart morphogenesis by establishing Nkx2.5 expression.

Sultana N(1), Nag K, Hoshijima K, Laird DW, Kawakami A, Hirose S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biological Sciences and Biological Information, Tokyo Institute
of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Heart development is a precisely coordinated process of cellular proliferation,
migration, differentiation, and integrated morphogenetic interactions, and
therefore it is highly susceptible to developmental anomalies such as the
congenital heart disease (CHD). One of the major causes of CHD has been shown to 
be the mutations in key cardiac transcription factors, including nkx2.5. Here, we
report the analysis of zebrafish mutant ftk that showed a progressive heart
malformation in the later stages of heart morphogenesis. Our analyses revealed
that the cardiac muscle maturation and heart morphogenesis in ftk mutants were
impaired because of the disorganization of myofibrils. Notably, we found that the
expression of nkx2.5 was down-regulated in the ftk heart despite the normal
expression of gata4 and tbx5, suggesting a common mechanism for the occurrence of
ftk phenotype and CHD. We identified ftk to be a loss-of-function mutation in a
connexin gene, cx36.7/early cardiac connexin (ecx), expressed during early heart 
development. We further showed by a rescue experiment that Nkx2.5 is the
downstream mediator of Ecx-mediated signaling. From these results, we propose
that the cardiac connexin Ecx and its downstream signaling are crucial for
establishing nkx2.5 expression, which in turn promotes unidirectional, parallel
alignment of myofibrils and the subsequent proper heart morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2290751
PMID: 18337497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1108-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.158. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Forkhead box transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are important regulators of
Muc2 mucin expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

van der Sluis M(1), Vincent A, Bouma J, Korteland-Van Male A, van Goudoever JB,
Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The mucin Muc2 is the main component of the intestinal mucus layer and thus plays
important roles in intestinal protection. Therefore, it is important to
understand its regulation during goblet cell differentiation. Foxa1 and Foxa2
forkhead box transcription factors (TFs) participate in transcriptional programs 
governing intestinal cell differentiation. Using immunohistochemistry, we showed 
a spatio-temporal pattern of expression of both TFs in developing and adult mouse
intestine and their expression in Muc2-expressing intestinal cells.
Down-regulation of Foxa1 and Foxa2 by RNA interference in cultured intestinal
cells decreased Muc2 mRNA level by half, and abolished Muc2 protein expression.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays showed that these two TFs
directly bind to the Muc2 promoter. Co-transfection experiments indicated that
both TFs activate the Muc2 promoter and that mutations of three Foxa cis-elements
inhibit Muc2 transactivation. In conclusion, this work identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2
as important regulators of Muc2 expression in the intestine.

PMID: 18336786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3219-35. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01516-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide activates silenced genes through
decreasing both CpG and H3K9 methylation on the promoter.

Wu LP(1), Wang X, Li L, Zhao Y, Lu S, Yu Y, Zhou W, Liu X, Yang J, Zheng Z, Zhang
H, Feng J, Yang Y, Wang H, Zhu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100083, China.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) has been shown to demethylate the mammalian
genome, which further strengthens the concept that DNA methylation and histone
modifications interact in regulation of gene expression. Here, we report that an 
HDAC inhibitor, depsipeptide, exhibited significant demethylating activity on the
promoters of several genes, including p16, SALL3, and GATA4 in human lung cancer 
cell lines H719 and H23, colon cancer cell line HT-29, and pancreatic cancer cell
line PANC1. Although expression of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) was not
affected by depsipeptide, a decrease in binding of DNMT1 to the promoter of these
genes played a dominant role in depsipeptide-induced demethylation and
reactivation. Depsipeptide also suppressed expression of histone
methyltransferases G9A and SUV39H1, which in turn resulted in a decrease of di-
and trimethylated H3K9 around these genes' promoter. Furthermore, both loading of
heterochromatin-associated protein 1 (HP1alpha and HP1beta) to methylated H3K9
and binding of DNMT1 to these genes' promoter were significantly reduced in
depsipeptide-treated cells. Similar DNA demethylation was induced by another HDAC
inhibitor, apicidin, but not by trichostatin A. Our data describe a novel
mechanism of HDACi-mediated DNA demethylation via suppression of histone
methyltransferases and reduced recruitment of HP1 and DNMT1 to the genes'
promoter.

PMCID: PMC2423178
PMID: 18332107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 9;369(3):801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.141. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Common marmoset embryonic stem cell can differentiate into cardiomyocytes.

Chen H(1), Hattori F, Murata M, Li W, Yuasa S, Onizuka T, Shimoji K, Ohno Y,
Sasaki E, Kimura K, Hakuno D, Sano M, Makino S, Ogawa S, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan.

Common marmoset monkeys have recently attracted much attention as a primate
research model, and are preferred to rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys due to their
small bodies, easy handling and efficient breeding. We recently reported the
establishment of common marmoset embryonic stem cell (CMESC) lines that could
differentiate into three germ layers. Here, we report that our CMESC can also
differentiate into cardiomyocytes and investigated their characteristics. After
induction, FOG-2 was expressed, followed by GATA4 and Tbx20, then Nkx2.5 and
Tbx5. Spontaneous beating could be detected at days 12-15. Immunofluorescent
staining and ultrastructural analyses revealed that they possessed
characteristics typical of functional cardiomyocytes. They showed sinus node-like
action potentials, and the beating rate was augmented by isoproterenol
stimulation. The BrdU incorporation assay revealed that CMESC-derived
cardiomyocytes retained a high proliferative potential for up to 24 weeks. We
believe that CMESC-derived cardiomyocytes will advance preclinical studies in
cardiovascular regenerative medicine.

PMID: 18331825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):524-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.037. Epub 2008 
Feb 13.

Identification of downstream genetic pathways of Tbx1 in the second heart field.

Liao J(1), Aggarwal VS, Nowotschin S, Bondarev A, Lipner S, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor, and an important gene for velo-cardio-facial 
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) in humans, causes outflow tract (OFT) heart
defects when inactivated in the mouse. Tbx1 is expressed in the second heart
field (SHF) and is required in this tissue for OFT development. To identify Tbx1 
regulated genetic pathways in the SHF, we performed gene expression profiling of 
the caudal pharyngeal region in Tbx1(-/-) and wild type embryos. Isl1, a key
marker for the SHF, as well as Hod and Nkx2-6, were downregulated in Tbx1(-/-)
mutants, while genes required for cardiac morphogenesis, such as Raldh2, Gata4,
and Tbx5, as well as a subset of muscle contractile genes, signifying myocardial 
differentiation, were ectopically expressed. Pan-mesodermal ablation of Tbx1
resulted in similar gene expression changes, suggesting cell-autonomous roles of 
Tbx1 in regulating these genes. Opposite expression changes concomitant with
SHF-derived cardiac defects occurred in TBX1 gain-of-function mutants, indicating
that appropriate levels of Tbx1 are required for heart development. When taken
together, our studies show that Tbx1 acts upstream in a genetic network that
positively regulates SHF cell proliferation and negatively regulates
differentiation, cell-autonomously in the caudal pharyngeal region.

PMCID: PMC2494702
PMID: 18328475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Endocrine. 2007 Dec;32(3):280-6. doi: 10.1007/s12020-008-9036-3. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Expression of Id1 in adult, regenerating and developing pancreas.

Hua H(1), Sarvetnick N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey
Pines Rd, IMM-23, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Several key transcription factors are necessary for alpha cell development in the
pancreas. In this study, we describe the expression of Inhibition of DNA-binding 
protein 1 (Id1) in the developing as well as the normal adult pancreas. We found 
co-expression of Id1 with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor in alpha
cells. Inhibition of BMP4 signaling with a specific neutralizing antibody
slightly decreases the proportion of glucagon cells in the adult pancreas but had
a significant effect in a model of pancreas regeneration. In late embryonic
pancreas, Id1 co-localized with GATA4, a transcription factor known for its
critical function in glucagon cell development. However, in early postnatal
period, the expression of Id1 and GATA4 diverged with Id1 identified in glucagon 
cells and GATA4 restricted to the acinar pancreas.

PMID: 18322823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Heart Fail. 2008 Mar;10(3):233-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ejheart.2008.01.004. Epub
2008 Mar 5.

Toll-like receptor-4 deficiency attenuates doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy in 
mice.

Riad A(1), Bien S, Gratz M, Escher F, Westermann D, Heimesaat MM, Bereswill S,
Krieg T, Felix SB, Schultheiss HP, Kroemer HK, Tschöpe C.

Author information: 
(1)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac inflammation and generation of oxidative stress are known to 
contribute to doxorubicin (Dox)-induced cardiomyopathy. Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) are a part of the innate immune system and are involved in cardiac stress 
reactions. Since TLR4 might play a relevant role in cardiac inflammatory
signalling, we investigated whether or not TLR4 is involved in Dox-induced
cardiotoxicity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Five days after a single injection of Dox (20 mg/kg; i.p.), 
left ventricular pressure-volume loops were measured in wild-type and
TLR4-deficient mice (TLR4-/-) Dox-treated and control mice. Analyses of possible 
pathophysiological mechanisms were performed in left ventricular tissue and
isolated myocytes, respectively. Dox injection resulted in an impairment of left 
ventricular function and neurohumoral activation, indexed by increased ET-1
expression. This was further associated with an increase in cardiac oxidative
stress, inflammation and apoptosis, as indicated by an up-regulation of cardiac
lipid peroxidation, TNF-alpha expression and enhanced content of TUNEL-positive
cells. In contrast, TLR4-/- Dox mice showed improved left ventricular function
with reduced oxidative and inflammatory stress response including reduced cardiac
apoptosis. These results were found to be associated with an increase of GATA-4
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR4 deficiency improves left ventricular function and attenuates
pathophysiological key mechanisms in Dox-induced cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 18321777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Circulation. 2008 Mar 18;117(11):1414-22. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.759233.
Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Heart-specific ablation of Prkar1a causes failure of heart development and
myxomagenesis.

Yin Z(1), Jones GN, Towns WH 2nd, Zhang X, Abel ED, Binkley PF, Jarjoura D,
Kirschner LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Ohio
State University, Columbus, USA.

BACKGROUND: Protein kinase A signaling has long been known to play an important
role in cardiac function. Dysregulation of the protein kinase A system, caused by
mutation of the protein kinase A regulatory subunit gene PRKAR1A, causes the
inherited tumor syndrome Carney complex, which includes cardiac myxomas as one of
its cardinal features. Mouse models of this genetic defect have been
unsatisfactory because homozygote null animals die early in development and
heterozygotes do not exhibit a cardiac phenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To study the cardiac-specific effects resulting from
complete loss of Prkar1a, we used cre-lox technology to generate mice lacking
this protein specifically in cardiomyocytes. Conditional knockout mice died at
day 11.5 to 12.5 of embryogenesis with thin-walled, dilated hearts. These hearts 
showed elevated protein kinase A activity and decreased cardiomyocyte
proliferation before demise. Analysis of the expression of transcription factors 
required for cardiogenesis revealed downregulation of key cardiac transcription
factors such as the serum response factor, Gata4, and Nkx2-5. Although heart wall
thickness was reduced overall, specific areas exhibited morphological changes
consistent with myxomatous degeneration in the walls of knockout hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of Prkar1a from the heart causes a failure of proper myocardial
development with subsequent cardiac failure and embryonic demise. These changes
appear to be due to suppression of cardiac-specific transcription by increased
protein kinase A activity. These biochemical changes lead to myxoma-like changes,
indicating that these mice may be a good model with which to study the formation 
of these tumors.

PMID: 18316483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1315-24. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0751. Epub 2008
Feb 28.

Evolution of the c-kit-positive cell response to pathological challenge in the
myocardium.

Fransioli J(1), Bailey B, Gude NA, Cottage CT, Muraski JA, Emmanuel G, Wu W,
Alvarez R, Rubio M, Ottolenghi S, Schaefer E, Sussman MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Diego State University Heart Institute, San Diego
State University, San Diego, California 92182, USA.

Cumulative evidence indicates that myocardium responds to growth or injury by
recruitment of stem and/or progenitor cells that participate in repair and
regenerative processes. Unequivocal identification of this population has been
hampered by lack of reagents or markers specific to the recruited population,
leading to controversies regarding the nature of these cells. Use of a transgenic
mouse expressing green fluorescent protein driven by the c-kit promoter allows
for unambiguous identification of this cell population. Green fluorescent protein
(GFP) driven by the c-kit promoter labels a fraction of the c-kit+ cells
recognized by antibody labeling for c-kit protein. Expression of GFP by the c-kit
promoter and accumulation of GFP-positive cells in the myocardium is relatively
high at birth compared with adult and declines between postnatal weeks 1 and 2,
which tracks in parallel with expression of c-kit protein and c-kit-positive
cells. Acute cardiomyopathic injury by infarction prompts increased expression of
both GFP protein and GFP-labeled cells in the region of infarction relative to
remote myocardium. Similar increases were observed for c-kit protein and cells
with a slightly earlier onset and decline relative to the GFP signal. Cells
coexpressing GFP, c-kit, and cardiogenic markers were apparent at 1-2 weeks
postinfarction. Cardiac-resident c-kit+ cell cultures derived from the transgenic
line express GFP that is diminished in parallel with c-kit by induction of
differentiation. The use of genetically engineered mice validates and extends the
concept of c-kit+ cells participating in the response to myocardial injury.

PMCID: PMC4037162
PMID: 18308948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Genet. 2007 Dec;86(3):241-7.

Isolation, characterization and genetic analysis of canine GATA4 gene in a family
of Doberman Pinschers with an atrial septal defect.

Lee SA(1), Lee SG, Moon HS, Lavulo L, Cho KO, Hyun C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Small Animal Internal Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.

GATA4 is expressed early in the developing heart where it plays a key role in
regulating the expression of genes encoding myocardial contractile proteins. Gene
mutations in the human GATA4 have been implicated in various congenital heart
defects (CHD), including atrial septal defect (ASD). Although ASD is the third
most common CHD in humans, it is generally rare in dogs and cats. There is also
no obvious predilection for ASD in dogs and cats, based on sex or breed. However,
among dogs, the incidence rate of ASD is relatively high in Samoyeds and Doberman
Pinschers, where its inheritance and genetic aetiology are not well understood.
In this study, we identified and investigated the genetic aetiology of an ASD
affected family in a pure breed dog population. Although the GATA4 gene was
screened, we did not find any mutations that would result in the alteration of
the coding sequence and hence, the predicted GATA4 structure and function.
Although the aetiology of ASD is multifactorial, our findings indicate that GATA4
may not be responsible for the ASD in the dogs used in this study. However, this 
does not eliminate GATA4 as a candidate for ASD in other dog breeds.

PMID: 18305343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Feb 20;121(4):336-40.

Hepatocyte growth factor combined with insulin like growth factor-1 improves
expression of GATA-4 in mesenchymal stem cells cocultured with cardiomyocytes.

Li Z(1), Gu TX, Zhang YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: In a suitable microenvironment, bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(BMSCs) can transdifferentiate into myocardial cells whose special gene can be
expressed as structural proteins. Growth factor (GF) plays an important role in
the cell migration, survival and differentiation. However, the effect of GF on
the cellular differentiation is not well understood. In this study, the
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) were used
in the mixed culture of BMSCs and myocardial cells and the effects of these
growth factors on the GATA-4 expression of BMSCs were investigated.
METHODS: BMSCs were isolated from the marrow of rabbit femurs and tibias and
foetal rabbit ventricular myocytes were isolated with trypsin sequential
digestion. These two kinds of cells were cocultured in a ratio of 1:1 for 6
weeks; cocultured cells with added HGF and IGF-1 were the experimental group. The
differentiated BMSCs were collected using the laser capture, microdissection
system and their RNA isolated. Immunocytochemical staining, transmission electron
microscopy and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used to
evaluate the transformation of the stem cells into cardiomyocytes like cells.
RESULTS: When cultured separately, BMSCs did not express alpha-actin and the stem
cells had many nucleoli. However, when cocultured with cardiomyocytes, BMSCs
expressed alpha-actin and the cardiac transcription factor GATA-4 and showed
cardiomyocyte like ultrastructure. In comparison with the control group, the
experimental group exhibited the enhanced expression level of GATA-4. The GATA-4 
expression of BMSCs increased gradually following the addition of HGF and IGF-1, 
reached the maximal level after two weeks and decreased slightly thereafter.
CONCLUSIONS: BMSCs can transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes like cells and
express the cardiac transcription factor GATA-4 after being cocultured with
myocardial cells. HGF and IGF-1 can stimulate transdifferentiation of BMSCs into 
cardiac phenotype and enhance the expression of GATA-4. These results indicate
that growth factors have a great potential in clinical cellular therapy.

PMID: 18304467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11841-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702563200. Epub 2008 
Feb 25.

HIF-1alpha signaling upstream of NKX2.5 is required for cardiac development in
Xenopus.

Nagao K(1), Taniyama Y, Kietzmann T, Doi T, Komuro I, Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

HIF-1alpha is originally identified as a transcription factor that activates gene
expression in response to hypoxia. In metazoans, HIF-1alpha functions as a master
regulator of oxygen homeostasis and regulates adaptive responses to change in
oxygen tension during embryogenesis, tissue ischemia, and tumorigenesis. Because 
Hif-1alpha-deficient mice exhibit a number of developmental defects, the precise 
role of HIF-1alpha in early cardiac morphogenesis has been uncertain. Therefore, 
to clarify the role of HIF-1alpha in heart development, we investigated the
effect of knockdown of HIF-1alpha in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide microinjection techniques. Knockdown of HIF-1alpha resulted in
defects of cardiogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization for cardiac troponin 
I (cTnI) showed the two separated populations of cardiomyocytes, which is
indicative of cardia bifida, in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Furthermore, the
depletion of HIF-1alpha led to the reduction in cTnI expression, suggesting the
correlation between HIF-1alpha and cardiac differentiation. We further examined
the expression of several heart markers, nkx2.5, gata4, tbx5, bmp4, hand1, and
hand2 in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Among them, the expression of nkx2.5 was
significantly reduced. Luciferase reporter assay using the Nkx2.5 promoter showed
that knockdown of HIF-1alpha decreased its promoter activity. The cardiac
abnormality in the HIF-1alpha-depleted embryo was restored with co-injection of
nkx2.5 mRNA. Collectively, these findings reveal that HIF-1alpha-regulated nkx2.5
expression is required for heart development in Xenopus.

PMID: 18303027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):868-78. doi: 10.1172/JCI33160.

The dietary compound curcumin inhibits p300 histone acetyltransferase activity
and prevents heart failure in rats.

Morimoto T(1), Sunagawa Y, Kawamura T, Takaya T, Wada H, Nagasawa A, Komeda M,
Fujita M, Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):850-2.

Hemodynamic overload in the heart can trigger maladaptive hypertrophy of
cardiomyocytes. A key signaling event in this process is nuclear acetylation by
histone deacetylases and p300, an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT). It
has been previously shown that curcumin, a polyphenol responsible for the yellow 
color of the spice turmeric, possesses HAT inhibitory activity with specificity
for the p300/CREB-binding protein. We found that curcumin inhibited the
hypertrophy-induced acetylation and DNA-binding abilities of GATA4, a
hypertrophy-responsive transcription factor, in rat cardiomyocytes. Curcumin also
disrupted the p300/GATA4 complex and repressed agonist- and p300-induced
hypertrophic responses in these cells. Both the acetylated form of GATA4 and the 
relative levels of the p300/GATA4 complex markedly increased in rat hypertensive 
hearts in vivo. The effects of curcumin were examined in vivo in 2 different
heart failure models: hypertensive heart disease in salt-sensitive Dahl rats and 
surgically induced myocardial infarction in rats. In both models, curcumin
prevented deterioration of systolic function and heart failure-induced increases 
in both myocardial wall thickness and diameter. From these results, we conclude
that inhibition of p300 HAT activity by the nontoxic dietary compound curcumin
may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for heart failure in humans.

PMCID: PMC2248328
PMID: 18292809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):879-93. doi: 10.1172/JCI32865.

Curcumin prevents and reverses murine cardiac hypertrophy.

Li HL(1), Liu C, de Couto G, Ouzounian M, Sun M, Wang AB, Huang Y, He CW, Shi Y, 
Chen X, Nghiem MP, Liu Y, Chen M, Dawood F, Fukuoka M, Maekawa Y, Zhang L, Leask 
A, Ghosh AK, Kirshenbaum LA, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Heart and Stroke/Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Retraction in
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):2113.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):850-2.

Chromatin remodeling, particularly histone acetylation, plays a critical role in 
the progression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. We
hypothesized that curcumin, a natural polyphenolic compound abundant in the spice
turmeric and a known suppressor of histone acetylation, would suppress cardiac
hypertrophy through the disruption of p300 histone acetyltransferase-dependent
(p300-HAT-dependent) transcriptional activation. We tested this hypothesis using 
primary cultured rat cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts as well as two
well-established mouse models of cardiac hypertrophy. Curcumin blocked
phenylephrin-induced (PE-induced) cardiac hypertrophy in vitro in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, curcumin both prevented and reversed mouse
cardiac hypertrophy induced by aortic banding (AB) and PE infusion, as assessed
by heart weight/BW and lung weight/BW ratios, echocardiographic parameters, and
gene expression of hypertrophic markers. Further investigation demonstrated that 
curcumin abrogated histone acetylation, GATA4 acetylation, and DNA-binding
activity through blocking p300-HAT activity. Curcumin also blocked AB-induced
inflammation and fibrosis through disrupting p300-HAT-dependent signaling
pathways. Our results indicate that curcumin has the potential to protect against
cardiac hypertrophy, inflammation, and fibrosis through suppression of p300-HAT
activity and downstream GATA4, NF-kappaB, and TGF-beta-Smad signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2248327
PMID: 18292803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1117-27. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-1102. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Efficient differentiation of functional hepatocytes from human embryonic stem
cells.

Agarwal S(1), Holton KL, Lanza R.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Cell Technology, 381 Plantation Street, Worcester, Massachusetts
01605, USA.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to specific functional cell
types can be achieved using methods that mimic in vivo embryonic developmental
programs. Current protocols for generating hepatocytes from hESCs are hampered by
inefficient differentiation procedures that lead to low yields and large cellular
heterogeneity. We report here a robust and highly efficient process for the
generation of high-purity (70%) hepatocyte cultures from hESCs that parallels
sequential hepatic development in vivo. Highly enriched populations of definitive
endoderm were generated from hESCs and then induced to differentiate along the
hepatic lineage by the sequential addition of inducing factors implicated in
physiological hepatogenesis. The differentiation process was largely uniform,
with cell cultures progressively expressing increasing numbers of hepatic lineage
markers, including GATA4, HNF4alpha, alpha-fetoprotein, CD26, albumin,
alpha-1-antitrypsin, Cyp7A1, and Cyp3A4. The hepatocytes exhibited functional
hepatic characteristics, such as glycogen storage, indocyanine green uptake and
release, and albumin secretion. In a mouse model of acute liver injury, the
hESC-derived definitive endoderm differentiated into hepatocytes and repopulated 
the damaged liver. The methodology described here represents a significant step
toward the efficient generation of hepatocytes for use in regenerative medicine
and drug discovery.

PMID: 18292207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Leukemia. 2008 May;22(5):1035-43. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.18. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

DNA methylation profiles in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and their relationship 
to gene expression status.

Pike BL(1), Greiner TC, Wang X, Weisenburger DD, Hsu YH, Renaud G, Wolfsberg TG, 
Kim M, Weisenberger DJ, Siegmund KD, Ye W, Groshen S, Mehrian-Shai R, Delabie J, 
Chan WC, Laird PW, Hacia JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

In an initial epigenetic characterization of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), we evaluated the DNA methylation levels of over 500 CpG islands. Twelve 
CpG islands (AR, CDKN1C, DLC1, DRD2, GATA4, GDNF, GRIN2B, MTHFR, MYOD1, NEUROD1, 
ONECUT2 and TFAP2A) showed significant methylation in over 85% of tumors.
Interestingly, the methylation levels of a CpG island proximal to FLJ21062
differed between the activated B-cell-like (ABC-DLBCL) and germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB-DLBCL) subtypes. In addition, we compared the methylation and
expression status of 67 genes proximal (within 500 bp) to the methylation assays.
We frequently observed that hypermethylated CpG islands are proximal to genes
that are expressed at low or undetectable levels in tumors. However, many of
these same genes were also poorly expressed in DLBCL tumors where their cognate
CpG islands were hypomethylated. Nevertheless, the proportional reductions in
BNIP3, MGMT, RBP1, GATA4, IGSF4, CRABP1 and FLJ21062 expression with increasing
methylation suggest that epigenetic processes strongly influence these genes.
Lastly, the moderate expression of several genes proximal to hypermethylated CpG 
tracts suggests that DNA methylation assays are not always accurate predictors of
gene silencing. Overall, further investigation of the highlighted CpG islands as 
potential clinical biomarkers is warranted.

PMCID: PMC2654231
PMID: 18288132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Feb;43(2):362-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.10.047.

Downregulation of GATA4 and GATA6 in the heart of rats with nitrofen-induced
diaphragmatic hernia.

Takayasu H(1), Sato H, Sugimoto K, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, University 
College Dublin, 12 Dublin, Ireland.

PURPOSE: The high incidence of cardiac malformations in humans and animal models 
with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is well known. The precise molecular
mechanisms underlying cardiac maldevelopment in CDH are still unclear. It has
been reported that GATA4 and GATA6, members of the GATA transcription factor
family, act cooperatively to regulate cardiovascular development, and the levels 
of cardiac GATA4 and GATA6 are important regulators of cardiomyocyte
proliferation, cardiac morphogenesis, and embryo survival. In addition, the
GATA4/GATA6 double heterozygous mutant embryo model displayed a spectrum of
cardiovascular malformations similar to those seen in human CDH and
nitrofen-induced animal models, including ventricular and aortopulmonary septal
defects and thin ventricular myocardium. To test the hypothesis that expression
of GATA4 and GATA6 is reduced in early stages of gestation in a CDH hypoplastic
heart, we investigated the expression of GATA4 and GATA6 in the hearts of
nitrofen-treated rats in early gestation. Wnt2, bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), and myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) were also investigated as GATA4/6 
target genes involved in cardiogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fetal rat hearts of normal (n = 7) and nitrofen-treated (n
= 7) dams were harvested on embryonic day 13. The expression of GATA4, GATA6,
Wnt2, BMP4, and MEF2C was analyzed in each heart by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase reaction.
RESULTS: The gene expression of GATA4, GATA6, Wnt2, BMP4, and MEF2C on embryonic 
day 13 were significantly reduced (P < .05) in the hearts of nitrofen-treated
animals compared with normal hearts of equivalent age.
CONCLUSION: Decreased expression of GATA4 and GATA6 and their target genes in the
developing fetal heart may perturb the delicate regulation of cardiovascular
development, resulting in cardiovascular malformations in the nitrofen rat model.

PMID: 18280291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2090-7. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1265. Epub 2008 Feb
14.

Positive regulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene expression
through the interaction between Dlx and GATA-4 for testicular steroidogenesis.

Nishida H(1), Miyagawa S, Vieux-Rochas M, Morini M, Ogino Y, Suzuki K, Nakagata
N, Choi HS, Levi G, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Resources and Development, Graduate School of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences and the Global COE Research Program, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is syndromic ectrodactyly often associated
with mental retardation and/or craniofacial defects. Several clinical reports
previously described urogenital dysplasia such as micropenis, hypospadias, and
small testis in SHFM patients. Genetic lesions in the Dlx5 and Dlx6 (Dlx5/6)
locus are associated with the human genetic disorder SHFM type 1. Although Dlx5/6
are expressed in the testis, their possible function of Dlx5/6 during testis
differentiation has not been described. In this study, we show that Dlx5/6 are
expressed in the fetal Leydig cells during testis development. We examined the
effect of Dlx5 expression on the promoter activation of the steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein (StAR) gene, which is essential for gonadal and adrenal
steroidogenesis, in a Leydig cell line. Dlx5 efficiently activates the StAR
promoter when GATA-4, another transcription factor essential for testicular
steroidogenesis, was coexpressed. The transcriptional activation required the
GATA-4-recognition element in the StAR promoter region and Dlx5 can physically
interact with GATA-4. Furthermore, we herein show that the double inactivation of
Dlx5 and Dlx6 in the mouse leads to decreased testosterone level and abnormal
masculinization phenotype. These results suggest that Dlx5 and Dlx6 participate
in the control of steroidogenesis during testis development. The findings of this
study may open the way to analyze human congenital birth defects.

PMID: 18276760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2008 Apr;294(4):L665-75. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00027.2008. Epub 2008 Feb 8.

Gene expression in the developing diaphragm: significance for congenital
diaphragmatic hernia.

Clugston RD(1), Zhang W, Greer JJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alberta, Department of Physiology, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a frequently occurring birth defect and 
a source of potentially fatal neonatal respiratory distress. Recently, through
the application of detailed karyotyping methods, several CDH-critical regions
within the human genome have been identified. These regions typically contain
several genes. Here we focused on genes from 15q26, the best-characterized
CDH-critical region, as well as FOG2 and GATA4, genes singled out from
CDH-critical regions at 8q22-8q23 and 8p23.1, respectively. We tested the
hypothesis that these putative CDH-related genes are expressed within the
developing diaphragm at the time of the hypothesized initial defect. Our results 
show that 15q26 contains a cluster of genes that are expressed in the developing 
rodent diaphragm, consistent with an association between deletions in this region
and CDH. We then examined the protein expression pattern of positively identified
genes within the developing diaphragm. Two major themes emerged. First, those
factors strongly associated with CDH are expressed only in the nonmuscular,
mesenchymal component of the diaphragm, supporting the hypothesis that CDH has
its origins in a mesenchymal defect. Second, these factors are all coexpressed in
the same cells. This suggests that cases of CDH with unique genetic etiology may 
lead to a common defect in these cells and supports the hypothesis that these
factors may be members of a common pathway. This study is the first to provide a 
detailed examination of how genes associated with CDH are expressed in the
developing diaphragm and provides an important foundation for understanding how
the deletion of specific genes may contribute to abnormal diaphragm formation.

PMID: 18263670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neuroendocrinology. 2008;88(1):1-16. doi: 10.1159/000115952. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Specific GATA-binding elements in the GnRH promoter are required for gene
expression pulse activity: role of GATA-4 and GATA-5 in this intermittent
process.

Leclerc GM(1), Bose SK, Boockfor FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Dynamics, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Recent evidence reveals that several GATA factors act as versatile
transcriptional modulators in neuroendocrine gene expression. The rat GnRH
promoter is expressed in an episodic fashion that requires a portion of the
promoter termed the neuron-specific enhancer (NSE) for activity. In this study,
we examined whether certain GATA regulatory elements in the NSE are necessary for
this intermittent activity. When injected into individual living GT1-7 cells,
luciferase reporter constructs containing mutations of either GATA-A- or
GATA-B-binding sites resulted in a marked reduction in gene expression pulse
frequency, while mutations of both sites virtually abolished pulses. In
subsequent studies, RT-PCR and western blot analysis revealed for the first time 
that GATA-5 and GATA-6 were expressed in GT1-7 cells, but electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrated further that GATA-5 bound to one of these GATA
sites: GATA-A. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that all three
factors, GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6, were associated with the GnRH promoter in
vivo. Interestingly though, immunoneutralization of GATA-5 or GATA-4 (reported to
bind GATA-B) abolished gene expression pulses, but injection of GATA-6 antibody
did not, indicating that of these factors just GATA-5 and GATA-4 are critical for
intermittent activity. Finally, gel shift competition experiments revealed an
interaction between proteins binding at the GATA-A site and those associating
with an adjacent OCT1 site, previously shown to be necessary for pulse formation.
These findings indicate that episodic GnRH gene expression pulses are mediated by
GATA-5 and GATA-4, likely acting through the GATA-binding sites in the GnRH NSE
region. Moreover, our observations that factors associated with GATA sites may
also interact with OCT1 sites and that both are critical for pulse activity raise
the intriguing possibility that GnRH pulse elaboration is a highly complex
process that may require the coordinated interaction of several NSE-binding
elements of the GnRH promoter.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18259093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Circ Res. 2008 Mar 28;102(6):677-85. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.161737. Epub
2008 Feb 7.

c-kit is required for cardiomyocyte terminal differentiation.

Li M(1), Naqvi N, Yahiro E, Liu K, Powell PC, Bradley WE, Martin DI, Graham RM,
Dell'Italia LJ, Husain A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
AL 35294, USA.

c-kit, the transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor for stem cell factor, is
required for melanocyte and mast cell development, hematopoiesis, and
differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells. We show here that in the heart,
c-kit is expressed not only by cardiac stem cells but also by cardiomyocytes,
commencing immediately after birth and terminating a few days later, coincident
with the onset of cardiomyocyte terminal differentiation. To examine the function
of c-kit in cardiomyocyte terminal differentiation, we used compound heterozygous
mice carrying the W (null) and W(v) (dominant negative) mutations of c-kit. In
vivo, adult W/W(v) cardiomyocytes are phenotypically indistinguishable from their
wild-type counterparts. After acute pressure overload adult W/W(v) cardiomyocytes
reenter the cell cycle and proliferate, leading to left ventricular growth;
furthermore in transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted overexpression of
the dominant negative W(v) mutant, pressure overload causes cardiomyocytes to
reenter the cell cycle. In contrast, in wild-type mice left ventricular growth
after pressure overload results mainly from cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.
Importantly, W/W(v) mice with pressure overload-induced cardiomyocyte hyperplasia
had improved left ventricular function and survival. In W/W(v) mice, c-kit
dysfunction also resulted in an approximately 14-fold decrease (P<0.01) in the
number of c-kit(+)/GATA4(+) cardiac progenitors. These findings identify novel
functions for c-kit: promotion of cardiac stem cell differentiation and
regulation of cardiomyocyte terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2763373
PMID: 18258857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11;283(15):9828-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707391200. Epub 2008 
Feb 5.

Identification of p300-targeted acetylated residues in GATA4 during hypertrophic 
responses in cardiac myocytes.

Takaya T(1), Kawamura T, Morimoto T, Ono K, Kita T, Shimatsu A, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research and Clinical Research Institute, Kyoto
Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa,
Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein, GATA4, is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription 
factors and increases its DNA binding and transcriptional activities in response 
to hypertrophic stimuli in cardiac myocytes. Activation of GATA4 during this
process is mediated, in part, through acetylation by intrinsic histone
acetyltransferases such as a transcriptional coactivator p300. However,
p300-targeted acetylated sites of GATA4 during myocardial cell hypertrophy have
not been identified. By mutational analysis, we showed that 4 lysine residues
located between amino acids 311 and 322 are required for synergistic activation
of atrial natriuretic factor and endothelin-1 promoters by GATA4 and p300. A
tetra-mutant GATA4, in which these 4 lysine residues were simultaneously mutated,
retained the ability to localize in nuclei and to interact with cofactors
including FOG-2, GATA6, and p300 but lacked p300-induced acetylation, DNA
binding, and transcriptional activities. Furthermore, coexpression of the
tetra-mutant GATA4 with wild-type GATA4 impaired the p300-induced acetylation,
DNA binding, and transcriptional activities of the wild type. When we expressed
the tetra-mutant GATA4 in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes using a lentivirus
vector, this mutant suppressed phenylephrine-induced increases in cell size,
protein synthesis, and expression of hypertrophy-responsive genes. However, its
expression did not affect the basal state. Thus, we have identified the most
critical lysine residues acting as p300-mediated acetylation targets in GATA4
during hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes. The results also demonstrate
that GATA4 with simultaneous mutation of these sites specifically suppresses
hypertrophic responses as a dominant-negative form, providing further evidence
for the acetylation of GATA4 as one of critical nuclear events in myocardial cell
hypertrophy.

PMID: 18252717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Yi Chuan. 2008 Feb;30(2):195-202.

[Effect of Sry silencing by siRNA on the expression of sex determining genes in
mouse embryos].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu N(1), Lin XK, Liao B, DU WH, Han FT, Zhao JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100094, China. wuning2283720@126.com

In order to investigate Sry regulation network in the development of male embryo,
we inhibited the Sry gene expression by RNAi and then examined expression of
other sex-related genes. Six genes (Sox9, Wt1, Sf1, Dax1, Gata4 and Amh), which
are suggested to be closely related to Sry regulation were studied. Two siRNA
expression vectors pSilencer4.1/Sry217 and pSilencer4.1/Sry565 were constructed
and injected into gestated mouse through tail vein at 9.5 day of conception
(dpc). The inhibition efficiency of Sry and the expression of other six genes
were examined in male embryos at 11.5 dpc by RT-PCR and Western-blot. Expressions
of the other six genes were analyzed by fluorescence quantity PCR. The results
indicated both the pSilencer4.1/Sry217 and pSilencer4.1/Sry565 could inhibit
significantly increased after Sry silencing. In contrast, no significant changes 
were observed in the expression of Sf1, Amh, Gata4, Dax1 and Sox9 when silencing 
Sry by siRNA. Our results suggested that the Wt1 transcription was regulated by
Sry, whereas the Sox9 expression is not directly regulated by Sry in the
development of genital ridge.

PMID: 18244926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2008 Mar;16(2):153-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31815b629c.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression in human ovarian surface epithelial carcinoma.

McEachin MD(1), Xu XX, Santoianni RA, Lawson D, Cotsonis G, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 are zinc finger transcription factors named for their
recognition motif and involved in ovarian development and function. GATA factors 
are strongly expressed and primarily localized within the nuclei of ovarian
surface epithelial cells. GATA factors have been previously shown to be expressed
in sex-cord stromal ovarian tumors and may contribute to the tumor phenotype.
Differential expression of GATA-4 within serous and mucinous ovarian carcinomas
has been reported. Using immunohistochemistry, we studied GATA-4 and GATA-6
expression in 50 ovarian surface epithelial carcinomas and examined the
relationship to clinicopathologic parameters and outcome. We found that the
majority of the carcinomas retained GATA-4 expression, whereas approximately
two-thirds of the carcinomas had mislocalization or loss of GATA-6 expression. No
statistically significant correlations were found between histologic type,
histologic grade, or patient outcome and GATA-4. Cytoplasmic GATA-6 expression
tended to correlate with overall survival (P=0.0756). These findings suggest that
although GATA factors play a role in ovarian surface epithelial carcinoma
oncogenesis, they do not seem to affect clinicopathologic parameters.

PMID: 18227727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2008 Jun;122(3):238-55. doi: 10.1007/s12011-007-8079-2. Epub
2008 Jan 26.

Prenatal zinc deficiency: influence on heart morphology and distribution of key
heart proteins in a rat model.

Lopez V(1), Keen CL, Lanoue L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, One Shields Ave.,
Meyer Hall, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The etiology of congenital heart disease is multifactorial, with genetics and
nutritional deficiencies recognized as causative agents. Maternal zinc (Zn)
deficiency is associated with an increased risk for fetal heart malformations;
however, the contributing mechanisms have yet to be identified. In this study, we
fed pregnant rats a Zn-adequate diet (ZnA), a Zn-deficient (ZnD), or a restricted
amount of Zn adequate diet (RF) beginning on gestation day (GD) 4.5, to examine
whether increased cell death and changes in cardiac neural crest cells (NCC) play
a role in Zn deficiency-induced heart defects. Fetuses were collected on GD 13.5,
15.5, and 18.5 and processed for GATA-4, FOG-2, connexin-43 (Cx43), HNK-1, smooth
muscle alpha-actin (SMA) and cleaved caspase-3 protein expression. Fetuses from
ZnA-fed dams showed normal heart development, whereas fetuses from dams fed with 
the ZnD diet exhibited a variety of heart anomalies, particularly in the region
of the outflow tract. HNK-1 expression was lower than normal in the hearts of
GD13.5 and 15.5 ZnD fetuses, particularly in the right atrium and in the distal
tip of the interventricular septum. Conversely, Cx43 immunoreactivity was
increased throughout the heart in fetuses from ZnD dams compared to fetuses from 
control dams. The distribution and intensity of expression of SMA, GATA-4, FOG-2,
and markers of apoptosis were similar among the three groups. We propose that Zn 
deficiency induced alterations in the distribution of Cx43 and HNK-1 in fetal
hearts contribute to the occurrence of the developmental heart anomalies.

PMID: 18224284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Apr;294(4):H1541-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.01285.2007. Epub 2008 Jan 25.

Functional properties of cells obtained from human cord blood CD34+ stem cells
and mouse cardiac myocytes in coculture.

Orlandi A(1), Pagani F, Avitabile D, Bonanno G, Scambia G, Vigna E, Grassi F,
Eusebi F, Fucile S, Pesce M, Capogrossi MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Terapia Genica, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino IRCCS, Via Parea 4, 20138 Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Apr;294(4):H1503-4.

Prior in vitro studies suggested that different types of hematopoietic stem cells
may differentiate into cardiomyocytes. The present work examined whether human
CD34(+) cells from the human umbilical cord blood (hUCB), cocultured with
neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes, acquire the functional properties of myocardial
cells and express human cardiac genes. hUCB CD34(+) cells were cocultured onto
cardiomyocytes following an infection with a lentivirus-encoding enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP). After 7 days, mononucleated EGFP(+) cells were tested
for their electrophysiological features by patch clamp and for cytosolic [Ca(2+)]
([Ca(2+)](i)) homeostasis by [Ca(2+)](i) imaging of X-rhod1-loaded cells. Human
Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 expression was examined in cocultured cell populations by
real-time RT-PCR. EGFP(+) cells were connected to surrounding cells by gap
junctions, acquired electrophysiological properties similar to those of
cardiomyocytes, and showed action potential-associated [Ca(2+)](i) transients.
These cells also exhibited spontaneous sarcoplasmic reticulum [Ca(2+)](i)
oscillations and the associated membrane potential depolarization. However,
RT-PCR of both cell populations showed no upregulation of human-specific cardiac 
genes. In conclusion, under our experimental conditions, hUCB CD34(+) cells
cocultured with murine cardiomyocytes formed cells that exhibited
excitation-contraction coupling features similar to those of cardiomyocytes.
However, the expression of human-specific cardiac genes was undetectable by
RT-PCR.

PMID: 18223188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Mar;44(3):607-17. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2007.11.011. Epub
2007 Dec 7.

Mobilized bone marrow progenitor cells serve as donors of cytoprotective genes
for cardiac repair.

Dai Y(1), Ashraf M, Zuo S, Uemura R, Dai YS, Wang Y, Haider HKh, Li T, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

We proposed here that mobilized progenitor cells (MPCs) from the bone marrow are 
special cell types which carry cytoprotective proteins for cardiac repair
following ischemia. Myocardial ischemia was induced by ligation of the left
anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) in mice. Progenitor cells in peripheral
blood were analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). The expression
of cytoprotective genes was assayed by ELISA, RT-PCR, and/or real-time PCR. G-CSF
was markedly up-regulated in the ischemic myocardium. A good correlation was
observed between serum G-CSF and progenitor cells in circulation following LAD
ligation. MPCs overexpressed cardiac transcription factor, GATA-4, and
anti-apoptotic factor, Bcl-2, besides expression of the surface markers of bone
marrow stem cells (BMSCs). Transplantation of cultured MPCs into the ischemic
border area significantly improved cardiac function by reducing infarction size. 
More importantly, MPCs significantly protected cardiomyocytes against apoptosis
when co-cultured with cardiomyocytes. The cardiac protection by MPCs was blocked 
by Bcl-2 neutralizing antibody and GATA-4 siRNA. In contrast, transfection of
BMSCs with GATA-4 provided increased protection of myocytes against apoptosis. It
is concluded that MPCs are highly cytoprotective and carry protective genes
responsible for cardiac repair.

PMCID: PMC2685071
PMID: 18221754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2138-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01170-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

GATA factors and androgen receptor collaborate to transcriptionally activate the 
Rhox5 homeobox gene in Sertoli cells.

Bhardwaj A(1), Rao MK, Kaur R, Buttigieg MR, Wilkinson MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Unit 1000, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

How Sertoli-specific expression is initiated is poorly understood. Here, we
address this issue using the proximal promoter (Pp) from the Rhox5 homeobox gene.
Its Sertoli cell-specific expression is achieved, in part, through a negative
regulatory element that inhibits Pp transcription in non-Sertoli cell lines.
Complementing this negative regulation is positive regulation conferred by four
androgen-response elements (AREs) that interact with the androgen receptor (AR), 
a nuclear hormone receptor expressed at high levels in Sertoli cells. A third
control mechanism is provided by a consensus GATA-binding site that is crucial
for Pp transcription both in vitro and in vivo. Several lines of evidence
suggested that GATA factors and AR act cooperatively to activate Pp
transcription: (i) the GATA-binding site crucial for Pp transcription is in close
proximity to two of the AREs, (ii) GATA and AR form a complex with the Pp in
vitro, (iii) overexpression of GATA factors rescued expression from mutant Pp
constructs harboring defective AREs, and (iv) incubation of a Sertoli cell line
with testosterone triggered corecruitment of AR and GATA4 to the Pp.
Collectively, our results suggest that the Rhox5 gene achieves Sertoli
cell-specific transcription using a combinatorial strategy involving negative and
cooperative positive regulation.

PMCID: PMC2268436
PMID: 18212046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Br J Pharmacol. 2008 Mar;153 Suppl 1:S137-53. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707659. Epub
2008 Jan 21.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) in the heart: a point of integration in
hypertrophic signalling and a therapeutic target? A critical analysis.

Sugden PH(1), Fuller SJ, Weiss SC, Clerk A.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute (NHLI) Division, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, UK. p.sugden@imperial.ac.uk

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3, of which there are two isoforms, GSK3alpha and 
GSK3beta) was originally characterized in the context of regulation of glycogen
metabolism, though it is now known to regulate many other cellular processes.
Phosphorylation of GSK3alpha(Ser21) and GSK3beta(Ser9) inhibits their activity.
In the heart, emphasis has been placed particularly on GSK3beta, rather than
GSK3alpha. Importantly, catalytically-active GSK3 generally restrains gene
expression and, in the heart, catalytically-active GSK3 has been implicated in
anti-hypertrophic signalling. Inhibition of GSK3 results in changes in the
activities of transcription and translation factors in the heart and promotes
hypertrophic responses, and it is generally assumed that signal transduction from
hypertrophic stimuli to GSK3 passes primarily through protein kinase B/Akt
(PKB/Akt). However, recent data suggest that the situation is far more complex.
We review evidence pertaining to the role of GSK3 in the myocardium and discuss
effects of genetic manipulation of GSK3 activity in vivo. We also discuss the
signalling pathways potentially regulating GSK3 activity and propose that,
depending on the stimulus, phosphorylation of GSK3 is independent of PKB/Akt.
Potential GSK3 substrates studied in relation to myocardial hypertrophy include
nuclear factors of activated T cells, beta-catenin, GATA4, myocardin, CREB, and
eukaryotic initiation factor 2Bvarepsilon. These and other transcription factor
substrates putatively important in the heart are considered. We discuss whether
cardiac pathologies could be treated by therapeutic intervention at the GSK3
level but conclude that any intervention would be premature without greater
understanding of the precise role of GSK3 in cardiac processes.

PMCID: PMC2268064
PMID: 18204489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Apr;332(1):49-56. doi: 10.1007/s00441-007-0562-8. Epub 2008
Jan 15.

Parallel up-regulation of FGF-2 and hyaluronan during development of cardiac
hypertrophy in rat.

Hellman U(1), Hellström M, Mörner S, Engström-Laurent A, Aberg AM, Oliviero P,
Samuel JL, Waldenström A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/Medicine, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden. urban.hellman@medbio.umu.se

The importance of glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA) and its receptor CD44 in cell
proliferation is becoming increasingly evident. Expression of the genes coding
for hyaluronan synthase 1 (HAS1), HAS2, HAS3, CD44, fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF-2), and FGF receptor-1 (FGFR-1) and the histological evidence for increases 
of HA and CD44 were investigated in an experimental rat model of cardiac
hypertrophy. The abdominal aorta was ligated to induce cardiac hypertrophy, and
mRNAs prepared from heart tissue were analyzed after 1, 6, and 42 days. The total
concentration of HA was quantified, and HA and CD44 were studied histochemically.
The expression of HAS1, HAS2, CD44, and FGF-2 was considerably up-regulated at
days 1 and 6 and returned to basal levels after 42 days. FGFR-1 was up-regulated 
at day 1 but at basal levels once more at days 6 and 42. The concentration of HA 
significantly increased in aorta-ligated rats. Histochemical analysis showed
increased expression of CD44 in hypertrophied myocardium mainly in and around the
coronary arteries. These results agree well with other studies of tissue growth
(malignancies and wound healing). The increase of HA, its synthases, and receptor
in parallel with FGF-2 and its receptor illustrates their complicated interplay
in the development of cardiac hypertrophy. The up-regulation of both HAS1 and
HAS2 indicates the importance of HA production in the hypertrophic process and
the possibility that HA is needed for two different purposes for the heart to be 
able to adapt to the increased afterload caused by aortic ligature.

PMID: 18196276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan 11;8:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-8-1.

Multilayered epithelium in a rat model and human Barrett's esophagus: similar
expression patterns of transcription factors and differentiation markers.

Chen X(1), Qin R, Liu B, Ma Y, Su Y, Yang CS, Glickman JN, Odze RD, Shaheen NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L, Chambers Biomedical/Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC
27707, USA. lchen@nccu.edu

BACKGROUND: In rats, esophagogastroduodenal anastomosis (EGDA) without
concomitant chemical carcinogen treatment leads to gastroesophageal reflux
disease, multilayered epithelium (MLE, a presumed precursor in intestinal
metaplasia), columnar-lined esophagus, dysplasia, and esophageal adenocarcinoma. 
Previously we have shown that columnar-lined esophagus in EGDA rats resembled
human Barrett's esophagus (BE) in its morphology, mucin features and expression
of differentiation markers (Lab. Invest. 2004;84:753-765). The purpose of this
study was to compare the phenotype of rat MLE with human MLE, in order to gain
insight into the nature of MLE and its potential role in the development of BE.
METHODS: Serial sectioning was performed on tissue samples from 32 EGDA rats and 
13 patients with established BE. Tissue sections were immunohistochemically
stained for a variety of transcription factors and differentiation markers of
esophageal squamous epithelium and intestinal columnar epithelium.
RESULTS: We detected MLE in 56.3% (18/32) of EGDA rats, and in all human samples.
As expected, both rat and human squamous epithelium, but not intestinal
metaplasia, expressed squamous transcription factors and differentiation markers 
(p63, Sox2, CK14 and CK4) in all cases. Both rat and human intestinal metaplasia,
but not squamous epithelium, expressed intestinal transcription factors and
differentiation markers (Cdx2, GATA4, HNF1alpha, villin and Muc2) in all cases.
Rat MLE shared expression patterns of Sox2, CK4, Cdx2, GATA4, villin and Muc2
with human MLE. However, p63 and CK14 were expressed in a higher proportion of
rat MLE compared to humans.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that rat MLE shares similar properties to human
MLE in its expression pattern of these markers, not withstanding small
differences, and support the concept that MLE may be a transitional stage in the 
metaplastic conversion of squamous to columnar epithelium in BE.

PMCID: PMC2267197
PMID: 18190713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Evol Dev. 2008 Jan-Feb;10(1):89-105. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00216.x.

Developmental expression of foxA and gata genes during gut formation in the
polychaete annelid, Capitella sp. I.

Boyle MJ(1), Seaver EC.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

Most bilaterian animals have evolved a through gut that is regionally specialized
along the anterior-posterior axis. In the polychaete annelid, Capitella sp. I,
the alimentary canal is subdivided into a buccal cavity, pharynx, esophagus,
midgut, and hindgut. Members of the Fox and GATA families of transcription
factors have conserved functions in patterning ectodermal and endodermal gut
components. We have isolated and characterized expression of one FoxA gene
(CapI-foxA) and four GATA genes (CapI-gataB1, CapI-gataB2, CapI-gataB3, and
CapI-gataA1) from Capitella sp. I. Both gene families are expressed in the
developing gut of this polychaete. CapI-foxA, an ortholog of the FoxA subgroup,
is expressed in vegetal hemisphere micromeres of cleavage-stage embryos, in
multiple blastomeres within and surrounding the blastopore during gastrulation,
and throughout morphogenesis of the pharynx, esophagus, and hindgut. The
CapI-gataB genes group within the vertebrate GATA4/5/6 subfamily, appear to be
products of lineage-specific gene duplication, and are expressed in specific
domains of endomesoderm. CapI-gataB1 is expressed in endoderm precursors and
throughout developing midgut endoderm, and is particularly prominent at anterior 
and posterior midgut boundaries. CapI-gataB2 is co-expressed with CapI-gataB1 in 
midgut endoderm, and is also expressed in visceral mesoderm. CapI-gataB3 is
limited to and coexpressed with CapI-gataB2 in visceral mesoderm. CapI-gataA1
groups within the vertebrate GATA1/2/3 subfamily and is expressed primarily in
ectodermal tissues of the brain, ventral nerve cord, lateral trunk, and both
pharyngeal and esophageal regions of the foregut. Collectively, the CapI-foxA and
CapI-gata genes show patterns of expression that span almost the entire length of
the developing alimentary canal, consistent with a role in gut development.

PMID: 18184360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Immunol. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):1050-9.

Distinct structural requirements of GATA-3 for the regulation of thymocyte and
Th2 cell differentiation.

Pai SY(1), Kang BY, Sabadini AM, Parisini E, Truitt ML, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA-3, the only T cell-specific member of the GATA family of transcription
factors, is essential for the intrathymic development of CD4+ T cells and for the
differentiation of Th2 cells. However, whether distinct biochemical features,
unique to GATA-3 compared with other GATA family members, are required to drive T
cell transcriptional programs or whether the T cell-specific functions of GATA-3 
can simply be ascribed to its expression pattern is unclear. Nor do we understand
the protein structural requirements for each individual function of GATA-3. In
this study, we report that a heterologous GATA factor, GATA-4, was competent in
supporting the development of CD4+ T cells but could not fully compensate for
GATA-3 in regulating the expression of Th cytokines. Specifically, GATA-3 was
more potent than GATA-4 in driving the production of IL-13 due to a mechanism
independent of DNA binding or chromatin remodeling of the IL-13 locus. The
difference was mapped to a partially conserved region C-terminal to the second
zinc finger. Converting a single proline residue located in this region of GATA-4
to its counterpart, a methionine of GATA-3, was sufficient to enhance the
IL-13-promoting function of GATA-4 but had no effect on other cytokines. Taken
together, our data demonstrate that the unique function of GATA-3 is conferred by
both its cell type-specific expression and distinct protein structure.

PMID: 18178845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Differentiation. 2008 Sep;76(7):760-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-0436.2007.00258.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Overexpression of COUP-TF1 in murine embryonic stem cells reduces retinoic
acid-associated growth arrest and increases extraembryonic endoderm gene
expression.

Zhuang Y(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Room 
E-409, 1300 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Vitamin A (retinol [Rol]) and its metabolites are essential for embryonic
development. The Rol metabolite all-trans retinoic acid (RA) is a biologically
active form of Rol. The orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription-factors (COUP-TF) proteins have been implicated in the
regulation of several important biological processes, such as embryonic
development and neuronal cell differentiation. Because there is evidence that
COUP-TFs function in the retinoid signaling network during development and
differentiation, we generated murine embryonic stem (ES) cell lines which stably 
and constitutively overexpress COUP-TF1 (NR2F1) and we analyzed RA-induced
differentiation. COUP-TF1 overexpression resulted in reduced RA-associated growth
arrest. A 2.4+/-0.17-fold higher Nanog mRNA level was seen in COUP-TF1
overexpressing lines, as compared with wild-type (WT) ES cells, after a 72 hr RA 
treatment. We also showed that COUP-TF1 overexpression enhanced RA-induced
extraembryonic endoderm gene expression. Specifically, COUP-TF1 overexpression
increased mRNA levels of GATA6 by 3.3+/-0.3-fold, GATA4 by 3.6+/-0.1-fold,
laminin B1 (LAMB1) by 3.4+/-0.1-fold, LAMC1 by 3.4+/-0.2-fold, Dab2 by
2.4+0.1-fold, and SOX17 by 2.5-fold at 72 hr after RA treatment plus LIF, as
compared with the increases seen in WT ES cells. However, RA-induced neurogenesis
was unaffected by COUP-TF1 overexpression, as shown by the equivalent levels of
expression of NeuroD1, nestin, GAP43 and other neuronal markers. Our results
revealed for the first time that COUP-TF1 is an important signaling molecule
during vitamin A (Rol)-mediated very early stage of embryonic development.

PMID: 18177425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Regen Med. 2008 Jan;3(1):23-31.

Endotoxin-induced silencing of mesoderm induction and functional differentiation:
role of HMGB1 in pluripotency and infection.

Sivasubramaniyan K(1), Atluri RR, Sarda K, Arvind M, Balaji V, Deb KD.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal University, Embryonic Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Program,
Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, #10 Service Road, Domlur Layout,
Bangalore 560071, India.

OBJECTIVES: Mechanisms underpinning Gram-negative bacterial vaginosis-induced
birth anomalies are obscure. Ethical issues limit such studies on
peri-implantation-stage human embryos. Here we have used embryoid bodies (EBs) as
an in vitro model to examine the effect of Gram-negative bacterial
endotoxins/lipopolysaccharides (LPS) on the faithful induction of germ lineages
during embryogenesis. The role of LPS-inducible cytokine and pluripotency-related
DNA-binding protein HMGB1 was also studied in these EBs.
METHODS: EBs derived from the human embryonic stem cell line HUES9 were exposed
to 12.5 pg/ml of LPS for 48 h. The expression profile of the ectoderm, endoderm, 
mesoderm and trophectoderm lineage markers, such as beta III-tubulin, GATA4,
BMP2, Brachury and beta-hCG, were studied, by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence.
Inhibition of mesoderm induction was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis for hANP, cTnT,
ABCG2, GATA2, BMP4 and HAND1. Osteoblast differentiation was induced in the EBs, 
and confirmed by von Kosa and Alizarin red staining. A comet assay was also
carried out to assess the degree of apoptosis in these EBs.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We found that the LPS-treated EBs were selectively
silenced for mesoderm markers and failed to differentiate into functional
osteoblasts. HMGB1 expression was absent in the normal EBs and was found to be
localized in the cytoplasm of the LPS-treated EBs. Overall, our data indicate
that endotoxin-induced HMGB1 expression in the peri-implantation-stage embryos
can bring about severe birth defects of, for example, the bone and heart. This
study also indicates that HMGB1 could be involved in maintenance of pluripotency 
in the human embryonic stem cells by impeding their differentiation.

PMID: 18154460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Feb;294(2):H1048-57. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

Treatment with an adenoviral vector encoding hepatocyte growth factor mitigates
established cardiac dysfunction in doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.

Esaki M(1), Takemura G, Kosai K, Takahashi T, Miyata S, Li L, Goto K, Maruyama R,
Okada H, Kanamori H, Ogino A, Ushikoshi H, Minatoguchi S, Fujiwara T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) reportedly exerts beneficial effects on the heart 
following myocardial infarction and during nonischemic cardiomyopathy, but the
precise mechanisms underlying the latter have not been well elucidated. We
generated nonischemic cardiomyopathy in mice by injecting them with doxorubicin
(15 mg/kg ip). Two weeks later, when cardiac dysfunction was apparent, an
adenoviral vector encoding human HGF gene (Ad.CAG-HGF, 1x10(11) particles/mouse) 
was injected into the hindlimb muscles; LacZ gene served as the control. Left
ventricular dilatation and dysfunction normally seen 4 wk after doxorubicin
administration were significantly mitigated in HGF-treated mice, as were the
associated cardiomyocyte atrophy/degeneration and myocardial fibrosis. Myocardial
expression of GATA-4 and a sarcomeric protein, myosin heavy chain, was
downregulated by doxorubicin, but the expression of both was restored by HGF
treatment. The protective effect of HGF against doxorubicin-induced cardiomyocyte
atrophy was confirmed in an in vitro experiment, which also showed that neither
cardiomyocyte apoptosis nor proliferation plays significant roles in the present 
model. Upregulation of c-Met/HGF receptor was noted in HGF-treated hearts. Among 
the mediators downstream of c-Met, the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was reduced by doxorubicin, but the activity was
restored by HGF. Levels of transforming growth factor-beta1 and cyclooxygenase-2 
did not differ between the groups. Our findings suggest the HGF gene delivery
exerts therapeutic antiatrophic/degenerative and antifibrotic effects on
myocardium in cases of established cardiac dysfunction caused by doxorubicin.
These beneficial effects appear to be related to HGF-induced ERK activation and
upregulation of c-Met, GATA-4, and sarcomeric proteins.

PMID: 18083897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jan 15;146A(2):251-3.

Mutations in GATA4, NKX2.5, CRELD1, and BMP4 are infrequently found in patients
with congenital cardiac septal defects.

Posch MG(1), Perrot A, Schmitt K, Mittelhaus S, Esenwein EM, Stiller B, Geier C, 
Dietz R, Gessner R, Ozcelik C, Berger F.

Author information: 
(1)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Cardiology at Campus Buch and
Helios-Klinikum Berlin-Buch and Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine,
Berlin, Germany.

PMID: 18076106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Feb;44(2):352-60. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

The zinc finger and C-terminal domains of MTA proteins are required for
FOG-2-mediated transcriptional repression via the NuRD complex.

Roche AE(1), Bassett BJ, Samant SA, Hong W, Blobel GA, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)The Committee on Developmental Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

FOG-2 is a transcriptional co-regulator that is required for cardiac
morphogenesis as mice deficient in this factor die during mid-gestation of
cardiac malformations. FOG-2 interacts with GATA4 to attenuate GATA4-dependent
gene expression. The first 12 amino acids of FOG-2 (the FOG Repression Motif) are
necessary to mediate this repression. To determine the mechanism by which the FOG
Repression Motif functions, we identified 7 polypeptides from rat cardiac nuclear
extracts that co-purified with a GST-FOG-2 fusion protein. All proteins
identified are members of the NuRD nucleosome remodeling complex. Using in vitro 
binding and co-immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrate that
Metastasis-Associated proteins (MTA)-1, 2 and 3 and Retinoblastoma binding
proteins RbAp46 and RbAp48 interact with FOG-2, but not with a mutant form of
FOG-2 that is unable to repress transcription. Furthermore, we define a novel
domain located in the C-terminal portion of MTA-1 that mediates the FOG-2/MTA-1
interaction. We also demonstrate that knockdown of MTA protein expression
dramatically impairs the ability of FOG-2 to repress GATA4 activity. Finally, we 
show that the zinc finger domain of MTA-1 is required for FOG-2-mediated
transcriptional repression and that this domain interacts with RbAp46 and RbAp48 
subunits of the NuRD complex. Together, these results demonstrate the importance 
of FOG-2/MTA/RbAp interactions for FOG-2-mediated transcriptional repression and 
further define the molecular interactions between the FOG Repression Motif and
the NuRD complex.

PMCID: PMC2277079
PMID: 18067919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Med Genet. 2007 Dec;44(12):779-83.

GATA4 sequence variants in patients with congenital heart disease.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Maslen CL, Morris CD, Garg V, Goldmuntz E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 2008 May;45(5):320.

BACKGROUND: Recent reports have identified mutations in the transcription factor 
GATA4 in familial cases of cardiac septal defects. The prevalence of GATA4
mutations in the population of patients with septal defects is unknown. Given
that patients with septal and conotruncal defect can share a common genetic
basis, it is unclear whether patients with additional types of CHD might also
have GATA4 mutations.
AIMS: To explore these questions by investigating a large population of 628
patients with either septal or conotruncal defects for GATA4 sequence variants.
METHODS: The GATA4 coding region and exon-intron boundaries were investigated for
sequence variants using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography or
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis. Samples showing peak or band shifts
were reamplified from genomic DNA and sequenced.
RESULTS: Four missense sequence variants (Gly93Ala, Gln316Glu, Ala411Val,
Asp425Asn) were identified in five patients (two with atrial septal defect, two
with ventricular septal defect and one with tetralogy of Fallot), which were not 
seen in a control population. All four affected amino acid residues are conserved
across species, and two of the sequence variants lead to changes in polarity. Ten
synonymous sequence variants were also identified in 18 patients, which were not 
seen in the control population.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that non-synonymous GATA4 sequence variants are
found in a small percentage of patients with septal defects and are very
uncommonly found in patients with conotruncal defects.

PMCID: PMC2652815
PMID: 18055909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Clin Invest. 2007 Dec;117(12):3730-41.

The CO/HO system reverses inhibition of mitochondrial biogenesis and prevents
murine doxorubicin cardiomyopathy.

Suliman HB(1), Carraway MS, Ali AS, Reynolds CM, Welty-Wolf KE, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

The clinical utility of anthracycline anticancer agents, especially doxorubicin, 
is limited by a progressive toxic cardiomyopathy linked to mitochondrial damage
and cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Here we demonstrate that the post-doxorubicin mouse 
heart fails to upregulate the nuclear program for mitochondrial biogenesis and
its associated intrinsic antiapoptosis proteins, leading to severe mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) depletion, sarcomere destruction, apoptosis, necrosis, and excessive 
wall stress and fibrosis. Furthermore, we exploited recent evidence that
mitochondrial biogenesis is regulated by the CO/heme oxygenase (CO/HO) system to 
ameliorate doxorubicin cardiomyopathy in mice. We found that the myocardial
pathology was averted by periodic CO inhalation, which restored mitochondrial
biogenesis and circumvented intrinsic apoptosis through caspase-3 and
apoptosis-inducing factor. Moreover, CO simultaneously reversed
doxorubicin-induced loss of DNA binding by GATA-4 and restored critical
sarcomeric proteins. In isolated rat cardiac cells, HO-1 enzyme overexpression
prevented doxorubicin-induced mtDNA depletion and apoptosis via activation of
Akt1/PKB and guanylate cyclase, while HO-1 gene silencing exacerbated
doxorubicin-induced mtDNA depletion and apoptosis. Thus doxorubicin disrupts
cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis, which promotes intrinsic apoptosis, while CO/HO
promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and opposes apoptosis, forestalling fibrosis
and cardiomyopathy. These findings imply that the therapeutic index of
anthracycline cancer chemotherapeutics can be improved by the protection of
cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2082137
PMID: 18037988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007 Dec;84(6):2137; author reply 2137.

GATA4 as candidate gene for pericardial defects.

Saffirio C, Marino B, Digilio MC.

Comment on
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2007 Apr;83(4):1552-3.

PMID: 18036970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Jan-Feb;1781(1-2):26-35. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

Atorvastatin inhibits GSK-3beta phosphorylation by cardiac hypertrophic stimuli.

Planavila A(1), Rodríguez-Calvo R, Palomer X, Coll T, Sánchez RM, Merlos M,
Laguna JC, Vázquez-Carrera M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Unit, Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Chemistry,
Faculty of Pharmacy, IBUB (Institut de Biomedicina de la UB) and CIBER Diabetes y
Enfermedades Metabólicas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, University of Barcelona,
Spain.

In this study we examined the effect of the statin atorvastatin on the
Akt/GSK-3beta pathway. Our findings indicate that atorvastatin treatment for 15
days inhibited pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy and prevented
nuclear translocation of GATA4 and c-Jun and AP-1 DNA-binding activity. In
addition, atorvastatin treatment prevented the increase in the phosphorylation of
Akt and GSK-3beta caused by cardiac hypertrophy, and this effect correlated with 
an increase in protein levels of phosphatase and tensin homolog on chromosome 10 
(PTEN), which negatively regulates the phosphoinositide-3 kinase/Akt pathway. To 
test whether the inhibitory effect of atorvastatin on Akt and GSK-3beta
phosphorylation was direct we performed in vitro studies using embryonic rat
heart-derived H9c2 cells, human AC16 cardiomyoblasts and neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes. Preincubation of cells with atorvastatin prevented Akt/GSK-3beta 
phosphorylation by different hypertrophic stimuli without affecting PTEN protein 
levels. However, atorvastatin prevented endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation and PTEN oxidation, a process that correlates with its inactivation,
suggesting that atorvastatin prevents ROS-induced PTEN inactivation in acute
treatments. These findings point to a new potential anti-hypertrophic effect of
statins, which can prevent activation of the Akt/GSK-3beta hypertrophic pathway
by modulating PTEN activation by different mechanisms in chronic and acute
treatments.

PMID: 18036354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Int Med Res. 2007 Nov-Dec;35(6):803-18.

Activation of the calcineurin/NFAT signalling cascade starts early in human
hypertrophic myocardium.

Diedrichs H(1), Hagemeister J, Chi M, Boelck B, Müller-Ehmsen J, Schneider CA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Research and Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Holger.Diedrichs@uni-koeln.de

Cardiac hypertrophy is an independent risk factor for heart failure. Recent
studies on gene regulation of proteins have involved intracellular Ca2+
homeostasis. The Ca2+-sensitive phosphatase, calcineurin, is one potential
regulator of the hypertrophic response, so we aimed to investigate the
calcineurin-dependent signal pathway at different stages of hypertrophy in human 
myocardium. We found the calcineurin pathway to be significantly activated in
hypertrophic compared with non-hypertrophic myocardium as demonstrated by
increased calcineurin activity and expression of calcineurin A-beta and B, and
GATA-4, and a shift of phosphorylated cytoplasmic NFAT-3 into the nucleus as
dephosphorylated nuclear NFAT-3. There was a tendency for these changes to be
more pronounced in the decompensated compared with the compensated hypertrophic
myocardium. The present study provides evidence for significant activation of the
Ca2+-triggered calcineurin pathway in hypertrophic humans. Already present in
compensated hypertrophy it showed a tendency to a further increase following
transition to decompensated hypertrophy.

PMID: 18034994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2007 Nov-Dec;16(6):329-35. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Altered expression of early cardiac marker genes in circulating cells of patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Kontaraki JE(1), Parthenakis FI, Patrianakos AP, Karalis IK, Vardas PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital of Heraklion, PO Box 1352,
Stavrakia, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. kontarak@med.uoc.gr <kontarak@med.uoc.gr>

BACKGROUND: Early cardiac marker genes, such as cardiac-specific homeobox
(Csx/Nkx2.5), myocardin, homeodomain only protein, GATA4, and myocyte enhancer
factor 2C, are thought to participate in cardiomyocyte differentiation and to
contribute to heart hypertrophy in animal models. In this study, we investigated 
whether the expression of early cardiac genes is altered in the peripheral blood 
of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from 30 consecutive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients and 20 healthy controls, and gene expression
was determined by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Csx/Nkx2.5, myocardin, and GATA4 expressions were significantly higher
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients by 5.14+/-0.89 (P<.001), 1.65+/-0.21
(P<.05), and 2.04+/-0.41 (P<.04) times, respectively, while homeodomain only
protein showed a fourfold decrease in expression (P<.02) compared to controls. In
addition, expression of the differentiation-specific marker genes beta-myosin
heavy chain and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain was significantly higher in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients by 3.72+/-0.82 (P<.02) and 2.57+/-0.72
(P<.05) times, respectively, compared to controls. Myocyte enhancer factor 2C
expression was not different between patients and controls. Furthermore,
increased expression of GATA4, myocardin, and beta-myosin heavy chain positively 
correlated with increased left ventricular mass.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we found altered expressions of early cardiac marker 
genes and differentiation-specific marker genes in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients compared to control individuals,
possibly reflecting changes in response to disease.

PMID: 18005871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3198-210.

Cardiomyocyte GATA4 functions as a stress-responsive regulator of angiogenesis in
the murine heart.

Heineke J(1), Auger-Messier M, Xu J, Oka T, Sargent MA, York A, Klevitsky R,
Vaikunth S, Duncan SA, Aronow BJ, Robbins J, Crombleholme TM, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 Jan;118(1):387. Cromblehol, Timothy M [corrected to
Crombleholme, Timothy M].

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3176-9.

The transcription factor GATA4 is a critical regulator of cardiac gene
expression, modulating cardiomyocyte differentiation and adaptive responses of
the adult heart. We report what we believe to be a novel function for GATA4 in
murine cardiomyocytes as a nodal regulator of cardiac angiogenesis. Conditional
overexpression of GATA4 within adult cardiomyocytes increased myocardial
capillary and small conducting vessel densities and increased coronary flow
reserve and perfusion-dependent cardiac contractility. Coculture of HUVECs with
either GATA4-expressing cardiomyocytes or with myocytes expressing a
dominant-negative form of GATA4 enhanced or reduced HUVEC tube formation,
respectively. Expression of GATA4 in skeletal muscle by adenoviral gene transfer 
enhanced capillary densities and hindlimb perfusion following femoral artery
ablation. Deletion of Gata4 specifically from cardiomyocytes reduced myocardial
capillary density and prevented pressure overload-augmented angiogenesis in vivo.
GATA4 induced the angiogenic factor VEGF-A, directly binding the Vegf-A promoter 
and enhancing transcription. GATA4-overexpressing mice showed increased levels of
cardiac VEGF-A, while Gata4-deleted mice demonstrated decreased VEGF-A levels.
The induction of HUVEC tube formation in GATA4-overexpressing cocultured myocytes
was blocked with a VEGF receptor antagonist. Pressure overload-induced
dysfunction in Gata4-deleted hearts was partially rescued by adenoviral gene
delivery of VEGF and angiopoietin-1. To our knowledge, these results demonstrate 
[corrected] a previously unrecognized function for GATA4 as a regulator of
cardiac angiogenesis through a nonhypoxic, load, and/or disease-responsive
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2045611
PMID: 17975667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3188-97.

Myocardial hypertrophy in the absence of external stimuli is induced by
angiogenesis in mice.

Tirziu D(1), Chorianopoulos E, Moodie KL, Palac RT, Zhuang ZW, Tjwa M, Roncal C, 
Eriksson U, Fu Q, Elfenbein A, Hall AE, Carmeliet P, Moons L, Simons M.

Author information: 
(1)Angiogenesis Research Center, Section of Cardiology, Department of Medicine,
Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire 03756, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3176-9.

Although studies have suggested a role for angiogenesis in determining heart size
during conditions demanding enhanced cardiac performance, the role of EC mass in 
determining the normal organ size is poorly understood. To explore the
relationship between cardiac vasculature and normal heart size, we generated a
transgenic mouse with a regulatable expression of the secreted angiogenic growth 
factor PR39 in cardiomyocytes. A significant change in adult mouse EC mass was
apparent by 3 weeks following PR39 induction. Heart weight; cardiomyocyte size;
vascular density normalization; upregulation of hypertrophy markers including
atrial natriuretic factor, beta-MHC, and GATA4; and activation of the Akt and MAP
kinase pathways were observed at 6 weeks post-induction. Treatment of
PR39-induced mice with the eNOS inhibitor L-NAME in the last 3 weeks of a 6-week 
stimulation period resulted in a significant suppression of heart growth and a
reduction in hypertrophic marker expression. Injection of PR39 or another
angiogenic growth factor, VEGF-B, into murine hearts during myocardial infarction
led to induction of myocardial hypertrophy and restoration of myocardial
function. Thus stimulation of vascular growth in normal adult mouse hearts leads 
to an increase in cardiac mass.

PMCID: PMC2045601
PMID: 17975666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3176-9.

Cardiac growth and angiogenesis coordinated by intertissue interactions.

Walsh K(1), Shiojima I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Unit, Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. kxwalsh@bu.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3198-210.
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Nov;117(11):3188-97.

Cardiac hypertrophy and angiogenesis are coordinately regulated during
physiological or adaptive cardiac growth, and disruption of the balanced growth
and angiogenesis leads to contractile dysfunction and heart failure. Coordination
of growth and angiogenesis is in part mediated by the secretion of angiogenic
growth factors from myocytes in response to hypertrophic stimuli, which enables
the vasculature to "catch up" to the growth of the myocardium. In this issue of
the JCI, two studies provide novel insights into the regulatory mechanisms of
cardiac growth and coronary angiogenesis. Heineke et al. demonstrate that GATA4
acts as a stress-responsive transcription factor in murine cardiac myocytes that 
induces the expression of angiogenic growth factors (see the related article
beginning on page 3198). Tirziu et al. show that enhanced coronary angiogenesis
per se leads to hypertrophic growth of myocytes through a nitric oxide-dependent 
mechanism (see the related article beginning on page 3188). These studies,
together with previous reports, suggest the existence of reciprocal signals
between the myocardium and the vasculature that promote the growth of each other 
in a paracrine fashion.

PMCID: PMC2045631
PMID: 17975662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 1;67(21):10428-35.

The endothelin receptor blocker bosentan inhibits doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyopathy.

Bien S(1), Riad A, Ritter CA, Gratz M, Olshausen F, Westermann D, Grube M, Krieg 
T, Ciecholewski S, Felix SB, Staudt A, Schultheiss HP, Ewert R, Völker U, Tschöpe
C, Kroemer HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald,
Germany.

Doxorubicin is a frequently used anticancer drug, but its therapeutic benefit is 
limited by acute and chronic cardiotoxicity, often leading to heart failure. The 
mechanisms underlying doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity remain unclear. It was
previously shown in men that doxorubicin leads to increased endothelin-1 plasma
levels. In addition, cardiac-specific overexpression of endothelin-1 in mice
resulted in a cardiomyopathy resembling the phenotype following doxorubicin
administration. We therefore hypothesized that endothelin-1 is involved in the
pathogenesis of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. In mice (C57Bl/10), we found that
doxorubicin (20 mg/kg body weight, i.p.) impaired cardiac function with decreased
ejection fraction, diminished cardiac output, and decreased end-systolic pressure
points recorded by a microconductance catheter. This impaired function was
accompanied by the up-regulation of endothelin-1 expression on mRNA and protein
level. In vitro investigations confirmed the regulation of endothelin-1 by
doxorubicin and indicated that the doxorubicin-mediated increase of endothelin-1 
expression involves epidermal growth factor receptor signaling via the
MEK1/2-ERK1/2 cascade, which was further confirmed by immunoblotting studies in
the left ventricle of treated animals. Pretreatment of mice with the endothelin
receptor antagonist bosentan (100 mg/kg body weight, p.o.) strikingly inhibited
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity with preserved indices of contractility.
Moreover, bosentan pretreatment resulted in reduced tumor necrosis factor-alpha
content, lipid peroxidation, and Bax expression, as well as increased GATA-4
expression. Thus, endothelin-1 plays a key role in mediating the cardiotoxic
effects of doxorubicin and its inhibition may be of therapeutic benefit for
patients receiving doxorubicin.

PMID: 17974986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2007 Nov;134(22):4023-32.

A combinatorial code of maternal GATA, Ets and beta-catenin-TCF transcription
factors specifies and patterns the early ascidian ectoderm.

Rothbächer U(1), Bertrand V, Lamy C, Lemaire P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille Luminy (IBDML),
CNRS-UMR6216/Université de la Méditerranée Aix-Marseille, F-13288 Marseille Cedex
9, France. rothbach@ibdml.univ-mrs.fr

Our understanding of the maternal factors that initiate early chordate
development, and of their direct zygotic targets, is still fragmentary. A
molecular cascade is emerging for the mesendoderm, but less is known about the
ectoderm, giving rise to epidermis and nervous tissue. Our cis-regulatory
analysis surprisingly places the maternal transcription factor Ci-GATAa
(GATA4/5/6) at the top of the ectodermal regulatory network in ascidians.
Initially distributed throughout the embryo, Ci-GATAa activity is progressively
repressed in vegetal territories by accumulating maternal beta-catenin. Once
restricted to the animal hemisphere, Ci-GATAa directly activates two types of
zygotic ectodermal genes. First, Ci-fog is activated from the 8-cell stage
throughout the ectoderm, then Ci-otx is turned on from the 32-cell stage in
neural precursors only. Whereas the enhancers of both genes contain critical and 
interchangeable GATA sites, their distinct patterns of activation stem from the
additional presence of two Ets sites in the Ci-otx enhancer. Initially
characterized as activating elements in the neural lineages, these Ets sites
additionally act as repressors in non-neural lineages, and restrict GATA-mediated
activation of Ci-otx. We thus identify a precise combinatorial code of maternal
factors responsible for zygotic onset of a chordate ectodermal genetic program.

PMID: 17965050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Dec;43(6):667-9. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

GATA4 mutation and congenital cardiovascular diseases: importance of phenotype
and genetic background clarification.

Matsuoka R.

PMID: 17961590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 15;312(2):613-22. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Gata5 and Gata6 are functionally redundant in zebrafish for specification of
cardiomyocytes.

Holtzinger A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

An outstanding problem in vertebrate development has been to define the genetic
program that specifies the cardiomyocyte lineage. It has been a challenge to
define the transcription factors that control specification, since candidate gene
knockouts typically cause rather complex morphogenetic defects. In contrast,
Drosophila genetics identified single transcription factors that are essential
for specification of cardiomyocytes from uncommitted mesoderm. For those
vertebrate orthologs, it has been considered that paralogous family members might
compensate for the loss-of-function of individual genes. However, this hypothesis
had not been formally tested. In zebrafish, defects in gata5 can lead to a loss
of myocardial tissue, but most embryos depleted for any single vertebrate
Gata4/5/6 transcription factor develop a cardiac morphogenetic defect, and
cardiomyocytes are specified and differentiate. Here we show that in zebrafish
the gata5 and gata6 genes are redundant for specification of cardiomyocytes.
Embryos depleted of these two gene products are heartless. Restoring either gene 
product is sufficient to rescue cardiomyocyte specification. In contrast, embryos
depleted of Gata4 and Gata6, or Gata4 and Gata5, develop defective heart tubes.
Our study identifies a specific pair of vertebrate transcription factor paralogs 
that is essential for cardiomyocyte specification.

PMCID: PMC2170521
PMID: 17950269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Circ Res. 2007 Dec 7;101(12):1255-65. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Identification of myocardial and vascular precursor cells in human and mouse
epicardium.

Limana F(1), Zacheo A, Mocini D, Mangoni A, Borsellino G, Diamantini A, De Mori
R, Battistini L, Vigna E, Santini M, Loiaconi V, Pompilio G, Germani A,
Capogrossi MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Terapia Genica, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Milan.

During cardiac development, the epicardium is the source of multipotent
mesenchymal cells, which give rise to endothelial and smooth muscle cells in
coronary vessels and also, possibly, to cardiomyocytes. The aim of the present
study was to determine whether stem cells are retained in the adult human and
murine epicardium and to investigate the regenerative potential of these cells
following acute myocardial infarction. We show that c-kit(+) and CD34(+) cells
can indeed be detected in human fetal and adult epicardium and that they
represent 2 distinct populations. Both subsets of cells were negative for CD45, a
cell surface marker that identifies the hematopoietic cell lineage.
Immunofluorescence revealed that freshly isolated c-kit(+) and CD34(+) cells
expressed early and late cardiac transcription factors and could acquire an
endothelial phenotype in vitro. In the murine model of myocardial infarction,
there was an increase in the absolute number and proliferation of epicardial
c-kit(+) cells 3 days after coronary ligation; at this time point, epicardial
c-kit(+) cells were identified in the subepicardial space and expressed GATA4.
Furthermore, 1 week after myocardial infarction, cells coexpressing c-kit(+),
together with endothelial or smooth muscle cell markers, were identified in the
wall of subepicardial blood vessels. In summary, the postnatal epicardium
contains a cell population with stem cell characteristics that retains the
ability to give rise to myocardial precursors and vascular cells. These cells may
play a role in the regenerative response to cardiac damage.

PMID: 17947800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;16(1):18-27. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

8p23.1 duplication syndrome; a novel genomic condition with unexpected complexity
revealed by array CGH.

Barber JC(1), Maloney VK, Huang S, Bunyan DJ, Cresswell L, Kinning E, Benson A,
Cheetham T, Wyllie J, Lynch SA, Zwolinski S, Prescott L, Crow Y, Morgan R, Hobson
E.

Author information: 
(1)National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury NHS Foundation
Trust, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

The 8p23.1 deletion syndrome is established but not an equivalent duplication
syndrome. Here, we report five patients; a de novo prenatal case and two families
in which 8p23.1 duplications have been directly transmitted from mothers to
children. Dual-colour fluorescent in situ hybridisation, multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis and customised oligonucleotide
array comparative genomic hybridisation (oaCGH) indicated an approximately 3.75
Mb duplication of most of band 8p23.1 between the olfactory receptor/defensin
repeats (ORDRs) in all cases. However, oaCGH revealed an additional duplication
of 500 kb adjacent to the proximal ORDR in Family 1 and an additional deletion of
3.14 Mb within the Nablus Mask-Like Facial Syndrome region of 8q22.1 in Family 2.
Copy number variation at introns 4-5 of the GATA4 gene was also identified. This 
8p23.1 duplication syndrome is associated with a characteristic facial phenotype 
including a prominent forehead and arched eyebrows. Adrenal insufficiency,
Tetralogy of Fallot, partial 2/3 syndactyly of the toes and cleft palate in some 
individuals may be explained by ascertainment bias, incomplete penetrance and/or 
the presence of the microdeletion in Family 2. The duplication is compatible with
normal early childhood development but, although our adult cases live independent
lives with varying degrees of support, learning difficulties have been
experienced by some family members. We conclude that the 8p23.1 duplication
syndrome is a genomic condition with an emerging but variable phenotype that may 
be under-diagnosed. Our results demonstrate that direct transmission does not
distinguish genuine duplications from euchromatic variants and illustrate the
power of array CGH to reveal unexpected additional imbalances in affected
patients.

PMID: 17940555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2007;21(5):312-22.

Using a comparative in vivo DNase I footprinting technique to analyze changes in 
protein-DNA interactions following phthalate exposure.

Kuhl AJ(1), Ross SM, Gaido KW.

Author information: 
(1)The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences (Formerly CIIT Centers for Health
Research), 6 Davis Drive, PO Box 12137, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
akuhl@ciit.org

Exposure to environmental chemicals often induces changes in gene expression
leading to a variety of developmental and physiological problems. Understanding
the underlying mechanism of these changes will aid in assessing human risk to
these chemicals. Traditional methods for analyzing protein-DNA interactions
include in vivo footprinting and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). However,
ChIP does not provide binding location, and conventional footprinting is too
subjective and time consuming for comparing protein binding in toxicological
studies. Here, in vivo DNase I footprinting is adapted for use with the automated
DNA sequencer to provide a semiquantitative map of changes in DNA-protein
interactions in the promoter of steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein.
StAR is the rate-limiting step in testosterone biosynthesis and is downregulated 
following in utero di-butyl phthalate (DBP) treatment in rats through an unknown 
mechanism. In vivo footprinting identified three regions of altered DNase
digestibility following DBP treatment, and EMSA identified the corresponding
transcription factors as SF-1, c/ebp beta, and GATA4. ChIP assays confirmed
changes in protein-binding activity of SF-1 and c/ebp beta, but only c/ebp beta
gesponds to only DBP. This suggests that c/ebp beta ginding is involved in
DBP-induced transcriptional changes. By tailoring in vivo footprinting for
toxicological studies, it can provide a detailed and accurate map of protein-DNA 
interactions and is an excellent first step in determining the changes in the
structure of transcriptional machinery following an exogenous chemical treatment.

(c) 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 17912698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Oct;6(10):1546-52. Epub 2007 Jul 7.

Evaluation of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation profiles in human pancreatic cancers 
indicate promoter methylation patterns distinct from other human tumor types.

Fu B(1), Guo M, Wang S, Campagna D, Luo M, Herman JG, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The GATA-4 and GATA-5 transcription factors are increasingly recognized as
playing a role in carcinogenesis of human tumors derived of endodermal and
mesodermal origin. The pancreas is derived from endodermal tissues suggesting
GATA-4 and GATA-5 gene methylation may play a critical role in the biology of
human pancreatic cancer as well. We investigated GATA-4 and -5 by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in normal and neoplastic pancreatic tissues,
including isogenic xenografts or cultured cell lines derived from the coexistent 
primary cancer and/or metastases in patients with pancreatic carcinoma. The
relationship of promoter methylation was correlated with mRNA expression for each
gene, and methylation patterns were correlated with known clinicopathologic
features of patients. GATA-4 demonstrated a significantly lower methylation
frequency than GATA-5 in low passage pancreatic cancer xenografts or cell lines
(1/34 versus 21/34, p < 0.001). GATA-4 and -5 were also evaluated in
microdissected samples of normal duct epithelium and cancer from pancreas cancer 
tissues which confirmed infrequent GATA-4 methylation in pancreatic cancers as
well as in normal duct epithelium. GATA-4 was frequently overexpressed at the
mRNA level with 27 of 30 (90%) pancreatic cancers showing >5.0-fold
overexpression compared to normal duct epithelial cells. By contrast, high
frequency methylation of GATA-5 was confirmed in pancreatic cancers tissues, but 
was rarely methylated in normal duct epithelium, indicating hypermethylation of
this gene during pancreatic cancer development. GATA-5 mRNA expression did not
correlate with its promoter hypermethylation, and treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine only partially restored mRNA
expression suggesting additional regulatory mechanisms of GATA-5 expression. The 
presence of GATA-5 methylation showed a trend towards worse long-term survival
(14.0 +/- 9.2 months versus 19.5 +/- 3.9 months, p = 0.06). While
hypermethylation of GATA-5 seems to be a universal feature among human tumors,
infrequent methylation of GATA-4, and its corresponding overexpression, appears
unique to pancreatic cancer from other tumor types reported thus far.

PMID: 17912029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Endocrinology. 2007 Dec;148(12):5851-64. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta, but not steroidogenic factor-1, modulates
the phthalate-induced dysregulation of rat fetal testicular steroidogenesis.

Kuhl AJ(1), Ross SM, Gaido KW.

Author information: 
(1)The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences, 6 Davis Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709-2137, USA. akuhl@thehamner.org

Prolonged in utero exposure of fetal male rats to dibutyl phthalate (DBP) can
result in a feminized phenotype characterized by malformed epididymides,
hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and retained thoracic nipples, among others. These
symptoms likely result, in part, from decreased expression of steroidogenic
enzymes and, therefore, reduced testosterone biosynthesis. However, the molecular
mechanisms involved in these changes in gene expression profiles are unknown. To 
understand these mechanisms in rats, in vivo DNase footprinting was adapted to
provide a semiquantitative map of changes in DNA-protein interactions in the
promoter region of steroidogenic genes, including steroidogenic acute regulatory,
scavenger receptor B-1, cytochrome P450 side chain cleavage, and cytochrome P450 
17A1, that are down-regulated after an in utero DBP exposure. Regions with
altered DNase protection were coordinated with a specific DNA binding protein
event by EMSA, and binding activity confirmed with chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Results demonstrated altered DNase protection at regions mapping to
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (c/ebp beta) and steroidogenic factor-1
(SF-1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed declines in DNA-protein
interactions of c/ebp beta in DBP treated animals, whereas SF-1 was reduced in
both diethyl phthalate (nontoxic) and DBP (toxic) treatments. These results
suggest that inhibition of c/ebp beta, and not SF-1, is critical in DBP induced
inhibition of steroidogenic genes. In addition, these observations suggest a
pathway redundancy in the regulation of steroidogenesis in fetal testis. In
conclusion, this study presents a snapshot of changes in the structure of
transcriptional machinery and proposes a mechanism of action resulting from DBP
exposure.

PMID: 17884934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):623-35. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Redundancy and evolution of GATA factor requirements in development of the
myocardium.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The transcription factors, GATA4, 5 and 6, recognize the same DNA sequence and
are all expressed in the developing myocardium. However, knockout studies in the 
mouse have indicated that none of them are absolutely required for the
specification of the myocardium. Here we present evidence for redundancy in this 
family for the first time. Using morpholinos in both Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that GATA4 knockdown, for example, only affects cardiac marker
expression in the absence of either GATA5 or GATA6. A similar situation pertains 
for GATA5 in Xenopus whereas, in zebrafish, GATA5 (faust) plays a major role in
driving the myocardial programme. This requirement for GATA5 in zebrafish is for 
induction of the myocardium, in contrast to the GATA6 requirement in both
species, which is for differentiation. This early role for GATA5 in zebrafish
correlates with its earlier expression and with an earlier requirement for BMP
signalling, suggesting that a mutual maintenance loop for GATA, BMP and Nkx
expression is the evolutionarily conserved entity.

PMCID: PMC2279743
PMID: 17869240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 1;311(1):136-46. Epub 2007 Aug 19.

Essential role of Smad4 in maintaining cardiomyocyte proliferation during murine 
embryonic heart development.

Qi X(1), Yang G, Yang L, Lan Y, Weng T, Wang J, Wu Z, Xu J, Gao X, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Genetic Laboratory of Development and
Diseases, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 20 Dongdajie, Fengtai, Beijing
100071, PR China.

Transforming growth factor-beta/bone morphogenetic protein (TGF-beta/BMP)
signaling pathway is essential for embryonic and postnatal heart development and 
remodeling. The intracellular factor Smad4 plays a pivotal role in mediating
TGF-beta/BMP signal transduction in the nucleus. To examine the function of Smad4
in embryonic cardiac development during mid-gestation, we specifically deleted
the Smad4 gene in embryonic cardiomyocytes using the Cre-LoxP system. Deletion of
Smad4 as early as E9.5, led to embryonic lethality between E12.5 and E15.5, and
embryos exhibited severe morphological defects in the heart, including a thin
compact layer, disorganized trabeculae, and ventricular septum defects (VSD).
Smad4 deletion also led to a dramatic decrease in cardiomyocyte proliferation
accompanied by downregulation of contractile protein-encoding genes such as
alpha-myosin heavy chain, beta-myosin heavy chain, ventricular myosin light chain
2, and alpha-cardiac actin. In addition, deletion of Smad4 resulted in
perturbation of TGF-beta/BMP ligand expression and signaling, and defects in
expression of several cardiac transcription factor genes such as Nkx2.5, GATA4,
and MEF2c. These results provide direct genetic evidences that Smad4 is essential
for regulating cardiomyocyte proliferation and differentiation during murine
cardiogenesis, and provides new insights into potential causes of congenital
heart disease.

PMID: 17869237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 18;104(38):14994-9. Epub 2007 Sep 11.

Correct dosage of Fog2 and Gata4 transcription factors is critical for fetal
testis development in mice.

Bouma GJ(1), Washburn LL, Albrecht KH, Eicher EM.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
Gerrit.Bouma@colostate.edu

Previous reports suggested that humans and mice differ in their sensitivity to
the genetic dosage of transcription factors that play a role in early testicular 
development. This difference implies that testis determination might be somewhat 
different in these two species. We report that the Fog2 and Gata4 transcription
factors are haploinsufficient for testis determination in mice. Whether gonadal
sex reversal occurs depends on genetic background (i.e., modifier genes). For
example, C57BL/6J (B6) XY mice develop testes if they are heterozygous for a
mutant Fog2 (Fog2-) or Gata4 (Gata4(ki)) allele. However, if the B6 Y chromosome 
(Y(B6)) is replaced by the AKR Y chromosome (Y(AKR)), B6 Fog2-/+ XY(AKR) mice
develop ovaries, and B6 Gata4(ki)/+ XY(AKR) mice develop ovaries and ovotestes
(gonads containing both ovarian and testicular tissue). Furthermore, DBA/2J (D2) 
Fog2-/+ XY(AKR) mice and (B6 x D2)F1 hybrid Gata4(ki)/+ XY(AKR) mice develop
testes. Sry is expressed in the mutant XY gonads, indicating that the lack of Sry
expression is not the cause of ovarian tissue development in B6 Fog2-/+ or
Gata4(ki)/+ XY(AKR) mice. However, up-regulation of Sox9 expression, which is
critical for normal testicular development, does not occur in mutant XY gonads
that develop as ovaries. We conclude that under certain genetic conditions, Sox9 
up-regulation depends on the proper dosage of Fog2 and Gata4. We propose that in 
humans the FOG2 and/or GATA4 genes might be haploinsufficient for normal testis
determination and thus could be the cause of some previously unassigned cases of 
XY gonadal sex reversal.

PMCID: PMC1986601
PMID: 17848526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Dec;92(12):4792-801. Epub 2007 Sep 11.

Developmental changes in human fetal testicular cell numbers and messenger
ribonucleic acid levels during the second trimester.

O'Shaughnessy PJ(1), Baker PJ, Monteiro A, Cassie S, Bhattacharya S, Fowler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Sciences, University of Glasgow Veterinary School, Bearsden
Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, United Kingdom. p.j.o'shaughnessy@vet.gla.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Normal fetal testis development is essential for masculinization and
subsequent adult fertility. The second trimester is a critical period of human
testicular development and masculinization, but there is a paucity of reliable
developmental data.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to analyze second-trimester human
testicular morphology and function.
DESIGN: This was an observational study of second-trimester testis development.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the Universities of Glasgow and Aberdeen.
PATIENTS/PARTICIPANTS: Testes were collected from 57 morphologically normal
fetuses of women undergoing elective termination of normally progressing
pregnancies (11-19 wk gestation).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Testicular morphology, cell numbers, and quantitative
expression of 22 key testicular genes were determined.
RESULTS: Sertoli cell and germ cell number increased exponentially throughout the
second trimester. Leydig cell number initially increased exponentially but slowed
toward 19 wk. Transcripts encoding Sertoli (KITL, FGF9, SOX9, FSHR, WT1) and germ
(CKIT, TFAP2C) cell-specific products increased per testis through the second
trimester, but expression per cell was static apart from TFAP2C, which declined. 
Leydig cell transcripts (HSD17B3, CYP11A1, PTC1, CYP17, LHR, INSL3) also remained
static per cell. Testicular expression of adrenal transcripts MC2R, CYP11B1, and 
CYP21 was detectable but unchanged. Expression of other transcripts known or
postulated to be involved in testicular development (GATA4, GATA6, CXORF6, WNT2B,
WNT4, WNT5A) increased significantly per testis during the second trimester.
CONCLUSIONS: The second trimester is essential for the establishment of Sertoli
and germ cell numbers. Sertoli and Leydig cells are active throughout the period,
but there is no evidence of changing transcript levels.

PMID: 17848411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun 26;87(24):1709-12.

[Differentially expressed transcription factors in the cardiac outflow tract
tissue of connexin43 knockout mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi CH(1), Huang GY, Zhou GM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes in the expression of cardiac transcription 
factors in the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) tissues in the connexin43 knockout
homozygotes (Cx43 KO), connexin43 heterozygotes, and connexin43 wild-type mice
(Cx43 WT).
METHODS: The cDNA was retrotranscribed from the RNA extracted from the OFT
tissues of 6 Cx43 KO, 6 Cx43 WT, and 6 Cx43 heterozygotes genotyped by PCR method
on the embryonic day (ED) 13.5 and ED 14.5. The biotin-labeled cRNA derived from 
the transcription of cDNA was fragmented as probes. The probes were hybridized
with Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array. Gene Array Scanner was used to screen
the signals of hybridization and detect the expression of genes. The mRNA
expression levels of 3 cardiac transcription factors: Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
were measured by real time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The ratios of the expression of the 6 genes, all cardiac transcription
factors: Gata4, Mef2C, Sox4, Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20 between the Cx43 KO and Cx43
WT groups were 1:1.41, 1:2.30, 1:3.25, 1:0.71, 1:0.66, and 1:0.54. The expression
levels of Sox11 and Foxp1 on ED13.5 in the Cx43 K group were 4.76 +/- 0.19 and
5.08 +/- 0.28 respectively, both significantly lower than those of the Cx43 WT
group (5.34 +/- 0.25 and 5.64 +/- 0.15 respectively, both P < 0.01), and
expression level of Tbx20 on ED 13.5 in the Cx43 K group was 7.18 +/- 0.16, not
significantly different from that of the Cx43 WT group (7.47 +/- 0.27, P > 0.05).
The expression levels of the genes Sox11, Foxp1, Tbx20 on ED 14,5 were 4.71 +/-
0.27, 5.25 +/- 0.31, and 7.05 +/- 0.17 respectively, all significantly lower than
those of the Cx43 WT group (5.00 +/- 0.19, 5.77 +/- 0.16,) and 7.43 +/- 0.25, all
P < 0.05). The results of the expression of these genes by real time PCR analysis
showed an excellent concordance with those indicated by the microarray analysis.
CONCLUSION: The cardiac transcription factors such as Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
that are differently expressed in the Cx43 KO OFT tissue may be involved in the
pathogenesis of the OFT defects.

PMID: 17825156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):605-13.

GATA factors induce mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation toward
extraembryonic endoderm.

Zhang C(1), Ye X, Zhang H, Ding M, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China.

The GATA family of transcription factors are implicated in early embryonic
development. There are six factors in this family in vertebrates. GATA4 and GATA6
have been demonstrated to induce mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). We investigated the effect of GATA3 on the 
differentiation of mES cells both in the ES cell and in the embryoid body (EB)
states. The results demonstrate that GATA3 overexpression can initiate the ES
cell differentiation program toward ExE. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA1 and
GATA2 in ES cells and EBs resulted in similar effects. We believe this finding
can augment our understanding of mouse ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17784834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14412-7. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (BMAL1) is associated with
susceptibility to hypertension and type 2 diabetes.

Woon PY(1), Kaisaki PJ, Bragança J, Bihoreau MT, Levy JC, Farrall M, Gauguier D.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics and Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

Many aspects of physiology and behavior follow a circadian rhythm. Brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is a key component of the mammalian molecular 
clock, which controls circadian oscillations. In the rat, the gene encoding Bmal1
is located within hypertension susceptibility loci. We analyzed the SNP
distribution pattern in a congenic interval associated with hypertension in the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), and we show that Bmal1 maps close to a
region genetically divergent between SHR and its normotensive (Wistar-Kyoto)
counterpart. Bmal1 sequencing in rat strains identified 19 polymorphisms,
including an SHR promoter variant that significantly affects Gata-4 activation of
transcription in transient transfection experiments. A genetic association study 
designed to test the relevance of these findings in 1,304 individuals from 424
families primarily selected for type 2 diabetes showed that two BMAL1 haplotypes 
are associated with type 2 diabetes and hypertension. This comparative genetics
finding translated from mouse and rat models to human provides evidence of a
causative role of Bmal1 variants in pathological components of the metabolic
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1958818
PMID: 17728404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Chromosome Res. 2007;15(6):777-85. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Search for the sex-determining switch in monotremes: mapping WT1, SF1, LHX1,
LHX2, FGF9, WNT4, RSPO1 and GATA4 in platypus.

Grafodatskaya D(1), Rens W, Wallis MC, Trifonov V, O'Brien PC, Clarke O, Graves
JA, Ferguson-Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Resource Centre for Comparative Genomics, Department of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 OES, UK.

The duck-billed platypus has five pairs of sex chromosomes, but there is no
information about the primary sex-determining switch in this species. As there is
no apparent SRY orthologue in platypus, another gene must acquire the function of
a key regulator of the gonadal male or female fate. SOX9 was ruled out from being
this key regulator as it maps to an autosome in platypus. To check whether other 
genes in mammalian gonadogenesis could be the primary switch in monotremes, we
have mapped a number of candidates in platypus. We report here the autosomal
location of WT1, SF1, LHX1, LHX9, FGF9, WNT4 and RSPO1 in platypus, thus
excluding these from being key regulators of sex determination in this species.
We found that GATA4 maps to sex chromosomes Y1 and X2; however, it lies in the
pairing region shown by chromosome painting to be homologous, so is unlikely to
be either male-specific or differentially dosed in male and female.

PMID: 17717721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 28;104(35):14008-13. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Vertebrate heart growth is regulated by functional antagonism between Gridlock
and Gata5.

Jia H(1), King IN, Chopra SS, Wan H, Ni TT, Jiang C, Guan X, Wells S, Srivastava 
D, Zhong TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Embryonic organs attain their final dimensions through the generation of proper
cell number and size, but the control mechanisms remain obscure. Here, we
establish Gridlock (Grl), a Hairy-related basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor, as a negative regulator of cardiomyocyte proliferative
growth in zebrafish embryos. Mutations in grl cause an increase in expression of 
a group of immediate-early growth genes, myocardial genes, and development of
hyperplastic hearts. Conversely, cardiomyocytes with augmented Grl activity have 
diminished cell volume and fail to divide, resulting in a marked reduction in
heart size. Both bHLH domain and carboxyl region are required for Grl negative
control of myocardial proliferative growth. These Grl-induced cardiac effects are
counterbalanced by the transcriptional activator Gata5 but not Gata4, which
promotes cardiomyocyte expansion in the embryo. Biochemical analyses show that
Grl forms a complex with Gata5 through the carboxyl region and can repress
Gata5-mediated transcription via the bHLH domain. Hence, our studies suggest that
Grl regulates embryonic heart growth via opposing Gata5, at least in part through
their protein interactions in modulating gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1955785
PMID: 17715064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;15(8):601-4.

[A study on the transdifferentiation of adipose mesenchymal stem cells into
hepatocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Z(1), Shi ZY, Zhou HX, Wu MH, She ZJ, Li YN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal
University, Changsha 410005, China. liuzhan2004@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possibility of transdifferentiation of adipose
mesenchymal stem cells (AMSCs) into hepatocytes.
METHODS: Human omentum adipose tissue was dispersed with collagenase I. Cells
collected were cultured in a DMEM-F12 medium containing 2% FBS supplemented with 
20 ng/ml HGF, 10 ng/ml FGF4, 1xITS and 0.1 micromol/L dexasmison. The cells of
the control group were also cultured in the same kind of medium but without any
cytokines serving as a control. The expression of hepatic transcriptional factors
such as GATA4 and HNF1 were checked by RT-PCR. At the end of the induction,
hepatocyte markers were analysed by flow cytometry, and cytokeratin expressions
were examined using cyto-immunofluorescence methods.
RESULTS: AMSCs grew like fibroblasts and were passaged easily. Most of the third 
passaged AMSCs were positive against anti-CD29, anti-CD44 antibodies, but
negative for the anti-CD34 and anti-CD45 ones. The hepatic transcriptional factor
was expressed gradually to higher levels during the induction time. AFP and Alb
positive cells were 30.0% and 17.8% of the total cultured cells, and the rate of 
cells positive to the two markers was 6.9%. The inducted cells were positive for 
CK18 and CK19 antibodies at the end of the induction. The cells in the control
group were negative when checked by these methods.
CONCLUSIONS: AMSCs could be directed to differentiate into hepatocytes in vitro
by a cytokine cocktail with a low concentration FBS culture system.

PMID: 17711631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Sep;217(9):651-63. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

SpGataE, a Strongylocentrotus purpuratus ortholog of mammalian Gata4/5/6: protein
expression, interaction with putative target gene spec2a, and identification of
friend of Gata factor SpFog1.

Kiyama T(1), Klein WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX,
77030, USA.

In the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuatus, SpGataE, an ortholog of the
vertebrate zinc-finger transcription factors Gata4/5/6, occupies a key position
in the gene regulatory network for endomesoderm specification. We have posited
that in addition to regulating gene activity required for endomesoderm
specification, SpGataE also represses the expression of the aboral
ectoderm-specific spec2a gene in endomesoderm territories. Although the
expression pattern of spgatae and its role in endomesoderm specification have
been described in considerable detail, little is known about SpGataE protein
accumulation and its interactions with target genes and coregulatory factors. Our
purpose here was to gain further insight into the mechanisms by which SpGataE
functions as a transcriptional regulator. To achieve this, we generated an
anti-SpGataE antibody to determine the spatiotemporal expression pattern of
SpGataE protein and establish whether it plays a role in repressing spec2a by
binding to gata cis-regulatory elements within the endogenous spec2a enhancer.
Because Gata proteins often associate with friend of Gata (Fog) coregulators, we 
identified an S. purpuratus fog ortholog, spfog1, and showed that SpGataE and
SpFog1 physically interacted. Spfog1 transcripts were maximal by early blastula
stage but continued thereafter to be expressed at low levels. Knockdown of spfog1
using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides did not produce notable effects on
endomesoderm specification or spec2a enhancer activity, suggesting that SpGataE
exerts these functions independently of SpFog1. In addition to providing new
information on Gata and Fog proteins in sea urchins, the anti-SpGataE antibody
developed here should be a useful reagent for future analysis of SpGataE
function.

PMID: 17710433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):280-91. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in cardiac T-box factor gene TBX20 are associated with diverse cardiac 
pathologies, including defects of septation and valvulogenesis and
cardiomyopathy.

Kirk EP(1), Sunde M, Costa MW, Rankin SA, Wolstein O, Castro ML, Butler TL, Hyun 
C, Guo G, Otway R, Mackay JP, Waddell LB, Cole AD, Hayward C, Keogh A, Macdonald 
P, Griffiths L, Fatkin D, Sholler GF, Zorn AM, Feneley MP, Winlaw DS, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, 2010, 
Australia.

The T-box family transcription factor gene TBX20 acts in a conserved regulatory
network, guiding heart formation and patterning in diverse species. Mouse Tbx20
is expressed in cardiac progenitor cells, differentiating cardiomyocytes, and
developing valvular tissue, and its deletion or RNA interference-mediated
knockdown is catastrophic for heart development. TBX20 interacts physically,
functionally, and genetically with other cardiac transcription factors, including
NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5, mutations of which cause congenital heart disease (CHD).
Here, we report nonsense (Q195X) and missense (I152M) germline mutations within
the T-box DNA-binding domain of human TBX20 that were associated with a family
history of CHD and a complex spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis. Biophysical
characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins indicated how the missense
mutation disrupts the structure and function of the TBX20 T-box. Dilated
cardiomyopathy was a feature of the TBX20 mutant phenotype in humans and mice,
suggesting that mutations in developmental transcription factors can provide a
sensitized template for adult-onset heart disease. Our findings are the first to 
link TBX20 mutations to human pathology. They provide insights into how mutation 
of different genes in an interactive regulatory circuit lead to diverse clinical 
phenotypes, with implications for diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC1950799
PMID: 17668378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Dec;43(6):677-85. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Spectrum of heart disease associated with murine and human GATA4 mutation.

Rajagopal SK(1), Ma Q, Obler D, Shen J, Manichaikul A, Tomita-Mitchell A,
Boardman K, Briggs C, Garg V, Srivastava D, Goldmuntz E, Broman KW, Benson DW,
Smoot LB, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA4 is essential for heart morphogenesis. Heterozygous
mutation of GATA4 causes familial septal defects. However, the phenotypic
spectrum of heterozygous GATA4 mutation is not known. In this study, we defined
the cardiac phenotypes that result from heterozygous mutation of murine Gata4. We
then asked if GATA4 mutation occurs in humans with these forms of congenital
heart disease (CHD). In mice, heterozygous Gata4 mutation was associated with
atrial and ventricular septal defect (ASD, VSD), endocardial cushion defect
(ECD), RV hypoplasia, and cardiomyopathy. Genetic background strongly influenced 
the expression of ECD and cardiomyopathy, indicating the presence of important
genetic modifiers. In humans, non-synonymous GATA4 sequence variants were
associated with ECD (2/43), ASD (1/8), and RV hypoplasia in the context of double
inlet left ventricle (1/9), forms of CHD that overlapped with abnormalities seen 
in the mouse model. These variants were not found in at least 500 control
chromosomes, and encode proteins with non-conservative amino acid substitutions
at phylogenetically conserved positions, suggesting that they are disease-causing
mutations. Cardiomyopathy was not associated with GATA4 mutation in humans. These
data establish the phenotypic spectrum of heterozygous Gata4 mutation in mice,
and suggest that heterozygous GATA4 mutation leads to partially overlapping
phenotypes in humans. Additional studies will be required to determine the degree
to which GATA4 mutation contributes to human CHD characterized by ECD or RV
hypoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2573470
PMID: 17643447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007 Aug;28(8):1149-54.

Inhibitory effect of ginsenoside Rb1 on calcineurin signal pathway in
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by prostaglandin F2alpha.

Jiang QS(1), Huang XN, Yang GZ, Jiang XY, Zhou QX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

AIM: To examine the antihypertrophic effect of ginsenoside Rb1 (Rb1) induced by
prostaglandin F2alpha(PGF2alpha) in vitro and to investigate the possible
mechanisms involved in the calcineurin (CaN) signal transduction pathway.
METHODS: The cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by PGF2alpha and the
antihypertrophic effect of Rb1 were evaluated in primary culture by measuring the
cell diameter, protein content, and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) mRNA
expression. ANP and CaN mRNA expressions, CaN and its downstream effectors NFAT3 
and GATA4 protein expressions, and the intracellular free Ca2+ concentration
([Ca2+]i) were assayed by RT-PCR, Western blot, and fluorescent determination
using Fura 2/AM, respectively.
RESULTS: PGF2alpha (100 nmol/L) significantly increased the cardiomyocyte
diameter, protein content and [Ca2+]i, and promoted ANP, CaN mRNA, and
CaN/NFAT3/GATA4 protein expressions, which were inhibited by either Rb1 in a
concentration-dependent manner (50, 100, and 200 microg/mL) or L-arginine (1
mmol/L). NG-nitro-L-arginine-methyl ester, a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor,
could abolish the effects of L-arginine, but failed to change the effects of Rb1 
in the experiments above.
CONCLUSION: The present data implicate that Rb1 attenuates cardiac hypertrophy,
the underlying mechanism may be involved in the inhibition of the Ca2+-CaN signal
transduction pathway.

PMID: 17640476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):H2262-70. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Functional arginine vasopressin system in early heart maturation.

Gutkowska J(1), Miszkurka M, Danalache B, Gassanov N, Wang D, Jankowski M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche CHUM, Hôtel-Dieu, 3850 St-Urbain, Montréal, QC, Canada H2W
1T7. jolanta.gutkowska@umontreal.ca

Since the neurohypophyseal hormone 8-arginine vasopressin (AVP) is involved in
cardiovascular tissue hypertrophy and myocyte differentiation, it is possible
that local AVP plays a role in heart maturation. AVP-specific RIA, RT-PCR, and
immunoblot measurement of AVP receptors (VR) were used to investigate heart
tissues from newborn and adult rats. To test AVP's role in differentiation and
specialization into ventricle-like cardiomyocytes, we studied GFP-P19Cl6 stem
cells, which express green fluorescence protein (GFP) reporter under
transcriptional control of the myosin light chain-2v promoter. VR(1) transcripts 
and proteins were higher in adult than in newborn rat hearts. In contrast, VR(2) 
increased from postnatal day 1 to 5 and was barely detected in the adult rat
heart. In cardiomyocytes expressing troponin C, immunofluorescence revealed VR(2)
and VR(1). Intracellular cAMP increased 6.5- and 8.9-fold in response to the
selective VR(2) agonist 1-desamino-8-D-AVP (DDAVP) after 1 and 24 h,
respectively. Cardiac AVP was high in 1- and 5-day-old (330 +/- 26 and 276 +/- 53
pg/mg protein, respectively) but low in 66-day-old (98 +/- 15 pg/mg protein)
rats. AVP immunostaining was detected in the tunica adventitia and endothelium of
the coronary vessels. The possible role of AVP in cardiomyogenesis was indicated 
by DDAVP-AVP-dependent differentiation of GFP-P19Cl6 stem cells into contracting 
cells displaying GATA-4, a cardiac-specific marker, and ventricle-specific myosin
light chain. Together, it is suggested that the AVP system is implicated in
postnatal cardiac maturation.

PMID: 17630342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):G615-22. Epub 2007 Jul
12.

Intestinal capacity to digest and absorb carbohydrates is maintained in a rat
model of cholestasis.

Los EL(1), Wolters H, Stellaard F, Kuipers F, Verkade HJ, Rings EH.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology/Research Laboratory of Pediatrics, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The
Netherlands.

Cholestasis is associated with systemic accumulation of bile salts and with
deficiency of bile in the intestinal lumen. During the past years bile salts have
been identified as signaling molecules that regulate lipid, glucose, and energy
metabolism. Bile salts have also been shown to activate signaling routes leading 
to proliferation, apoptosis, or differentiation. It is unclear, however, whether 
cholestasis affects the constitution and absorptive capacity of the intestinal
epithelium in vivo. We studied small intestinal morphology, proliferation,
apoptosis, expression of intestine-specific genes, and carbohydrate absorption in
cholestatic (1 wk bile duct ligation), bile-deficient (1 wk bile diversion), and 
control (sham) rats. Absorptive capacity was assessed by determination of plasma 
[(2)H]- and [(13)C]glucose concentrations after intraduodenal administration of
[(2)H]glucose and naturally enriched [(13)C]sucrose, respectively. Small
intestinal morphology, proliferation, apoptosis, and gene expression of
intestinal transcription factors (mRNA levels of Cdx-2, Gata-4, and Hnf-1alpha,
and Cdx-2 protein levels) were similar in cholestatic, bile-deficient, and
control rats. The (unlabeled) blood glucose response after intraduodenal
administration was delayed in cholestatic animals, but the absorption over 180
min was quantitatively similar between the groups. Plasma concentrations of
[(2)H]glucose and [(13)C]glucose peaked to similar extents in all groups within
7.5 and 30 min, respectively. Absorption of [(2)H]glucose and [(13)C]glucose in
plasma was similar in all groups. The present data indicate that neither
accumulation of bile salts in the body, nor their intestinal deficiency, two
characteristic features of cholestasis, affect rat small intestinal
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, or its capacity to digest and absorb
carbohydrates.

PMID: 17627970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 3;7:80.

Extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived from ES cells induced by GATA factors
acquire the character of XEN cells.

Shimosato D(1), Shiki M, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp <dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp>

BACKGROUND: Three types of cell lines have been established from mouse
blastocysts: embryonic stem (ES) cells, trophoblast stem (TS) cells, and
extra-embryonic endoderm (XEN) cells, which have the potential to differentiate
into their respective cognate lineages. ES cells can differentiate in vitro not
only into somatic cell lineages but into extra-embryonic lineages, including
trophectoderm and extra-embryonic endoderm (ExEn) as well. TS cells can be
established from ES cells by the artificial repression of Oct3/4 or the
upregulation of Cdx2 in the presence of FGF4 on feeder cells. The relationship
between these embryo-derived XEN cells and ES cell-derived ExEn cell lines
remains unclear, although we have previously reported that overexpression of
Gata4 or Gata6 induces differentiation of mouse ES cells into extra-embryonic
endoderm in vitro.
RESULTS: A system in which GATA factors were conditionally activated revealed
that the cells continue to proliferate while expressing a set of extra-embryonic 
endoderm markers, and, following injection into blastocysts, contribute only to
the extra-embryonic endoderm lineage in vivo. Although the in vivo contribution
is limited to cells of parietal endoderm lineage, Gata-induced extra-embryonic
endoderm cells (gExEn) can be induced to differentiate into visceral
endoderm-like cells in vitro by repression of Gata6. During early passage, the
propagation of gExEn cells is dependent on the expression of the Gata6 transgene.
These cells, however, lose this dependency following establishment of endogenous 
Gata6 expression.
CONCLUSION: We show here that Gata-induced extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived
from ES cells mimic the character of XEN cells. These findings indicate that Gata
transcription factors are sufficient for the derivation and propagation of
XEN-like extra-embryonic endoderm cells from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC1933422
PMID: 17605826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neoplasia. 2007 Jun;9(6):521-31.

Early alterations in ovarian surface epithelial cells and induction of ovarian
epithelial tumors triggered by loss of FSH receptor.

Chen X(1), Aravindakshan J, Yang Y, Sairam MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Reproduction Research Laboratory, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Univerisité de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Little is known about the behavior of the ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), which
plays a central role in ovarian cancer etiology. It has been suggested that
incessant ovulation causes OSE changes leading to transformation and that high
gonadotropin levels during postmenopause activate OSE receptors, inducing
proliferation. We examined the chronology of OSE changes, including tumor
appearance, in a mouse model where ovulation never occurs due to deletion of
follitropin receptor. Changes in epithelial cells were marked by pan-cytokeratin 
(CK) staining. Histologic changes and CK staining in the OSE increased from
postnatal day 2. CK staining was observed inside the ovary by 24 days and
increased thereafter in tumor-bearing animals. Ovaries from a third of aged (1
year) mutant mice showed CK deep inside, indicating cell migration. These tumors 
resembled serous papillary adenoma of human ovaries. Weak expression of GATA-4
and elevation of PCNA, cyclooxygenase-1, cyclooxygenase-2, and platelet-derived
growth factor receptors alpha and beta in mutants indicated differences in cell
proliferation, differentiation, and inflammation. Thus, we report that OSE
changes occur long before epithelial tumors appear in FORKO mice. Our results
suggest that neither incessant ovulation nor follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor presence in the OSE is required for inducing ovarian tumors; thus, other
mechanisms must contribute to ovarian tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC1899255
PMID: 17603635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 Nov;330(2):321-9. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Characterization of germ cells from pre-pubertal bull calves in preparation for
germ cell transplantation.

Herrid M(1), Davey RJ, Hill JR.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Food Futures National Research Flagship, CSIRO Livestock Industries,
Armidale, NSW, 2350, Australia.

Although methods to assess testis cell populations are established in mice, the
detailed validation of similar methods for bovine testis cells is necessary for
the development of emerging technologies such as male germ cell transplantation. 
As young calves provide donor cells for germ cell transplantation, we
characterized cell populations from three key pre-pubertal stages. Nine Angus
bull calves were selected to represent three stages of testis development at ages
(and testis weights) of 2-3 months (Stage 1, 10 g), 4-5 months (Stage 2, 35 g),
and 6-7 months (Stage 3, 70 g). The proportion and absolute numbers of germ and
somatic cells in fixed sections and from enzymatically dissociated seminiferous
tubules were assessed. Germ cells were identified by DBA and PGP9.5 staining, and
Sertoli cells by vimentin and GATA-4 staining. Staining of serial sections
confirmed that DBA and PGP9.5 identified similar cells, which were complementary 
to those stained for vimentin and GATA-4. In fixed tubules, the proportion of
cells within tubules that were positive for DBA and PGP9.5 increased nearly
three-fold from Stage 1 to Stage 2 with no further increase at Stage 3. Absolute 
numbers of spermatogonia also increased between Stages 1 and 2. After enzymatic
dissociation of tubules, three times more DBA- and PGP9.5-positive cells were
isolated from Stage 3 testes than from either Stage 1 or 2 testes. A higher
proportion of spermatogonia was observed after enzymatic isolation than were
present in seminiferous tubules. These data should help to predict the yield and 
expected proportions of spermatogonia from three distinct stages of testis
development in pre-pubertal bull calves.

PMID: 17593396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Jun 25;8:38.

Mutations in the 3'-untranslated region of GATA4 as molecular hotspots for
congenital heart disease (CHD).

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Cho SH, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.
reamon-buettner@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of mRNA contains regulatory
elements that are essential for the appropriate expression of many genes. These
regulatory elements are involved in the control of nuclear transport,
polyadenylation status, subcellular targetting as well as rates of translation
and degradation of mRNA. Indeed, 3'-UTR mutations have been associated with
disease, but frequently this region is not analyzed. To gain insights into
congenital heart disease (CHD), we have been analyzing cardiac-specific
transcription factor genes, including GATA4, which encodes a zinc finger
transcription factor. Germline mutations in the coding region of GATA4 have been 
associated with septation defects of the human heart, but mutations are rather
rare. Previously, we identified 19 somatically-derived zinc finger mutations in
diseased tissues of malformed hearts. We now continued our search in the 609 bp
3'-UTR region of GATA4 to explore further molecular avenues leading to CHD.
METHODS: By direct sequencing, we analyzed the 3'-UTR of GATA4 in DNA isolated
from 68 formalin-fixed explanted hearts with complex cardiac malformations
encompassing ventricular, atrial, and atrioventricular septal defects. We also
analyzed blood samples of 12 patients with CHD and 100 unrelated healthy
individuals.
RESULTS: We identified germline and somatic mutations in the 3'-UTR of GATA4. In 
the malformed hearts, we found nine frequently occurring sequence alterations and
six dbSNPs in the 3'-UTR region of GATA4. Seven of these mutations are predicted 
to affect RNA folding. We also found further five nonsynonymous mutations in
exons 6 and 7 of GATA4. Except for the dbSNPs, analysis of tissue distal to the
septation defect failed to detect sequence variations in the same donor, thus
suggesting somatic origin and mosaicism of mutations. In a family, we observed
c.+119A > T in the 3'-UTR associated with ASD type II.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that somatic GATA4 mutations in the 3'-UTR may
provide an additional molecular rationale for CHD.

PMCID: PMC1933416
PMID: 17592645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jul 15;273(1-2):59-67. Epub 2007 May 16.

Cardiac BNP gene activation by angiotensin II in vivo.

Majalahti T(1), Suo-Palosaari M, Sármán B, Hautala N, Pikkarainen S, Tokola H,
Vuolteenaho O, Wang J, Paradis P, Nemer M, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu FIN-90014, 
Finland.

The transcription factors involved in the activation of cardiac gene expression
by angiotensin II (Ang II) in vivo are not well understood. Here we studied the
contribution of transcriptional elements to the activation of the cardiac B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene promoter by Ang II in conscious rats and in
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) transgenic mice. Rat BNP luciferase
reporter gene constructs were injected into the left ventricular wall. The mean
luciferase activity was 1.8-fold higher (P<0.05) in the ventricles of animals
subjected to 2-week Ang II infusion as compared with vehicle infusion. Our
results indicate that GATA binding sites at -90 and -81 in the rat BNP promoter
are essential for the in vivo response to Ang II. The GATA factor binding to
these sites is GATA-4. BNP mRNA levels and GATA-4 binding activity are also
increased in the hypertrophied hearts of aged AT1R transgenic mice.

PMID: 17587490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25748-59. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Transcriptional repression by the T-box proteins Tbx18 and Tbx15 depends on
Groucho corepressors.

Farin HF(1), Bussen M, Schmidt MK, Singh MK, Schuster-Gossler K, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbox18 (Tbx18) and Tbox15 (Tbx15) encode a closely related pair of
vertebrate-specific T-box (Tbx) transcription factors. Functional analyses in the
mouse have proven the requirement of Tbx15 in skin and skeletal development and
of Tbx18 in the formation of the vertebral column, the ureter, and the posterior 
pole of the heart. Despite the accumulation of genetic data concerning the
embryological roles of these genes, it is currently unclear how Tbx18 and Tbx15
exert their function on the molecular level. Here, we have initiated a molecular 
analysis of Tbx18 and Tbx15 proteins and have characterized functional domains
for nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transcriptional modulation. We show
that both proteins homo- and heterodimerize, bind to various combinations of T
half-sites, and repress transcription in a Groucho-dependent manner. Competition 
with activating T-box proteins may constitute one mode of action as we show that 
Tbx18 interacts with Gata4 and Nkx2-5 and competes Tbx5-mediated activation of
the cardiac Natriuretic peptide precursor type a-promoter and that ectopic
expression of Tbx18 down-regulates Tbx6-activated Delta-like 1 expression in the 
somitic mesoderm in vivo.

PMID: 17584735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FASEB J. 2007 Oct;21(12):3369-79. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Fibroblasts from human postmyocardial infarction scars acquire properties of
cardiomyocytes after transduction with a recombinant myocardin gene.

van Tuyn J(1), Pijnappels DA, de Vries AA, de Vries I, van der Velde-van Dijke I,
Knaän-Shanzer S, van der Laarse A, Schalij MJ, Atsma DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600,
2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Myocardial scar formation impairs heart function by inducing cardiac remodeling, 
decreasing myocardial compliance, and compromising normal electrical conduction. 
Conversion of myocardial scar fibroblasts (MSFs) into (functional) cardiomyocytes
may be an effective alternative treatment to limit loss of cardiac performance
after myocardial injury. In this study, we investigated whether the phenotype of 
MSFs can be modified by gene transfer into cells with properties of
cardiomyocytes. To this end, fibroblasts from postmyocardial infarction scars of 
human left ventricles were isolated and characterized by cell biological,
immunological, and molecular biological assays. Cultured human MSFs express GATA4
and connexin 43 and display adipogenic differentiation potential. Infection of
human MSFs with a lentivirus vector encoding the potent cardiogenic transcription
factor myocardin renders them positive for a wide variety of
cardiomyocyte-specific proteins, including sarcomeric components, transcription
factors, and ion channels, and induces the expression of several smooth muscle
marker genes. Forced myocardin expression also endowed human MSFs with the
ability to transmit an action potential and to repair an artificially created
conduction block in cardiomyocyte cultures. These finding indicate that in vivo
myocardin gene transfer may potentially limit cardiomyocyte loss, myocardial
fibrosis, and disturbances in electrical conduction caused by myocardial
infarction.

PMID: 17579192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jan 1;103(1):182-94.

Induction of Id2 expression by cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and Nkx2.5.

Lim JY(1), Kim WH, Kim J, Park SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institute of Health, 194, Tongillo, Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul 122-701, Korea.

Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding (Id) proteins function as a regulator of
helix-loop-helix proteins participating in cell lineage commitment and
differentiation. Here, we observed a marked induction of Id2 during cardiomyocyte
differentiation from P19CL6 murine embryonic teratocarcinoma stem cells,
prompting us to investigate the upstream regulatory mechanism of Id2 induction.
Computer analysis of Id2 promoter and subsequent electrophoretic mobility shift
assay revealed several binding sites for GATA4 and Nkx2.5 within the Id2
promoter. By further deletion and mutation analysis of the respective binding
site, we identified that two motifs located at -497/-502 and -264/-270 were
functionally important for Id2 promoter activation by GATA4 and Nkx2.5,
respectively. Overexpression of GATA4 and/or Nkx2.5 induced not only Id2 promoter
activity but also Id2 protein expression. Additionally, Id proteins significantly
inhibit the GATA4 and Nkx2.5-dependent transcription, suggesting Id proteins may 
play a regulatory role in cardiogenesis. Collectively, our results demonstrate
that GATA4 and Nkx2.5 could be one of the upstream regulators of Id2.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17559079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Circ Res. 2007 Jun 8;100(11):1540-2.

Cell-based GATA4 cardiac gene transfer using cell-penetrating peptide.

Tang T, Hammond HK.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2007 Jun 8;100(11):1626-33.

PMID: 17556666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22638-50. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

The human mucin MUC4 is transcriptionally regulated by caudal-related homeobox,
hepatocyte nuclear factors, forkhead box A, and GATA endodermal transcription
factors in epithelial cancer cells.

Jonckheere N(1), Vincent A, Perrais M, Ducourouble MP, Male AK, Aubert JP, Pigny 
P, Carraway KL, Freund JN, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U560, Place de Verdun, Lille, F-59045, France.

The human gene MUC4 encodes a large transmembrane mucin that is developmentally
regulated and expressed along the undifferentiated pseudostratified epithelium,
as early as 6.5 weeks during fetal development. Immunohistochemical analysis of
Muc4 expression in developing mouse lung and gastrointestinal tract showed a
different spatio-temporal pattern of expression before and after
cytodifferentiation. The molecular mechanisms governing MUC4 expression during
development are, however, unknown. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), forkhead box
A (FOXA), GATA, and caudal-related homeobox transcription factors (TFs) are known
to control cell differentiation of gut endoderm derived-tissues during embryonic 
development. They also control the expression of cell- and tissue-specific genes 
and may thus control MUC4 expression. To test this hypothesis, we studied and
deciphered the molecular mechanisms responsible for MUC4 transcriptional
regulation by these TFs. Experiments using small interfering RNA, cell
co-transfection, and site-directed mutagenesis indicated that MUC4 is regulated
at the transcriptional level by CDX-1 and -2, HNF-1 alpha and -1 beta, FOXA1/A2, 
HNF-4 alpha and -4 gamma, and GATA-4, -5, and -6 factors in a cell-specific
manner. Binding of TFs was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
gel-shift assays. Altogether, these results demonstrate that MUC4 is a target
gene of endodermal TFs and thus point out an important role for these TFs in
regulating MUC4 expression during epithelial differentiation during development, 
cancer, and repair.

PMID: 17553805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 24;282(34):24915-27. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Analysis of the signals and mechanisms mediating nuclear trafficking of GATA-4.
Loss of DNA binding is associated with localization in intranuclear speckles.

Philips AS(1), Kwok JC, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

Nucleocytoplasmic transport of GATA-4 is important in maintaining and regulating 
normal cardiogenesis and heart function. This report investigates the detailed
mechanisms of GATA-4 nuclear transport. We characterized a nonclassical nuclear
localization signal between amino acids 270 and 324 that actively transports
GATA-4 into the nucleus of both HeLa cells and cardiac myocytes. Fine mapping
studies revealed four crucial arginine residues within this region that mediate
active transport predominantly through the nonclassical pathway via interaction
with importin beta. These four residues were also essential for the DNA binding
activity of GATA-4 and transcriptional activation of cardiac-specific genes.
Interestingly, mutation of these residues not only inhibited DNA binding and gene
transcription but also resulted in a preferential accumulation of the GATA-4
protein in distinct subnuclear speckles. A cardiac myocyte-specific, chromosome
maintenance region 1-dependent nuclear export signal consisting of three
essential leucine residues was also identified. The current study provides
detailed information on the nuclear shuttling pathways of GATA-4 that represents 
an additional mechanism of gene regulation.

PMID: 17548362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Jul 15;313(12):2550-62. Epub 2007 May 5.

'Working' cardiomyocytes exhibiting plateau action potentials from human
placenta-derived extraembryonic mesodermal cells.

Okamoto K(1), Miyoshi S, Toyoda M, Hida N, Ikegami Y, Makino H, Nishiyama N,
Tsuji H, Cui CH, Segawa K, Uyama T, Kami D, Miyado K, Asada H, Matsumoto K, Saito
H, Yoshimura Y, Ogawa S, Aeba R, Yozu R, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology and Pathology, National Research Institute 
for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

The clinical application of cell transplantation for severe heart failure is a
promising strategy to improve impaired cardiac function. Recently, an array of
cell types, including bone marrow cells, endothelial progenitors, mesenchymal
stem cells, resident cardiac stem cells, and embryonic stem cells, have become
important candidates for cell sources for cardiac repair. In the present study,
we focused on the placenta as a cell source. Cells from the chorionic plate in
the fetal portion of the human placenta were obtained after delivery by the
primary culture method, and the cells generated in this study had the Y sex
chromosome, indicating that the cells were derived from the fetus. The cells
potentially expressed 'working' cardiomyocyte-specific genes such as cardiac
myosin heavy chain 7beta, atrial myosin light chain, cardiac alpha-actin by gene 
chip analysis, and Csx/Nkx2.5, GATA4 by RT-PCR, cardiac troponin-I and connexin
43 by immunohistochemistry. These cells were able to differentiate into
cardiomyocytes. Cardiac troponin-I and connexin 43 displayed a discontinuous
pattern of localization at intercellular contact sites after cardiomyogenic
differentiation, suggesting that the chorionic mesoderm contained a large number 
of cells with cardiomyogenic potential. The cells began spontaneously beating 3
days after co-cultivation with murine fetal cardiomyocytes and the frequency of
beating cells reached a maximum on day 10. The contraction of the cardiomyocytes 
was rhythmical and synchronous, suggesting the presence of electrical
communication between the cells. Placenta-derived human fetal cells may be useful
for patients who cannot supply bone marrow cells but want to receive stem
cell-based cardiac therapy.

PMID: 17544394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):356-67. Epub 2007 May 3.

The regulation of Sox9 gene expression by the GATA4/FOG2 transcriptional complex 
in dominant XX sex reversal mouse models.

Manuylov NL(1), Fujiwara Y, Adameyko II, Poulat F, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA.

We have previously established an in vivo requirement for GATA4 and FOG2
transcription factors in sexual differentiation. Fog2 null mouse fetuses or
fetuses homozygous for a targeted mutation in Gata4 (Gata4(ki)), which cripples
the GATA4-FOG2 interaction, exhibit a profound and early block in testis
differentiation in both sexes. Others have shown that XX mice with the Ods
transgenic insertion or the Wt1-Sox9 YAC transgene overexpress the testis
differentiation gene, Sox9. Thus, these XX animals undergo dominant sex reversal 
by developing into phenotypically normal, but sterile, males. Now we have
determined that Fog2 haploinsufficiency prevents (suppresses) this dominant sex
reversal and Fog2+/-Wt1-Sox9 or Ods XX animals develop normally--as fertile
females. The suppression of sex reversal in Fog2 heterozygous females results
from approximately 50% downregulation of the expression from the
transgene-associated allele of Sox9. The GATA4/FOG2-dependent sex reversal
observed in the transgenic XX gonads has to rely on gene targets other than the Y
chromosome-linked Sry gene. Importantly, Fog2 null or Gata4(ki/ki) embryos
(either XX or XY) fail to express detectable levels of Sox9 despite carrying the 
Ods mutation or Wt1-Sox9 transgene. Fog2 haploinsufficiency leads to a decreased 
amount of SOX9-positive cells in XY gonads. We conclude that FOG2 is a limiting
factor in the formation of a functional GATA4/FOG2 transcription complex that is 
required for Sox9 expression during gonadogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2020840
PMID: 17540364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Oct;31(10):1079-88. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Isolation and characterization of EG-like cells from Chinese swamp buffalo
(Bubalus bubalis).

Huang B(1), Xie TS, Shi DS, Li T, Wang XL, Mo Y, Wang ZQ, Li MM.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Guangxi, Nanning, PR China.

There have been few studies done on the isolation and characterization of Chinese
swamp buffalo embryonic germ cells (EG cells). Here, we first report on EG-like
cells isolated from Chinese swamp buffalo fetuses. The results showed the cells
grew in large, multilayered colonies, which were densely packed with an obvious
border resembling mouse embryonic stem cells (ES cells) and EG cells. The buffalo
EG-like cells expressed AP, SSEA-1, SSEA-3, SSEA-4 and OCT-4. By RT-PCR, we found
that undifferentiated swamp buffalo EG-like cells expressed the OCT-4, NANOG,
SOX2, FOXD3, GP130, STAT3, and HEB gene mRNA, but not Fgf4. When these cells were
cultured for more than 2weeks without passage, they could differentiate into
several types of cells including fibroblast-like, neuron-like, smooth
muscle-like, and epithelial-like cells. Some cells formed simple embryoid bodies 
(EBs) and cystic EBs by suspension culture. By RT-PCR, we found cystic EBs
expressed FOXD3, GP130, STAT3 and HEB gene mRNA, but not OCT-4, NANOG, and SOX2
gene mRNA, which could be detected in undifferentiated buffalo EG-like cells. At 
the same time, the expression of KERATIN-14 (Endoderm), GATA4, ACTA2 (Mesoderm)
and TUBB3 (Ectoderm) gene mRNA were also detected in cystic EBs. The results
suggested that these cells were capable of forming three germ layers in in vitro 
differentiation. The expression of OCT-4, NANOG and SOX2 might be essential for
Chinese swamp buffalo EG-like cells in a pluripotent state. During the isolation 
and culture of Chinese swamp buffalo EG-like cells, we found the fetuses that
were at 30-80days post-coitus were more efficient than others; and the mechanical
method was better than trypsin digestion. The maximal passage of the mechanical
method was eight, but the trypsin digestion was just three passages. So it seemed
like that the buffalo EG-like cells were sensitive to trypsin. In summary, we
were the first to isolate and characterize Chinese swamp buffalo EG-like cells
that had morphology and characterization similar to those of established
EG/EG-like cells in mouse and human.

PMID: 17532234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 27;282(30):21945-52. Epub 2007 May 24.

Diminished GATA4 protein levels contribute to hyperglycemia-induced cardiomyocyte
injury.

Kobayashi S(1), Mao K, Zheng H, Wang X, Patterson C, O'Connell TD, Liang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Sanford Research, University of South
Dakota Sanford School of Medicine, Sioux Falls, SD 57105, USA.

Hyperglycemia is an independent risk factor for diabetic heart failure. However, 
the mechanisms that mediate hyperglycemia-induced cardiac damage remain poorly
understood. The transcription factor GATA4 is essential for cardiac homeostasis, 
and its protein levels are dramatically reduced in the heart in response to
diverse pathologic stresses. In this study, we investigated if hyperglycemia
affects GATA4 expression in cardiomyocytes and if enhancing GATA4 signaling could
attenuate hyperglycemia-induced cardiomyocyte injury. In cultured rat
cardiomyocytes, high glucose (HG, 25 or 40 mm) markedly reduced GATA4 protein
levels as compared with normal glucose (NG, 5.5 mm). Equal amount of mannitol did
not affect GATA4 protein expression (NG, 100 +/- 12%; mannitol, 97 +/- 8%, versus
HG, 43 +/- 16%, p < 0.05). The GATA4 mRNA content, either steady-state or
polysome-associated, remained unchanged. HG-induced GATA4 reduction was reversed 
by MG262, a specific proteasome inhibitor. HG did not activate the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS) in cardiomyocytes as indicated by a UPS reporter, nor did
it increase the peptidase activities or protein expression of the proteasomal
subunits. However, the mRNA levels of ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase (E3)
carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP) were markedly increased in 
HG-treated cardiomyocytes. CHIP overexpression promoted GATA4 protein
degradation, whereas small interfering RNA-mediated CHIP knockdown prevented
HG-induced GATA4 depletion. Moreover, overexpression of GATA4 blocked HG-induced 
cardiomyocyte death. Also, GATA4 protein levels were diminished in the hearts of 
streptozotocin and db/db diabetic mice (44 +/- 7% and 67 +/- 13% of control, p < 
0.05), which correlated with increased CHIP mRNA abundance. In summary, increased
GATA4 protein degradation may be an important mechanism that contributes to
hyperglycemic cardiotoxicity.

PMID: 17525155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2007 Jun;9(6):723-9.

Effects of intermittent hypoxia on the heart.

Park AM(1), Nagase H, Kumar SV, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA. ys82@georgetown.edu

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with cardiovascular diseases such as 
hypertension through mechanisms involving intermittent hypoxia (IH). However, it 
is not yet clear whether IH directly affects the heart. In a mouse model of OSA, 
we found that IH causes time-dependent alterations of the susceptibility of the
heart to oxidative stress. Acute IH can exert preconditioning-like
cardioprotection, in part, through the transcriptional activation of genes such
as bcl-x(L) and gata4. We cloned the mouse gata4 promoter and identified an
IH-responsive region. The exposure of mice to prolonged IH results in the
increased susceptibility of the heart to ischemia-reperfusion injury by
increasing the oxidative stress status. This might resemble conditions of OSA
patients. In our mouse model, further exposure to prolonged IH allowed reversal
of the enhancement of myocardial damage. Understanding the complex effects of IH 
on the heart should help ultimately to develop therapeutic strategies against
OSA-induced complications.

PMID: 17511587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2041-50.

Bmp and Fgf signaling are essential for liver specification in zebrafish.

Shin D(1), Shin CH, Tucker J, Ober EA, Rentzsch F, Poss KD, Hammerschmidt M,
Mullins MC, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, Liver Center, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Based on data from in vitro tissue explant and ex vivo cell/bead implantation
experiments, Bmp and Fgf signaling have been proposed to regulate hepatic
specification. However, genetic evidence for this hypothesis has been lacking.
Here, we provide in vivo genetic evidence that Bmp and Fgf signaling are
essential for hepatic specification. We utilized transgenic zebrafish that
overexpress dominant-negative forms of Bmp or Fgf receptors following heat-shock 
induction. These transgenes allow one to bypass the early embryonic requirements 
for Bmp and Fgf signaling, and also to completely block Bmp or Fgf signaling. We 
found that the expression of hhex and prox1, the earliest liver markers in
zebrafish, was severely reduced in the liver region when Bmp or Fgf signaling was
blocked just before hepatic specification. However, hhex and prox1 expression in 
adjacent endodermal and mesodermal tissues appeared unaffected by these
manipulations. Additional genetic studies indicate that the endoderm maintains
competence for Bmp-mediated hepatogenesis over an extended window of embryonic
development. Altogether, these data provide the first genetic evidence that Bmp
and Fgf signaling are essential for hepatic specification, and suggest that
endodermal cells remain competent to differentiate into hepatocytes for longer
than anticipated.

PMID: 17507405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Jun;42(6):1045-53. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Transcription factors Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 distinctly regulate expression of Ca2+
channels in neonatal rat heart.

Wang Y(1), Morishima M, Zheng M, Uchino T, Mannen K, Takahashi A, Nakaya Y,
Komuro I, Ono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Oita University School of Medicine, 1-1
Idaigaoka, Hasama, Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan.

The cardiac transcription factors Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 play important roles in
vertebrate heart development. Although mutations of Csx/Nkx2.5 or GATA4 are
associated with various congenital heart diseases, their mechanism of action on
cardiomyocyte function is not completely elucidated. In this study, we therefore 
investigated the actions of these transcription factors on the
electrophysiological features and expression of ion channels in cardiomyocytes.
Genes for transcription factors Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 were transfected into rat
neonatal cardiomyocytes by adenoviral infection. Action potentials, L-, T-type
Ca(2+) channels and hyperpolarization-activated cation current (I(h)) of rat
neonatal myocytes were recorded by patch clamp technique after adenoviral
infection. Expression of ion channels was confirmed by real-time PCR. In
Csx/Nkx2.5 overexpression myocytes, the spontaneous beating rate was markedly
increased with an up-regulation of the Ca(v)3.2 T-type Ca(2+) channel, while in
GATA4 overexpression myocytes, the T-type Ca(2+) channel was unchanged. On the
other hand, the L-type Ca(2+) channel was down-regulated by both Csx/Nkx2.5 and
GATA4 overexpression; the level of Ca(v)1.3 mRNA was dramatically decreased by
Csx/Nkx2.5 overexpression. These results indicate that Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 play 
important roles on the generation of pacemaker potentials modulating
voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels in the neonatal cardiomyocyte.

PMID: 17498735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Circ Res. 2007 Jun 8;100(11):1626-33. Epub 2007 May 10.

Effect of cell-based intercellular delivery of transcription factor GATA4 on
ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Bian J(1), Popovic ZB, Benejam C, Kiedrowski M, Rodriguez LL, Penn MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Jun 8;100(11):1540-2.

Recent loss-of-function studies highlight the importance of the transcription
factor GATA4 in the myocardial response to injury in the adult heart. However,
the potential effects of gain-in-function of GATA4 overexpression, and
transcription factors in general, is hindered by the fact that transcription
factors are neither secreted nor taken up by cells. Chimeric proteins
incorporating motifs of cell-penetrating proteins are secreted from cells and
internalized by surrounding cells. We engineered a chimeric protein consisting of
GATA4 and the cell-penetrating protein VP22. Cardiac fibroblasts stably
transfected with the GATA4:VP22, GFP:VP22, or green fluorescent protein (GFP)
constructs were transplanted into Lewis rats 1 month after left anterior
descending ligation. GATA4:VP22 expression in the border zone was associated with
increased cardiac myosin expression and cardiac myocyte size (30 mum versus 19
mum, P<0.01). Compared with the GFP:VP22 control group, 6 weeks after cardiac
fibroblast transplantation (10 weeks after myocardial infarction), animals that
received GATA4:VP22-expressing cardiac fibroblasts demonstrated increased cardiac
function and less negative remodeling. These data demonstrate a novel strategy
for transcription factor delivery to injured myocardium and indicate that the
delivery of GATA4 locally to the infarct border zone induces multiple local
effects in the border zone cardiac myocytes resulting in beneficial ventricular
remodeling and improved global left ventricular function.

PMID: 17495229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Ontogenez. 2007 Mar-Apr;38(2):126-35.

[Comparative analysis of expression of TGFbeta family factors and their receptors
in mouse embryonic stem and embryonic teratocarcinoma cells].

[Article in Russian]

Krasnikova NIu, Gordeeva OF.

Specific factors that determine the cell fate in early embryogenesis are
modulated during interaction of signaling pathways to form a unique regulatory
network inside the cell, which is essential for differentiation of various cell
populations. We carried out a comparative study of expression of the genes of
TGFbeta growth factors and their receptors at the initial stages of
differentiation of the embryonic stem cells, during formation of spheroids of the
embryonic teratocarcinoma cells, and during growth of neoplastic cells in vivo in
immunodeficient mice. The patterns of expression of the genes Activin, Nodal,
Lefty1, Lefty2, BMP, and TGF1 and their receptors ActRI, ActRII, BMPRI,
TGFbeta1R1, and Tdgf proved to be identical. Expression of alpha-fetoprotein and 
transcription factor Gata4 protein, specific for the primary endoderm, was
detected in the embryonic teratocarcinoma cells. In Undifferentiated embryonic
stem cells, expression of Gata4 was found at the mRNA level, while expression at 
the level of proteins appeared only in the primary endoderm cells in the embryoid
bodies. The results obtained suggest that despite the existence of similar
signaling systems in the embryonic stem and teratocarcinoma cells, the presence
of different intracellular specific factors forms radically different regulatory 
pathways, which determine the program of their differentiation.

PMID: 17479535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Sep;31(9):1002-9. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha is involved in cardiomyocyte
differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells in vitro.

Ding L(1), Liang X, Zhu D, Lou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology-Toxicology and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) plays a key role in 
the transcriptional regulation of genes involved in cellular lipid and energy
metabolism, which is abundantly expressed in tissues with high energy demand,
including the mammalian heart. Although multiple roles for PPARalpha in adult
cardiomyocytes have been proposed, little is known about the significance of
PPARalpha in early differentiation of cardiomyocytes. To address this issue,
murine embryonic stem (ES) cells were adopted in this study since they would
differentiate in vitro into cardiomyocytes that faithfully recapitulated
cardiomyocyte differentiation in vivo. As determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR 
and Western-blot, both PPARalpha and its coactivatior PGC-1alpha were increased
during cardiomyocyte differentiation. A positive correlation between PPARalpha
and Troponin-T expression was also observed by immunofluorescence in early
differentiation. Application of PPARalpha antagonist GW6471 prevented
cardiomyocyte differentiation as indicated by reduced expression of cardiac
specific genes (alpha-MHC, MLC2v) and cardiac sarcomeric proteins (alpha-Actinin,
Troponin-T). However, gene expression of cardiac specific transcription factors
(GATA4, Nkx2.5, and MEF2C) remained unchanged. Moreover, cardiomyocyte
differentiation of EBs could be efficiently stimulated by WY14643 treatment, the 
specific agonist of PPARalpha. Taken together, these results suggested a
facilitating role of PPARalpha in cardiomyocyte differentiation of murine ES
cells in vitro.

PMID: 17467307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Regen Med. 2007 Mar;2(2):193-202.

Creating prodynorphin-expressing stem cells alerted for a high-throughput of
cardiogenic commitment.

Maioli M(1), Asara Y, Pintus A, Ninniri S, Bettuzzi S, Scaltriti M, Galimi F,
Ventura C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and National Institute of Biostructures and 
Biosystems, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The development of cell therapy for the rescue of damaged heart
muscle is a major area of inquiry. Within this context, the establishment of a
cardiogenic cell line may remarkably facilitate the molecular dissection of
cardiac fate specification, a low-efficiency and still poorly understood process,
paving the way for novel approaches in the use of stem cells for cardiac repair.
METHODS & RESULTS: We used GTR1 cells, a derivative of mouse R1 embryonic stem
cells bearing the puromycin-resistance gene driven by the cardiomyocyte-specific 
alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter, affording a gene trapping selection of a
virtually pure population of embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.
Third-generation lentiviral vectors were used to overexpress the prodynorphin
gene, previously shown to orchestrate a dynorphinergic system acting as a major
conductor of embryonic stem cell cardiogenesis. Lentiviral prodynorphin
transduction remarkably enhanced the transcription of GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5, two
cardiac lineage-promoting genes, resulting in a dramatic increase in the number
of spontaneously beating cardiomyocytes. Transduced cells also exhibited a
subcellular redistribution patterning of protein kinase C-beta, -delta and
-epsilon, a major requirement in cardiac lineage commitment. This activation
resulted from a sustained increase in the transcription of targeted protein
kinase C genes. Prodynorphin transduction was selective in nature and failed to
activate genes responsible for skeletal myogenesis or neuronal specification.
CONCLUSIONS: The cell line developed in this study provides a powerful in vitro
model of cardiomyogenesis that may help clarify the cascade of transcriptional
activation and signaling networks that push multipotent cells to take on the
identity of a cardiac myocyte.

PMID: 17465751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;85(1):121-32.

BMPs regulate differentiation of a putative visceral endoderm layer within human 
embryonic stem-cell-derived embryoid bodies.

Conley BJ(1), Ellis S, Gulluyan L, Mollard R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproduction and Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton 3168, Australia. brock.conley@gmail.com

Human embryonic stem cells (HESCs), pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell
mass (ICM) of human blastocysts, represent a novel tool for the study of early
human developmental events. When cultured in suspension with serum, HESCs form
spherical structures resembling embryoid bodies (EBs). We show that
differentiation of HESCs within EBs occurs radially, with central cells then
undergoing apoptosis in association with EB cavitation. Cells within the outer
layer of cavitating EBs display stage-specific immunoreactivity to pan-keratin,
cytokeratin-8, GATA6, alpha-fetoprotein, and transthyretin specific antibodies,
and hybridization to disabled-2, GATA4, and GATA6 specific riboprobes.
Transmission electron microscopy of these cells reveals clathrin-coated
micropinocytotic vesicles, microvilli, and many vacuoles, a phenotype consistent 
with mouse visceral endoderm (VE) rather than mouse definitive or parietal
endoderm. When cultured in media supplemented with the BMP inhibitor noggin, or
in the absence of serum, HESC derivatives do not develop the mouse VE-like
phenotype. The addition of BMP-4 to noggin-treated HESCs cultured in serum or in 
serum-free conditions reconstituted development of the VE-like phenotype. These
data demonstrate that human EBs undergo developmental events similar to those of 
mouse EBs and that in vitro BMP signalling induces derivatives of the human ICM
to express a phenotype similar to mouse VE.

PMID: 17464352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):8023-8. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Inhibition of lysine-specific demethylase 1 by polyamine analogues results in
reexpression of aberrantly silenced genes.

Huang Y(1), Greene E, Murray Stewart T, Goodwin AC, Baylin SB, Woster PM, Casero 
RA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Bunting-Blaustein Cancer Research Building, 1650
Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Epigenetic chromatin modification is a major regulator of eukaryotic gene
expression, and aberrant epigenetic silencing of gene expression contributes to
tumorigenesis. Histone modifications include acetylation, phosphorylation, and
methylation, resulting in a combination of histone marks known collectively as
the histone code. The chromatin marks at a given promoter determine, in part,
whether specific promoters are in an open/active conformation or closed/repressed
conformation. Dimethyl-lysine 4 histone H3 (H3K4me2) is a
transcription-activating chromatin mark at gene promoters, and demethylation of
this mark by the lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), a homologue of polyamine
oxidases, may broadly repress gene expression. We now report that novel biguanide
and bisguanidine polyamine analogues are potent inhibitors of LSD1. These
analogues inhibit LSD1 in human colon carcinoma cells and affect a reexpression
of multiple, aberrantly silenced genes important in the development of colon
cancer, including members of the secreted frizzle-related proteins (SFRPs) and
the GATA family of transcription factors. Furthermore, we demonstrate by
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis that the reexpression is concurrent with
increased H3K4me2 and acetyl-H3K9 marks, decreased H3K9me1 and H3K9me2 repressive
marks. We thus define important new agents for reversing aberrant repression of
gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1857229
PMID: 17463086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 15;357(4):896-902. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Endocardiogenesis in embryoid bodies: novel markers identified by gene expression
profiling.

Narumiya H(1), Hidaka K, Shirai M, Terami H, Aburatani H, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
5-7-1 Fujishirodai, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan.

Endocardial cells and cardiomyocytes differentiate from the cardiogenic mesoderm 
at about the same time during development. Although in vitro embryonic stem (ES) 
cell systems have been used to study the differentiation of various types of cell
lineages, including cardiomyocytes, smooth muscle cells, and vascular endothelial
cells, differentiation of endocardial cells, or endocardiogenesis, has not been
well reported, because of a lack of specific molecular markers. In our search for
cardiogenesis-associated genes expressed in embryoid bodies, we found several
genes expressed in the heart region of mouse embryos, but not in cardiomyocytes. 
To identify the cell types expressing these genes, CD31(+) cells were taken from 
mouse embryos on embryonic day (E)8.5 and E9.5 and sorted, then their transcripts
were analyzed using quantitative RT-PCR analyses. In those embryos, Gata4 and
Nfatc1, as well as newly identified Cgnl1 and Dok4 were found to be
preferentially expressed in endocardial cells, but not in yolk sac endothelial
cells, while Cdh5 and Kdr were expressed in both cardiac and yolk sac endothelial
cells. Immunohistochemical analyses of embryoid bodies revealed that some CD31(+)
cells co-expressing Gata4 and Nfatc1 were located in close proximity to
cardiomyocytes. These results suggest that embryoid bodies express endocardial
specific genes and likely generate endocardial cells along with cardiomyocytes.
Further, they indicate that these new marker genes are useful to study the origin
and induction of endocardial cells, and identify other endocardial markers.

PMID: 17462595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 23;7:37.

Development of the mammalian liver and ventral pancreas is dependent on GATA4.

Watt AJ(1), Zhao R, Li J, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53202, USA. awatt1@staffmail.ed.ac.uk
<awatt1@staffmail.ed.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: In the mouse, the parenchyma of both the liver and ventral pancreas
is specified from adjacent domains of the ventral foregut endoderm. GATA4, a zinc
finger transcription factor, is strongly expressed in these endodermal domains
and molecular analyses have implicated GATA4 in potentiating liver gene
expression during the onset of hepatogenesis. We therefore hypothesized that
GATA4 has an integral role in controlling the early stages of pancreatic and
liver development.
RESULTS: To determine whether GATA4 contributes to development of either the
pancreas or liver we characterized the formation of pancreatic and hepatic
tissues in embryos derived from Gata4-/- ES cells by tetraploid embryo
complementation. In the absence of GATA4, development of the liver and ventral
pancreas was disrupted. At embryonic day (E) 9.5, the liver bud failed to expand 
although, contrary to expectations, the hepatic endoderm was able to form a
pseudo-stratified epithelial liver bud that expressed hepatic genes. Moreover, as
we had shown previously, the embryos lacked septum transversum mesenchyme
suggesting that liver defects may be cell non-autonomous. Analyses of pancreatic 
development revealed a complete absence of the ventral but not the dorsal
pancreas in Gata4-/- embryos. Moreover, Gata6-/- embryos displayed a similar,
although less dramatic phenotype, suggesting a critical role for multiple GATA
factors at the earliest stages of ventral pancreas development.
CONCLUSION: This study defines integral roles for GATA factors in controlling
early development of the mammalian liver and pancreas.

PMCID: PMC1877807
PMID: 17451603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 8;357(3):683-7. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

An alternative transcript of the FOG-2 gene encodes a FOG-2 isoform lacking the
FOG repression motif.

Dale RM(1), Remo BF, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue,
MC6088, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The FOG family of transcriptional co-factors is composed of two members in
mammals: FOG-1 and FOG-2. Both have been shown to bind to GATA factors and
function as transcriptional co-repressors in specific cell and promoter contexts.
We have previously defined a novel repression domain localized to the N-terminus 
of each FOG family member, the FOG repression motif, which is necessary for
FOG-mediated transcriptional repression. In this report, we describe the
identification and characterization of a novel isoform of FOG-2 lacking the FOG
repression motif. In contrast to full-length FOG-2, this isoform is expressed
predominately in the embryonic and adult heart. It can bind GATA4 avidly, but is 
unable to repress GATA4-mediated activation of cardiac-restricted gene promoters.
Together, these results suggest that FOG-2 repressive activity may be modulated
by the generation of isoforms of FOG-2 lacking the FOG repression motif.

PMCID: PMC1971242
PMID: 17445768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 24;104(17):7074-9. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Kruppel-like factor 15 is a regulator of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Fisch S(1), Gray S, Heymans S, Haldar SM, Wang B, Pfister O, Cui L, Kumar A, Lin 
Z, Sen-Banerjee S, Das H, Petersen CA, Mende U, Burleigh BA, Zhu Y, Pinto YM,
Liao R, Jain MK.

Author information: 
(1)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute, Case Western Reserve University School
of Medicine, 2103 Cornell Road, Room 4-503, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 21;104(34):13851. Pinto, Yigal [corrected to
Pinto, Yigal M].

Cardiac hypertrophy is a common response to injury and hemodynamic stress and an 
important harbinger of heart failure and death. Herein, we identify the
Kruppel-like factor 15 (KLF15) as an inhibitor of cardiac hypertrophy. Myocardial
expression of KLF15 is reduced in rodent models of hypertrophy and in biopsy
samples from patients with pressure-overload induced by chronic valvular aortic
stenosis. Overexpression of KLF15 in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes
inhibits cell size, protein synthesis and hypertrophic gene expression.
KLF15-null mice are viable but, in response to pressure overload, develop an
eccentric form of cardiac hypertrophy characterized by increased heart weight,
exaggerated expression of hypertrophic genes, left ventricular cavity dilatation 
with increased myocyte size, and reduced left ventricular systolic function.
Mechanistically, a combination of promoter analyses and gel-shift studies suggest
that KLF15 can inhibit GATA4 and myocyte enhancer factor 2 function. These
studies identify KLF15 as part of a heretofore unrecognized pathway regulating
the cardiac response to hemodynamic stress.

PMCID: PMC1855421
PMID: 17438289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2007 May 15;145C(2):217-26.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) etiology as revealed by pathway genetics.

Kantarci S(1), Donahoe PK.

Author information: 
(1)Peadiatric Surgical Research Laboratories at Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with high
mortality and morbidity. Two hundred seventy CDH patients were ascertained,
carefully phenotyped, and classified as isolated (diaphragm defects alone) or
complex (with additional anomalies) cases. We established different strategies to
reveal CDH-critical chromosome loci and genes in humans. Candidate genes for
sequencing analyses were selected from CDH animal models, genetic intervals of
recurrent chromosomal aberration in humans, such as 15q26.1-q26.2 or 1q41-q42.12,
as well as genes in the retinoic acid and related pathways and those known to be 
involved in embryonic lung development. For instance, FOG2, GATA4, and COUP-TFII 
are all needed for both normal diaphragm and lung development and are likely all 
in the same genetic and molecular pathway. Linkage analysis was applied first in 
a large inbred family and then in four multiplex families with Donnai-Barrow
syndrome (DBS) associated with CDH. 10K SNP chip and microsatellite markers
revealed a DBS locus on chromosome 2q23.3-q31.1. We applied array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) techniques to over 30, mostly complex,
CDH patients and found a de novo microdeletion in a patient with Fryns syndrome
related to CDH. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) techniques allowed us to further
define the deletion interval. Our aim is to identify genetic intervals and, in
those, to prioritize genes that might reveal molecular pathways, mutations in any
step of which, might contribute to the same phenotype. More important, the
elucidation of pathways may ultimately provide clues to treatment strategies.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17436295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):825-45. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Genetic factors in congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Holder AM(1), Klaassens M, Tibboel D, de Klein A, Lee B, Scott DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a relatively common birth defect
associated with high mortality and morbidity. Although the exact etiology of most
cases of CDH remains unknown, there is a growing body of evidence that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. In this review, we
examine key findings that are likely to form the basis for future research in
this field. Specific topics include a short overview of normal and abnormal
diaphragm development, a discussion of syndromic forms of CDH, a detailed review 
of chromosomal regions recurrently altered in CDH, a description of the retinoid 
hypothesis of CDH, and evidence of the roles of specific genes in the development
of CDH.

PMCID: PMC1852742
PMID: 17436238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2007 Mar;15(3):164-9.

[Human fetal liver nonparenchymal mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into
functional hepatocyte-like cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

He NH(1), Zhao WL, Wang YM.

Author information: 
(1)PLA Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To induce nonparenchymal mesenchymal stem cells (NPMSCs)
differentiating into functional hepatocyte-like cells in vitro, and to identify
the molecular biology and functional characteristics of those hepatocyte-like
cells.
METHODS: Human NPMSCs were isolated and cultured with cell culture technique.
NPMSCs were induced (on 1% Matrigel as a matrix and then submitted to 2.5 mmol/L 
AZA pretreatment for 10-12 h), by adding HGF 10 microg/L + FGF4 10microg/L + HGM 
into the culture medium. The characteristics of proliferation and growth of human
NPMSCs were studied with methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT). The phenotypes of
NPMSCs were identified by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
Albumin (Alb) levels in culture supernatants were determined with ELISA. Staining
for glycogen of undifferentiated NPMSCs and NPMSCs derivated hepatocyte-like
cells was conducted with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) test.
RESULTS: Growth and division of adherent cells obtained from fetal livers were
good and the amount of NPMSCs resourced from each fetus could be amplified to 109
cells after 10 serial subcultivations. The phenotype of NPMSCs was CD166 positive
and CD34 negative. The shape of NPMSCs plated on Matrigel with FGF4 and HGF
changed from long fusiform to polygonal or round on days 21-28. The rate of cell 
rounding was 40% and the ratio of dikaryocytes was 5%. Immunohistochemical and
RT-PCR detection showed that undifferentiated NPMSCs expressed few alpha
fetoprotein (AFP) and AFP mRNA, and did not express any of the liver-specific
transcription factors or cytoplasmic markers. Many cells in early induction
expressed GATA4, AFP and CK18 proteins and their mRNAs, and their expressions
were reduced at the late induction, but the expressions of Alb, CK18, GST-and
hepatocyte transcription factor HNF1increased gradually. The ratio of Alb and
CK18 positive cells was 60%. Undifferentiated NPMSCs did not produce Alb. Alb
production by induced NPMSCs increased in a time-dependent manner. Glycogen
storage was first seen on day 14, and maximum levels were seen after day 28.
CONCLUSIONS: There are MSCs among nonparenchymal cells of fetal livers. A high
ratio of hepatocyte-like cells was obtained under our induction condition. NPMSCs
differentiate firstly into hepatocyte precursors, and then differentiate into
mature hepatocytes and hepatocyte-like cells with positive hepatocyte markers.
The induced NPMSCs have hepatocyte specific functional features.

PMID: 17407703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(12):4248-60. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Cooperative interaction between hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha and GATA
transcription factors regulates ATP-binding cassette sterol transporters ABCG5
and ABCG8.

Sumi K(1), Tanaka T, Uchida A, Magoori K, Urashima Y, Ohashi R, Ohguchi H,
Okamura M, Kudo H, Daigo K, Maejima T, Kojima N, Sakakibara I, Jiang S, Hasegawa 
G, Kim I, Osborne TF, Naito M, Gonzalez FJ, Hamakubo T, Kodama T, Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan.

Cholesterol homeostasis is maintained by coordinate regulation of cholesterol
synthesis and its conversion to bile acids in the liver. The excretion of
cholesterol from liver and intestine is regulated by ATP-binding cassette
half-transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8. The genes for these two proteins are closely
linked and divergently transcribed from a common intergenic promoter region.
Here, we identified a binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) in the ABCG5/ABCG8 intergenic promoter, through which HNF4alpha
strongly activated the expression of a reporter gene in both directions. The
HNF4alpha-responsive element is flanked by two conserved GATA boxes that were
also required for stimulation by HNF4alpha. GATA4 and GATA6 bind to the GATA
boxes, coexpression of GATA4 and HNF4alpha leads to a striking synergistic
activation of both the ABCG5 and the ABCG8 promoters, and binding sites for
HNF4alpha and GATA were essential for maximal synergism. We also show that
HNF4alpha, GATA4, and GATA6 colocalize in the nuclei of HepG2 cells and that a
physical interaction between HNF4alpha and GATA4 is critical for the synergistic 
response. This is the first demonstration that HNF4alpha acts synergistically
with GATA factors to activate gene expression in a bidirectional fashion.

PMCID: PMC1900057
PMID: 17403900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Ethnopharmacol. 2007 May 22;111(3):567-72. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Inhibitory effect of ginsenoside Rb1 on cardiac hypertrophy induced by
monocrotaline in rat.

Jiang QS(1), Huang XN, Dai ZK, Yang GZ, Zhou QX, Shi JS, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Medical University, Department of Pharmacology, 400016 Chongqing,
China.

Ginseng, the root of Panax ginseng, has been used as folk medicine in the
treatment of various diseases for thousands of years in China. Ginsenoside Rb1
(Rb1), one of the effective components of ginseng, has been reported to release
nitric oxide and decrease intracellular free Ca2+ in cardiac myocytes, both of
which play important roles in antihypertrophic effect. This study was to
investigate the potential effect of Rb1 on right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH)
induced by monocrotaline (MCT) and its possible influence on calcineurin (CaN)
signal trasnsduction pathway. MCT-treated animals were administered with Rb1 (10 
and 40 mg /kg) from day 1 to day 14 (preventive administration) or from day 15 to
day 28 (therapeutic administration), or with vehicle as corresponding controls.
After 2 weeks, significantly hypertrophic reactions, including RVH index and the 
expressions of atrial natriuretic peptide mRNA, appeared in right ventricle of
all MCT-treated animals (p < 0.05), which were significantly decreased with some 
improvements of myocardial pathomorphology in both Rb1 prevention- and
therapy-groups (p < 0.05). Similarly, MCT-treatment caused the high expressions
of mRNA and/or proteins of CaN, NFAT3 and GATA4 from cardiocytes (p < 0.05) and
Rb1 could alleviate the expressions of these factors above (p < 0.05). These
results suggest that Rb1 treatment can inhibit the RVH induced by MCT, which may 
be involved in its inhibitory effects on CaN signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 17374466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Sep 1;102(1):122-35.

Ear mesenchymal stem cells (EMSC) can differentiate into spontaneously
contracting muscle cells.

Gawronska-Kozak B(1), Manuel JA, Prpic V.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Biology Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA. kozakB@pbrc.edu

We have previously shown that cells isolated from the outer ears of adult mice
are a source of mesenchymal stem cells that can be induced to differentiate into 
adipo-, osteo-, and chondrocytes. In this study, we demonstrate that ear
mesenchymal stem cells (EMSC) express stromal cell-associated markers (CD44,
CD73) and stem cell marker Sca-1 and can be differentiated into spontaneously
contracting muscle cells. Treatment of cells with epidermal growth factor (EGF)
change their morphology from fibroblast shapes into stick-like structures that
show repeated spontaneous contractions. Under conditions that promote myogenic
differentiation, EMSC expressed mRNA for myoD and ventricular specific myosin
light chain (MLC-2v) and protein for connexin 43, sarcomeric alpha-actinin,
myocyte enhancer factor 2c (MEF2c), myosin heavy chain (MyHC), myogenin, and
sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)ATPase (SERCA) 1. However, the cells were
negative for Nkx2.5, GATA4, and ANP. Intracellular Ca(2+) transients in
spontaneously beating EMSC, visualized by Fluo-3AM, showed a frequency of Ca(2+) 
oscillations ranging over 28-59/min (mean 41.17 +/- SEM 1.54). We also
demonstrated that small pieces of ear tissues (ear punches) collected from live
mice provide sufficient numbers of EMSC to isolate, culture and differentiate
them into myocytes. Due to the ease of acquiring an expanding repertoire of
differentiated EMSC cell types by a noninvasive surgical procedure, we conclude
that the ear may prove to be a potential source of autologous cells for
regenerative medicine, as supported by the fact that ears are one of the best
sources of cells for somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).

PMID: 17370316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14243-52. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Hyaluronan mixed esters of butyric and retinoic Acid drive cardiac and
endothelial fate in term placenta human mesenchymal stem cells and enhance
cardiac repair in infarcted rat hearts.

Ventura C(1), Cantoni S, Bianchi F, Lionetti V, Cavallini C, Scarlata I, Foroni
L, Maioli M, Bonsi L, Alviano F, Fossati V, Bagnara GP, Pasquinelli G, Recchia
FA, Perbellini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Stem Cell Engineering, Institute of
Cardiology, National Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy. carlo.ventura@unibo.it

We have developed a mixed ester of hyaluronan with butyric and retinoic acid
(HBR) that acted as a novel cardiogenic/vasculogenic agent in human mesenchymal
stem cells isolated from bone marrow, dental pulp, and fetal membranes of term
placenta (FMhMSCs). HBR remarkably enhanced vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), KDR, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene expression and the secretion
of the angiogenic, mitogenic, and antiapoptotic factors VEGF and HGF, priming
stem cell differentiation into endothelial cells. HBR also increased the
transcription of the cardiac lineage-promoting genes GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5 and the
yield of cardiac markerexpressing cells. These responses were notably more
pronounced in FMhMSCs. FMhMSC transplantation into infarcted rat hearts was
associated with increased capillary density, normalization of left ventricular
function, and significant decrease in scar tissue. Transplantation of
HBR-preconditioned FMhM-SCs further enhanced capillary density and the yield of
human vWF-expressing cells, additionally decreasing the infarct size. Some
engrafted, HBR-pretreated FMhMSCs were also positive for connexin 43 and cardiac 
troponin I. Thus, the beneficial effects of HBR-exposed FMhMSCs may be mediated
by a large supply of angiogenic and antiapoptotic factors, and FMhMSC
differentiation into vascular cells. These findings may contribute to further
development in cell therapy of heart failure.

PMID: 17363374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 6;104(10):3877-82. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Mechanisms controlling the acquisition of a cardiac phenotype by liver stem
cells.

Muller-Borer BJ(1), Cascio WE, Esch GL, Kim HS, Coleman WB, Grisham JW, Anderson 
PA, Malouf NN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

The mechanisms underlying stem cell acquisition of a cardiac phenotype are
unresolved. We studied early events during the acquisition of a cardiac phenotype
by a cloned adult liver stem cell line (WB F344) in a cardiac microenvironment.
WB F344 cells express a priori the transcription factors GATA4 and SRF, connexin 
43 in the cell membrane, and myoinositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor in the
perinuclear region. Functional cell-cell communication developed between WB F344 
cells and adjacent cocultured cardiomyocytes in 24 h. De novo cytoplasmic
[Ca(2+)](c) and nuclear [Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations appeared in WB F344 cells,
synchronous with [Ca(2+)](i) transients in adjacent cardiomyocytes. The [Ca(2+)] 
oscillations in the WB F344 cells, but not those in the cardiomyocytes, were
eliminated by a gap junction uncoupler and reappeared with its removal. By 24 h, 
WB F344 cells began expressing the cardiac transcription factors Nkx2.5, Tbx5,
and cofactor myocardin; cardiac proteins 24 h later; and a sarcomeric pattern 4-6
days later. Myoinositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor inhibition suppressed WB F344
cell [Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations but not [Ca(2+)](c) oscillations, and L-type
calcium channel inhibition eliminated [Ca(2+)] oscillations in cardiomyocytes and
WB F344 cells. The use of these inhibitors was associated with a decrease in
Nkx2.5, Tbx5, and myocardin expression in the WB F344 cells. Our findings suggest
that signals from cardiomyocytes diffuse through shared channels, inducing
[Ca(2+)] oscillations in the WB F344 cells. We hypothesize that the WB F344 cell 
[Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations activate the expression of a cardiac specifying gene
program, ushering in a cardiac phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1805456
PMID: 17360446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Jun;71(6):1630-9. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Identification and functional analysis of a novel human CYP2E1 far upstream
enhancer.

Shadley JD(1), Divakaran K, Munson K, Hines RN, Douglas K, McCarver DG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmacogenetics & Teratology, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226-4801, USA.
jshadley@mcw.edu

Both transcriptional and post-transcriptional CYP2E1 regulatory mechanisms are
known, resulting in 20-fold or greater variation in CYP2E1 expression. To
evaluate functional regulatory elements controlling transcription, CYP2E1
promoter constructs were used to make adenovirus vectors containing CYP2E1
promoter-driven luciferase reporters for analyses in both primary human
hepatocytes and HepG2 cells. A 1.2-kilobase pair portion of the CYP2E1 promoter
was associated with 5- to 10-fold greater luciferase activity. This upstream
region contained five direct repeats of 59 base pairs (bp) that increased
thymidine kinase-driven luciferase reporter activity in HepG2 cells more than
5-fold, regardless of orientation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) 
identified sequence-specific nuclear protein binding to the 59-bp repeats that
was dependent on a 17-bp sequence containing a canonical GATA binding site
(WGATAR). Competitive and supershift EMSA identified the participation of GATA4, 
another GATA family member or GATA-like factor, and a third factor unrelated to
the GATA family. Involvement of the tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome-1 factor,
which also binds a GATA sequence, was eliminated. Rather, competitive EMSA using 
known binding sequences for the orphan nuclear receptors, steroidogenic factor-1 
(or NR5A1), and fetoprotein transcription factor (or NR5A2) implicated an NR5A
member in binding a sequence overlapping the canonical GATA. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated in vivo binding of NR5A2 to the enhancer
sequence in human hepatocytes. The enhancer sequence is conserved within the
human population but seems species-specific. The identification of this novel
enhancer and its putative mechanism adds to the complexities of human CYP2E1
regulation.

PMID: 17353354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 15;143A(8):817-23.

Screening and biochemical analysis of GATA4 sequence variations identified in
patients with congenital heart disease.

Schluterman MK(1), Krysiak AE, Kathiriya IS, Abate N, Chandalia M, Srivastava D, 
Garg V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Few known monogenic causes of non-syndromic congenital heart disease (CHD) have
been identified. Mutations in NKX2.5 were initially implicated in familial cases 
of cardiac septal defects and subsequently, functionally significant NKX2.5
mutations were found in diverse forms of non-syndromic CHD. Similarly, mutations 
in GATA4, which encodes a cardiac transcription factor, were first identified in 
familial cases of cardiac septal defects. We hypothesize that individuals with
non-syndromic CHD may harbor GATA4 mutations and that these mutations alter the
biochemical properties of the protein. The coding region encompassing the six
exons of GATA4 was screened in a study population of 157 patients with CHD. We
identified several sequence variations in GATA4. We tested these novel sequence
variations that altered evolutionarily conserved amino acids and other previously
reported GATA4 mutations in various biochemical assays. The novel sequence
variations had no biochemical deficits while a previously reported, but
unstudied, missense mutation in GATA4 (S52F) functioned as a hypomorph in
transactivation assays. We did not identify any novel GATA4 mutations in our
patient population with non-syndromic CHD. Consistent with previous findings,
GATA4 mutations that result in deficits in transactivation ability are
consistently associated with CHD suggesting that normal transactivation
properties of GATA4 are required for proper cardiac development.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17352393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Feb;16(1):25-9.

Transplantation of human undifferentiated embryonic stem cells into a myocardial 
infarction rat model.

Xie CQ(1), Zhang J, Xiao Y, Zhang L, Mou Y, Liu X, Akinbami M, Cui T, Chen YE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30310, USA.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells hold great therapeutic potential for cell
transplantation. To date, it remains uncertain whether undifferentiated hES cells
can differentiate into cardiac lineage in vivo during myocardial infarction. Here
we provide the first report that undifferentiated hES cells can survive in rat
hearts during myocardial infarction without the formation of teratoma using
undifferentiated green fluorescent protein (GFP)-transgenic hES cells. Using a
laser-capture microscope to dissect the GFP-positive cell area from the
hES-injected hearts, we documented the expression of human cardiac-specific
genes, including GATA-4, Nkx-2.5, and cardiac troponin I. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that undifferentiated hES cells can be driven to the cardiac 
lineage under the local injured environment in the heart, which may provide a
potential method for regenerating de novo myocardium to treat myocardial
infarction.

PMID: 17348803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Apr 15;269(1-2):38-45. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Adrenocortical tumorigenesis, luteinizing hormone receptor and transcription
factors GATA-4 and GATA-6.

Vuorenoja S(1), Rivero-Muller A, Kiiveri S, Bielinska M, Heikinheimo M, Wilson
DB, Huhtaniemi IT, Rahman NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.

Luteinizing hormone (LH/hCG) responsiveness of normal and pathological human
adrenal glands as well as the possibility of constitutive expressions of
luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) in adrenal cortex has been reported. Some
recent studies showed a correlation between the LHR and abundant GATA-4
expression in both metastasizing and non-metastasizing human adrenocortical
tumors, but not in normal adrenals, implicating the putative relevance of LHR and
GATA-4 for adrenocortical pathophysiology. However, the physio- and
pathophysiological significance of LHR and GATA-4 in the mechanism of
adrenocortical tumorigenesis remains unclear. The paucity of suitable models for 
adrenal tumorigenesis makes the establishment of proper animal models highly
important. LHR expression in the murine adrenal gland is an exception and not
found in wild-type (WT) animal. We have previously shown that ectopic LHR
expression in the murine adrenal gland can be induced by chronically elevated LH 
levels. We have generated a gonadotropin-responsive adrenal tumor model in
gonadectomized transgenic (TG) mice expressing the inhibin alpha promoter/Simian 
Virus 40 T antigen transgene (inhalpha/Tag). Given the induction of expression
and regulation of GATA-4 and GATA-6 zinc finger transcription factors in the
gonads by gonadotropins, this review will explore their relationship to LHR
expression and their role in adrenocortical tumorigenesis. A functional link
between LHR and GATA-4 actions in the adrenal pathophysiology is proposed.

PMID: 17337116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Jun;53(3):581-9. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Reduced mitotic activity and increased apoptosis of fetal sertoli cells in rat
hypogonadic (hgn/hgn) testes.

Yagi M(1), Takenaka M, Suzuki K, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science
University, Japan.

Sterility in male hypogonadic (hgn/hgn) rats results from congenital testicular
dysplasia caused by a single recessive gene hgn on rat chromosome 10. We recently
identified an insertion mutation in the Spag5/astrin gene of hgn/hgn rats that
may cause defective proliferation of immature Sertoli cells in the postnatal
hgn/hgn testis. Since the pathological alterations were present in the testes at 
birth, we examined the involvement of defective mitosis and apoptotic cell death 
in embryonic development of hgn/hgn testes. Testicular hypoplasia was apparent at
embryonic day (ED) 18.5. Immunostaining of hgn/hgn testes at ED 21.5 with
antibody to GATA-4, which is specific for fetal Sertoli cells in the seminiferous
cords, showed that the significant decrease in the number of fetal Sertoli cells 
was accompanied by a two fold increase in their mitotic index and abnormal
mitosis and apoptosis. Prior to this, we observed a decrease in the number of
BrdU-labeled cells, an increase in the number of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells, 
and presence of MIS-positive apoptotic cells in hgn/hgn testes on ED 17.5 and
18.5. These results suggest that the Spag5 mutation may cause a reduction in
mitotic activity and an increase in apoptosis of fetal Sertoli cells in hgn/hgn
testes.

PMID: 17310077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Transfusion. 2007 Feb;47(2):280-9.

Human cord blood CD133+ cells immunoselected by a clinical-grade apparatus
differentiate in vitro into endothelial- and cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Bonanno G(1), Mariotti A, Procoli A, Corallo M, Rutella S, Pessina G, Scambia G, 
Mancuso S, Pierelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Catholic University Medical School,
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings on human hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) properties
suggest a possible therapeutic role of human umbilical cord blood (UCB) HSC-based
cellular therapies in the treatment of myocardial infarction.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Nine UCB units were subjected to sequential red cell
removal, freezing, and postthawing CD133+ HSC immunoselection by a
clinical-grade, CE-approved, magnetic apparatus and microbead-coated anti-CD133
monoclonal antibody. Selected UCB CD133+ cells were cultured in vitro in medium
supporting either endothelial or cardiomyocytic differentiation in parallel
experiments.
RESULTS: Immunoselection allowed recovery of 79 percent of initial CD133+ cells
with a CD133+ cell purity of 81 percent, on average. Parallel cultures showed the
appearance of endothelial markers (VE-cadherin, CD146, and KDR and bright
expression of CD105), morphofunctional features of endothelium in
endothelial-supporting cultures, of cardiac muscle proteins (troponin I and
myosin ventricular heavy chain alpha/beta; MYHC) and specific gene expression
(GATA4, NKX2.5, troponin I, and MYHC) in cardiomyocyte-oriented cultures.
CONCLUSIONS: The appearance of both endothelial- and cardiomyocyte-like cells
from parallel cultures of frozen-thawed-immunoselected UCB CD133+ cells by a
clinical-grade method and previously reported data on lack of major signs of
rejection of these cells in immunocompetent rats subjected to experimental liver 
damage suggest a possible role of these allogeneic HSCs in cell therapies
designed for regenerative treatments of ischemic diseases of human myocardium.

PMID: 17302775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Cell Sci. 2007 Mar 1;120(Pt 5):885-94. Epub 2007 Feb 13.

Stimulation of ES-cell-derived cardiomyogenesis and neonatal cardiac cell
proliferation by reactive oxygen species and NADPH oxidase.

Buggisch M(1), Ateghang B, Ruhe C, Strobel C, Lange S, Wartenberg M, Sauer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Aulweg 129, 35392 
Giessen, Germany.

After birth the proliferation of cardiac cells declines, and further growth of
the heart occurs by hypertrophic cell growth. In the present study the cell
proliferation capacity of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells versus neonatal
cardiomyocytes and the effects of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on
cardiomyogenesis and cardiac cell proliferation of ES cells was investigated. Low
levels of hydrogen peroxide stimulated cardiomyogenesis of ES cells and induced
proliferation of cardiomyocytes derived from ES cells and neonatal mice, as
investigated by nuclear translocation of cyclin D1, downregulation of p27(Kip1), 
phosphorylation of retinoblastoma (Rb), increase of Ki-67 expression and
incorporation of BrdU. The observed effects were blunted by the free radical
scavengers vitamin E and 2-mercaptoglycin (NMPG). In ES cells ROS induced
expression of the cardiac-specific genes encoding alpha-actin, beta-MHC, MLC2a,
MLC2v and ANP as well as the transcription factors GATA-4, Nkx-2.5, MEF2C, DTEF-1
and the growth factor BMP-10. During differentiation ES cells expressed the NADPH
oxidase isoforms Nox-1, Nox-2 and Nox-4. Treatment of cardiac cells with ROS
increased Nox-1, Nox-4, p22-phox, p47-phox and p67-phox proteins as well as Nox-1
and Nox-4 mRNA, indicating feed-forward regulation of ROS generation. Inhibition 
of NADPH oxidase with diphenylen iodonium chloride (DPI) and apocynin abolished
ROS-induced cardiomyogenesis of ES cells. Our data suggest that proliferation of 
neonatal and ES-cell-derived cardiac cells involves ROS-mediated signalling
cascades and point towards an involvement of NADPH oxidase in cardiovascular
differentiation of ES cells.

PMID: 17298980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;38(1-2):245-57.

Npr1-regulated gene pathways contributing to cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis.

Ellmers LJ(1), Scott NJ, Piuhola J, Maeda N, Smithies O, Frampton CM, Richards
AM, Cameron VA.

Author information: 
(1)Christchurch Cardioendocrine Research Group, Department of Medicine,
Christchurch School of Medicine and Health Sciences, PO Box 4345, Christchurch,
New Zealand. leigh.ellmers@chmeds.ac.nz

The natriuretic peptides, atrial (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) are
known to suppress cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. Both ANP and BNP exert their 
bioactivities through the Npr1 receptor, and Npr1 knockout mice (Npr1-/-) exhibit
marked cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. In this study, we investigated which
genes within the hypertrophic and fibrotic pathways are influenced by the lack of
Npr1 signalling. cDNA microarray and quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR) analyses
were performed on cardiac ventricles from Npr1-/-mice. Gene expression at early
and late stages during development of hypertrophy was investigated in male and
female Npr1-/-mice at 8 weeks and 6 months of age. Heart weight to body weight
ratios (HW:BW) were maximally increased in 8-week males (P<0 x 01), whilst HW:BW 
in females continued to increase progressively up to 6 months (P<0 x 01). This
was despite blood pressure being similarly elevated at both the ages in male and 
female knockout when compared with wild-type (WT) mice (P<0 x 001). Microarray
analysis identified altered gene expression at the earliest steps in the
hypertrophy-signalling cascade in Npr1-/- mice, particularly calcium-calmodulin
signalling and ion channels, with subsequent changes in the expression of
intracellular messengers including protein kinases and transcription factors.
Real-time PCR analysis confirmed significant differences in gene expression of
ANP, BNP, calmodulin 1, histone deacetylase 7a (HDAC7a), protein kinase C
(PKC)iota, (GATA) 4, collagen 1, phospholamban and transforming growth
factor-beta1 in Npr1-/- mice when compared with WT (P<0 x 05). The present study 
implicates the calmodulin-CaMK-Hdac-Mef2 and PKC-MAPK-GATA4 pathways in Npr1
mediation of cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 17293444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jun;292(6):G1520-33. Epub 2007 Feb 
8.

Cooperation between GATA4 and TGF-beta signaling regulates intestinal epithelial 
gene expression.

Belaguli NS(1), Zhang M, Rigi M, Aftab M, Berger DH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Dept. of Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, 2002 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
elaguli@bcm.tmc.edu

Members of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family have been shown 
to play an important role in the regulation of gut epithelial gene expression. We
have used the intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) and intestinal fatty acid
binding protein (IFABP) promoters to dissect the mechanisms by which TGF-beta1
signaling regulates gut epithelial gene expression. TGF-beta signaling alone was 
not sufficient for activation of IAP and IFABP promoters. However, TGF-beta
signaling cooperated with the gut epithelial transcription factor GATA4 to
synergistically activate IAP and IFABP promoters. Coexpression of GATA4 along
with the TGF-beta1 signal transducing downstream effectors such as Smad2, 3, and 
4 resulted in synergistic activation of both IAP and IFABP promoters. This
synergistic activation was reduced by simultaneous expression of
dominant-negative Smad4. -40 and -89 GATA binding sites in the IFABP promoter
were required for the synergistic activation by Smad2, 3, and 4 and GATA4. GATA4 
and Smad2, 3, and 4 physically associated with each other and this interaction
was mediated through the MH2 domain of Smad2, 3, and 4 and the second zinc finger
and the COOH-terminal basic domain of GATA4. The COOH-terminal activation domain 
and the Smad-interacting second zinc finger domain of GATA4 were required for the
synergistic activation of the IFABP promoter. Naturally occurring oncogenic
mutations within the GATA4-interacting MH2 domain of Smad2 reduced the
coactivation of IFABP promoter by Smad2 and GATA4. Our results suggest that the
TGF-beta signaling regulates gut epithelial gene expression by targeting GATA4.

PMID: 17290010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 30;355(1):47-53. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Efficient capture of cardiogenesis-associated genes expressed in ES cells.

Terami H(1), Hidaka K, Shirai M, Narumiya H, Kuroyanagi T, Arai Y, Aburatani H,
Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
5-7-1 Fujishirodai, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan.

Cardiogenesis can be induced in vitro in ES cells, though it is difficult to
distinguish cardiac-specific genes, since embryoid bodies simultaneously
differentiate into multiple lineages. In the present study, transient serum
removal during culture greatly enhanced cardiogenesis, and reduced generation of 
endothelial and hematopoietic cells. Using DNA microarray analysis of 24
differentiated sample cultures including cardiogenesis-enhanced cells, we
successfully selected genes up-regulated in embryoid bodies that had undergone
cardiogenic differentiation. Besides contractile protein genes, cardiac
transcriptional regulatory genes, such as Nkx2-5, Gata4/5, Mef2c, and Myocd, were
primary constituents of the first 100 genes chosen as cardiogenesis-associated
genes. Further, whole mount in situ hybridization analysis of 13 genes containing
non-characterized ones confirmed that most of them were specifically expressed in
the heart region of mouse embryos from E9.5-10.5. Based on our results, we
consider that the present profiling method may be useful to identify novel genes 
important for cardiac development.

PMID: 17286962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9505-16. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Protein kinase C regulates internal initiation of translation of the GATA-4 mRNA 
following vasopressin-induced hypertrophy of cardiac myocytes.

Sharma A(1), Masri J, Jo OD, Bernath A, Martin J, Funk A, Gera J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research & Development, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California 91343, USA.

GATA-4 is a key member of the GATA family of transcription factors involved in
cardiac development and growth as well as in cardiac hypertrophy and heart
failure. Our previous studies suggest that GATA-4 protein synthesis may be
translationally regulated. We report here that the 518-nt long 5'-untranslated
region (5'-UTR) of the GATA-4 mRNA, which is predicted to form stable secondary
structures (-65 kcal/mol) such as to be inhibitory to cap-dependent initiation,
confers efficient translation to monocistronic reporter mRNAs in cell-free
extracts. Moreover, uncapped GATA-4 5'-UTR containing monocistronic reporter
mRNAs continue to be well translated while capped reporters are insensitive to
the inhibition of initiation by cap-analog, suggesting a cap-independent
mechanism of initiation. Utilizing a dicistronic luciferase mRNA reporter
containing the GATA-4 5'-UTR within the intercistronic region, we demonstrate
that this leader sequence confers functional internal ribosome entry site (IRES) 
activity. The activity of the GATA-4 IRES is unaffected in trans-differentiating 
P19CL6 cells, however, is strongly stimulated immediately following
arginine-vasopressin exposure of H9c2 ventricular myocytes. IRES activity is then
maintained at submaximal levels during hypertrophic growth of these cells.
Supraphysiological Ca(2+) levels diminished stimulation of IRES activity
immediately following exposure to vasopressin and inhibition of protein kinase C 
activity utilizing a pseudosubstrate peptide sequence blocked IRES activity
during hypertrophy. Thus, our data suggest a mechanism for GATA-4 protein
synthesis under conditions of reduced global cap-dependent translation, which is 
maintained at a submaximal level during hypertrophic growth and point to the
regulation of GATA-4 IRES activity by sarco(ER)-reticular Ca(2+) stores and PKC.

PMID: 17284439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 23;354(4):999-1003. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

VEGF is critical for spontaneous differentiation of stem cells into
cardiomyocytes.

Song YH(1), Gehmert S, Sadat S, Pinkernell K, Bai X, Matthias N, Alt E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cardiomyocyte regeneration is limited in adult life and is not sufficient to
compensate for cell loss with myocardial infarction. Hence, the identification of
a useful source of cardiomyocyte progenitors is of great interest for possible
use in regenerative therapy. In this study, we isolated stem cells derived from
human subcutaneous adipose tissue. The expression of Nkx2.5 and GATA-4 can be
observed by PCR directly after extraction and during cultivation in some of these
cells. Cardiac Troponin T and myosin light chain-2v become positive after 12 days
of cultivation. To define respective factors responsible for spontaneous
differentiation, we measured VEGF level in ADSC conditioned medium. Our data
showed that ADSC secrete significant amount of VEGF (283.5pg per microgram DNA)
and that anti-VEGF receptor antibodies blocked the cardiac differentiation. In
conclusion, we demonstrated the spontaneous differentiation of human subcutaneous
adipose-derived stem cells into a cardiomyocyte phenotype under standard
culturing conditions.

PMID: 17276389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):308-16. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

FOG-2 attenuates endothelial-to-mesenchymal transformation in the endocardial
cushions of the developing heart.

Flagg AE(1), Earley JU, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Section of Cardiology, 5841 S. 
Maryland Ave, MC6088, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Development of the heart valves is a complex process that relies on the
successful remodeling of endocardial cushions. This process is dependent on a
number of transcriptional regulators, including GATA4 and its interacting partner
FOG-2. We have previously shown that the endocardial cushions in FOG-2 deficient 
mice are hyperplastic and fail to remodel appropriately, suggesting a defect late
in endocardial cushion development. To elucidate this defect, we examined the
later steps in endocardial cushion development including mesenchymal cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We also measured myocardialization
and endothelial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) using previously described in
vitro assays. We found no difference in the ability of the endocardial cushions
to undergo myocardialization or in the rates of mesenchymal cell proliferation,
differentiation, or apoptosis in the FOG-2 deficient cushions when compared to
wild-type controls. However, using a collagen gel invasion assay, we found a 78% 
increase in outflow tract cushion EMT and a 35% increase in atrioventricular
cushion EMT in the FOG-2 deficient mice when compared with wild-type mice. Taken 
together with GATA4's known role in promoting EMT, these results suggest that
FOG-2 functions in cardiac valve formation as an attenuator of EMT by repressing 
GATA4 activity within the developing endocardial cushions.

PMCID: PMC1868509
PMID: 17274974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;36(6):678-87. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Regulation of Bcl-xL expression in lung vascular smooth muscle.

Suzuki YJ(1), Nagase H, Wong CM, Kumar SV, Jain V, Park AM, Day RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, NW403
Medical-Dental Building, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
ys82@georgetown.edu

Pulmonary hypertension is characterized by thickened pulmonary arterial walls due
to increased number of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMC). Apoptosis of
PASMC may play an important role in regulating the PASMC number and may be useful
for reducing pulmonary vascular thickening. The present study examined the
regulation of an anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-x(L). Bcl-x(L) expression was found
to be increased in the pulmonary artery of chronic hypoxia-treated rats with
pulmonary vascular remodeling. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of Bcl-x(L)
indeed showed that this protein has anti-apoptotic activities in PASMC. Treatment
of remodeled pulmonary artery with sodium nitroprusside (SNP) reduced Bcl-x(L)
expression by targeting the bcl-x(L) promoter. The bcl-x(L) promoter contains two
GATA elements, and SNP decreases the GATA-4 DNA-binding activity. Overexpression 
of GATA-4 attenuated the SNP-mediated suppression of Bcl-x(L) expression,
providing direct evidence for the role of GATA-4 in Bcl-x(L) gene transcription. 
We established that SNP targets the 250 proximal region of the gata4 promoter and
suppresses its gene transcription. Thus, inducers of pulmonary hypertension
enhance anti-apoptotic Bcl-x(L) gene transcription, which can be suppressed by
targeting gata4 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1868666
PMID: 17272823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 May;292(5):G1302-14. Epub 2007 Feb 
1.

Gata4 and Hnf1alpha are partially required for the expression of specific
intestinal genes during development.

Bosse T(1), Fialkovich JJ, Piaseckyj CM, Beuling E, Broekman H, Grand RJ,
Montgomery RK, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The terminal differentiation phases of intestinal development in mice occur
during cytodifferentiation and the weaning transition. Lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase (LPH), liver fatty acid binding protein (Fabp1), and sucrase-isomaltase
(SI) are well-characterized markers of these transitions. With the use of gene
inactivation models in mature mouse jejunum, we have previously shown that a
member of the zinc finger transcription factor family (Gata4) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha (Hnf1alpha) are each indispensable for LPH and Fabp1 gene
expression but are both dispensable for SI gene expression. In the present study,
we used these models to test the hypothesis that Gata4 and Hnf1alpha regulate
LPH, Fabp1, and SI gene expression during development, specifically focusing on
cytodifferentiation and the weaning transition. Inactivation of Gata4 had no
effect on LPH gene expression during either cytodifferentiation or suckling,
whereas inactivation of Hnf1alpha resulted in a 50% reduction in LPH gene
expression during these same time intervals. Inactivation of Gata4 or Hnf1alpha
had a partial effect ( approximately 50% reduction) on Fabp1 gene expression
during cytodifferentiation and suckling but no effect on SI gene expression at
any time during development. Throughout the suckling period, we found a
surprising and dramatic reduction in Gata4 and Hnf1alpha protein in the nuclei of
absorptive enterocytes of the jejunum despite high levels of their mRNAs.
Finally, we show that neither Gata4 nor Hnf1alpha mediates the
glucocorticoid-induced precocious maturation of the intestine but rather are
downstream targets of this process. Together, these data demonstrate that
specific intestinal genes have differential requirements for Gata4 and Hnf1alpha 
that are dependent on the developmental time frame in which they are expressed.

PMID: 17272516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2007 May;102(5):1806-14. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Effects of intermittent hypoxia on oxidative stress-induced myocardial damage in 
mice.

Park AM(1), Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20057, USA. ys82@georgetown.edu

Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with increased risk for cardiovascular
diseases. As obstructive sleep apnea is characterized by episodic cycles of
hypoxia and normoxia during sleep, we investigated effects of intermittent
hypoxia (IH) on ischemia-reperfusion-induced myocardial injury. C57BL/6 mice were
subjected to IH (2 min 6% O(2) and 2 min 21% O(2)) for 8 h/day for 1, 2, or 4 wk;
isolated hearts were then subjected to ischemia-reperfusion. IH for 1 or 2 wk
significantly enhanced ischemia-reperfusion-induced myocardial injury. However,
enhanced cardiac damage was not seen in mice treated with 4 wk of IH, suggesting 
that the heart has adapted to chronic IH. Ischemia-reperfusion-induced lipid
peroxidation and protein carbonylation were enhanced with 2 wk of IH, while, with
4 wk, oxidative stress was normalized to levels in animals without IH. H(2)O(2)
scavenging activity in adapted hearts was higher after ischemia-reperfusion,
suggesting the increased antioxidant capacity. This might be due to the
involvement of thioredoxin, as the expression level of this protein was
increased, while levels of other antioxidant enzymes were unchanged. In the heart
from mice treated with 2 wk of IH, ischemia-reperfusion was found to decrease
thioredoxin. Ischemia-reperfusion injury can also be enhanced when thioredoxin
reductase was inhibited in control hearts. These results demonstrate that IH
changes the susceptibility of the heart to oxidative stress in part via
alteration of thioredoxin.

PMID: 17272404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar;23(2):111-4.

Intestinal morphogenesis.

Rubin DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. drubin@wustl.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The molecular basis of endoderm differentiation and
interaction with mesoderm to generate the mature intestine has been the focus of 
intensive investigation. Signaling pathways relevant to organogenesis may be
recapitulated during oncogenesis. This review highlights recent studies of
endoderm specification, differentiation and formation of the gut tube, the
ontogeny of regional differentiation along the anterior-posterior and
crypt-villus axes, and mechanisms of epithelial differentiation and
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during gut morphogenesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Model organisms include zebrafish, Xenopus, Drosophila and the
mouse. Fibroblast growth factors play critical roles in early endoderm
differentiation and anterior-posterior patterning, and retinoids regulate
left-right asymmetry and gut looping/rotation. Embryoid bodies derived from
embryonic stem cells recapitulate many aspects of gut epithelial morphogenesis.
Novel regulators of epithelial cell differentiation and epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions have been identified (e.g. Mtgr1), and several known genes modulate 
these processes (e.g. PPARbeta/delta, Ptk6, GATA4). The role of Bmp, Hh and wnt
signaling in morphogenesis continues to be elucidated.
SUMMARY: The complex process of intestinal morphogenesis involves interactions
among multiple signaling pathways. Studies of morphogenesis are critical for
elucidating the molecular basis of congenital gut defects and provide novel
insight into intestinal oncogenic processes.

PMID: 17268237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Mar 10;313(5):921-30. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) enhances cardiac commitment of differentiating
embryonic stem cells by activating PI3 kinase.

Roggia C(1), Ukena C, Böhm M, Kilter H.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin III (Kardiologie, Angiologie, Internistische
Intensivmedizin), Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, 66421 Homburg/Saar,
Germany.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a pleiotropic cytokine promoting proliferation,
migration and survival in several cell types. HGF and its cognate receptor c-Met 
are expressed in cardiac cells during early cardiogenesis, but data concerning
its role in cardiac differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and the
underlying molecular mechanisms involved are limited. In the present study we
show that HGF significantly increases the number of beating embryoid bodies of
differentiating ESCs without affecting beating frequency. Furthermore, HGF
up-regulates the expression of the cardiac-specific transcription factors Nkx 2.5
and GATA-4 and of markers of differentiated cardiomyocytes, i.e. alpha-MHC,
beta-MHC, ANF, MLC2v and Troponin T. The HGF-induced increase in Nkx 2.5
expression was inhibited by co-treatment with the PI3 kinase inhibitors
Wortmannin and LY294002, but not by its inactive homolog LY303511, suggesting an 
involvement of the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway in this effect. We conclude that HGF is
an important growth factor involved in cardiac differentiation and/or
proliferation of ESCs and may therefore be critical for the in vitro generation
of pre- or fully differentiated cardiomyocytes as required for clinical use of
embryonic stem cells in cardiac diseases.

PMID: 17258200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2007 Jan;8(1):7-11.

Genetics of congenital heart diseases in syndromic and non-syndromic patients:
new advances and clinical implications.

Piacentini G(1), Digilio MC, Sarkozy A, Placidi S, Dallapiccola B, Marino B.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, La Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy.

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are the most common birth defects in humans and
over the last 20 years significant progress has been made in the understanding of
the molecular and genetic determinants of an increasing number of CHDs.
Fundamental to this progress has been the contribution of five fields of
research: the epidemiological results of the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study
(BWIS); the pathogenetic classification introduced by Clark; the Human Genome
Project; genotype-phenotype correlation and familial recurrence studies; and
transgenic animals. The recently advanced cytogenetic techniques can now detect
subtle rearrangements in chromosomes, which may be overlooked by standard methods
and, more recently, molecular instruments such as linkage analysis and positional
cloning are being used to identify genes causing Mendelian monogenic syndromes
with CHDs, such as Holt-Oram, Ellis-van Creveld and Noonan/LEOPARD syndromes.
Finally, useful information is yet available with regard to genes causing
isolated CHDs in individuals who do not have a genetic syndrome (an example is
the mutation of NKX2.5 and GATA4 genes causing atrial septal defect). The future 
perspectives for the genetics of CHDs will involve three fields of interest:
diagnosis; therapy; and prognosis.

PMID: 17255809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genet Test. 2006 Winter;10(4):277-80.

Screening of 99 Danish patients with congenital heart disease for GATA4
mutations.

Zhang L(1), Tümer Z, Jacobsen JR, Andersen PS, Tommerup N, Larsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) affects nearly 1% of the population, but only few 
genes involved in human CHD are presently known. Germ-line mutations in the zinc 
finger transcription factor GATA4 have been associated with familial cases of
atrial and ventricular septal defects and pulmonary stenosis. We have screened 99
unrelated Danish patients with different CHD phenotypes to evaluate the
prevalence of GATA4 mutations in CHD. No pathogenic mutations were found among
the patients, suggesting that GATA4 mutations are relatively rare among CHD
patients. Thus, the diagnostic importance of GATA4 mutations may be confined to
familial cases or specific subgroups of CHD phenotypes.

PMID: 17253934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 9;354(2):552-8. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Interleukin-18 knockout mice display maladaptive cardiac hypertrophy in response 
to pressure overload.

Colston JT(1), Boylston WH, Feldman MD, Jenkinson CP, de la Rosa SD, Barton A,
Trevino RJ, Freeman GL, Chandrasekar B.

Author information: 
(1)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-18 is a cardiotropic proinflammatory cytokine chronically
elevated in the serum of patients with cardiac hypertrophy (LVH). The purpose of 
this study was to examine the role of IL-18 in pressure-overload hypertrophy
using wild type (WT) and IL-18 -/- (null) mice. Adult male C57Bl/6 mice underwent
transaortic constriction (TAC) for 7days or sham surgery. Heart weight/body
weight ratios showed blunted hypertrophy in IL-18 null TAC mice compared to WT
TAC animals. Microarray analyses indicated differential expression of
hypertrophy-related genes in WT versus IL-18 nulls. Northern, Western, and EMSA
analyses showed Akt and GATA4 were increased in WT but unchanged in IL-18 null
mice. Our results demonstrate blunted hypertrophy with reduced expression of
contractile-, hypertrophy-, and remodeling-associated genes following pressure
overload in IL-18 null mice, and suggest that IL-18 plays a critical role in the 
hypertrophic response.

PMCID: PMC1847636
PMID: 17250807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cell Cycle. 2007 Jan 15;6(2):117-21. Epub 2007 Jan 13.

The KLF family of transcriptional regulators in cardiomyocyte proliferation and
differentiation.

Nemer M(1), Horb ME.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
Mona.nemer@ircm.qc.ca

Unlike other organs, the adult heart has limited regenerative potential owing to 
the inability of postnatal cardiomyocytes to undergo proliferative growth. As a
result, ischemic heart disease continues to be a major cause of morbidity and
mortality worldwide. Elucidating the molecular pathways of cardiomyocyte
differentiation and proliferation holds great promise for human health. In a
recent paper we employed a multidisciplinary approach to identify a novel pathway
required for cardiomyocyte growth and differentiation. Starting with the
dissection of a new regulatory sequence required for cardiac specific expression,
we identified the cognate DNA binding protein as KLF13, a tissue-restricted
member of the newly identified KLF family of zinc-finger proteins. We took
advantage of the ease in manipulating Xenopus embryos to genetically alter KLF13 
levels thus demonstrating a requirement for KLF13 in cardiac progenitor cell
proliferation and heart morphogenesis. Furthermore, we combined biochemical
approaches with genetic manipulations in Xenopus to show that KLF13 is a GATA4
interacting protein and a genetic modifier of GATA4 function. Cyclin D1 was
identified as a direct transcriptional target for KLF13 that may account for the 
proliferation defects observed in embryos with downregulated KLF13 levels. Thus, 
tissue-specific regulators of the cell cycle may be potential congenital heart
disease causing genes in humans.

PMID: 17245133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Genomics. 2007 Apr;89(4):451-9. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Identification of genes with correlated patterns of variations in DNA copy number
and gene expression level in gastric cancer.

Yang S(1), Jeung HC, Jeong HJ, Choi YH, Kim JE, Jung JJ, Rha SY, Yang WI, Chung
HC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Research Center (CMRC), Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

To identify DNA copy number changes that had a direct influence on mRNA
expression in gastric cancer, cDNA microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) and gene expression profiling were performed using 17 K cDNA
microarrays. A set of 158 genes showing Pearson correlation coefficients over 0.6
between DNA copy number changes and mRNA expression level variations was
selected. In an independent gene expression profiling of 60 tissue samples, the
158 genes were able to distinguish most of the normal and tumor tissues in an
unsupervised hierarchical clustering, suggesting that the differential expression
patterns displayed by this specific group of genes are most likely based on the
gene copy number changes. Furthermore, 43 statistically significant (P<0.01)
genes were selected that correctly distinguished all of the tissue samples. The
copy number changes detected by aCGH can be verified by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and real-time polymerase chain reaction. The selected genes include
those that were previously identified as being tumor suppressors or deleted in
various tumors, including GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4), monoamine oxidase A
(MAOA), cyclin C (CCNC), and oncogenes including malignant fibrous histiocytoma
amplified sequence 1 (MFHAS1/MASL1), high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2), PPAR 
binding protein (PPARBP), growth factor receptor-bound protein 7 (GRB7), and TBC1
(tre-2, BUB2, cdc16) domain family, member 1 (TBC1D1).

PMID: 17229543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):933-47. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Follicle-stimulating hormone-induced activation of Gata4 contributes in the
up-regulation of Cyp19 expression in rat granulosa cells.

Kwintkiewicz J(1), Cai Z, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Science, Yale University
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA.

Several studies have suggested that the transcription factor GATA4 plays an
important role in ovarian function. This study evaluated the effects of GATA4 on 
the regulation of the Cyp19 gene in primary rat granulosa cells under basal
conditions and in response to stimulation by FSH. A significant increase in GATA4
mRNA, protein, and DNA binding activity was observed in rats treated with
pregnant mare serum gonadotropin, a hormone that binds to the FSH receptors, and 
in granulosa cells incubated with FSH. Enrichment of the Cyp19 promoter was
observed in granulosa cells treated with FSH after chromatin precipitation with
an anti-GATA4 antibody. Mutation of the GATA binding site on the Cyp19 promoter
and inhibition of GATA4 expression with specific small interfering RNA
significantly reduced FSH-enhanced Cyp19 expression, whereas overexpression of
GATA4 increased Cyp19 promoter activity. A synergistic effect observed between
GATA4 overexpression and FSH treatment in Cyp19 expression was abolished by
mutating Ser105 in the GATA4 protein or by pretreating granulosa cells with a
protein kinase A inhibitor. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-dependent kinase
(PI3-K)/casein kinase 2 or ERK1/2 attenuated GATA4/FSH synergism, whereas the
simultaneous blockade of PI3-K/casein kinase 2 and ERK1/2 activity eliminated
Cyp19 stimulation. Finally, we demonstrated that FSH increases GATA4
phosphorylation and that GATA4 activation requires the activation of multiple
kinases, including ERK1/2, PI3-K, and protein kinase A. These findings
demonstrate that GATA4 contributes in the regulation of Cyp19 expression in the
rat ovary and provide the first evidence that FSH regulates GATA4 activity.

PMID: 17227882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Evol Dev. 2007 Jan-Feb;9(1):39-50.

Ectoderm- and endomesoderm-specific GATA transcription factors in the marine
annelid Platynereis dumerilli.

Gillis WJ(1), Bowerman B, Schneider SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors appears to retain conserved roles in
early germ layer patterning in most, if not all, animals; however, the number and
structure of GATA factor genes varies substantially when different animal genomes
are compared. Thus, the origin and relationships of invertebrate and vertebrate
GATA factors, and their involvement in animal germ layer evolution, are unclear. 
We identified two highly conserved GATA factor genes in a marine annelid, the
polychaete Platynereis dumerilii. A phylogenetic analysis indicates that the two 
Platynereis GATA factors are orthologous to the GATA1/2/3 and GATA4/5/6
subfamilies present in vertebrates. We also identified conserved motifs within
each GATA class, and assigned the divergent Caenorhabditiselegans and Drosophila 
melanogaster GATA factor genes to the vertebrate classes. Similar to their
vertebrate homologs, PdGATA123 mRNA expression was restricted to ectoderm,
whereas PdGATA456 was detected only in endomesoderm. Finally, we identified in
genome databases one GATA factor gene in each of two distantly related cnidarians
that include motifs from both bilaterian GATA factor classes. Our results show
that distinct orthologs of the two vertebrate GATA factor classes exist in a
protostome invertebrate, suggesting that bilaterian GATA factors originated from 
GATA1/2/3 and 4/5/6 ancestral orthologs. Moreover, our results indicate that the 
GATA gene duplication and the functional divergence that led to these two
ancestral GATA factor genes occurred after the split of the bilaterian stem group
from the cnidarians.

PMID: 17227365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Cell Biochem. 2007 May 15;101(2):271-80.

Oct-4, Rex-1, and Gata-4 expression in human MSC increase the differentiation
efficiency but not hTERT expression.

Roche S(1), Richard MJ, Favrot MC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'investigation Biologique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Grenoble, Grenoble, France. stephane.roche@igh.cnrs.fr

Micro-environment seems to exert an important influence on human mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC) differentiation and proliferative capacity in bone marrow as well as
in culture ex vivo. Oct-4, Rex-1, and TERT genes are well-known for the
maintenance of pluripotentiality differentiation and the proliferative capacity
of embryonic stem cells. Some previous data report expression of these embryonic 
factors in selected clones from bone marrow adult stem cells. Our goal was to
study expression of Oct-4, Rex-1, and TERT in primary cultured human MSC
according to the serum concentration. In addition, we have studied the expression
of Gata-4 since this factor plays a key role in organogenesis. We hypothesized
that low serum concentration with appropriate growth factors may induce an
undifferentiated status with a re-expression of embryonic factors and extend
differentiation capacity. Thus, using a defined culture medium, we report on the 
increased expression of Oct-4, Rex-1, and Gata-4 in human MSC. We have correlated
this expression to an increase in differentiation efficiency towards osteogenic
and adipogenic phenotypes. Our data suggest that the culture medium used permits 
the emergence of adult stem cells with a high differentiation capacity and
expression of embryonic factors. These cells may have important implications for 
cell therapy.

PMID: 17211834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Feb 15;313(4):698-706. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Single-cell-derived mesenchymal stem cells overexpressing Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4
undergo the stochastic cardiomyogenic fate and behave like transient amplifying
cells.

Yamada Y(1), Sakurada K, Takeda Y, Gojo S, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)BioFrontier Laboratories, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co. Ltd., 3-6-6 Asahi-machi,
Machida-shi, Tokyo 194-8533, Japan.

Bone marrow-derived stromal cells can give rise to cardiomyocytes as well as
adipocytes, osteocytes, and chondrocytes in vitro. The existence of mesenchymal
stem cells has been proposed, but it remains unclear if a single-cell-derived
stem cell stochastically commits toward a cardiac lineage. By single-cell
marking, we performed a follow-up study of individual cells during the
differentiation of 9-15c mesenchymal stromal cells derived from bone marrow
cells. Three types of cells, i.e., cardiac myoblasts, cardiac progenitors and
multipotent stem cells were differentiated from a single cell, implying that
cardiomyocytes are generated stochastically from a single-cell-derived stem cell.
We also demonstrated that overexpression of Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4, precardiac
mesodermal transcription factors, enhanced cardiomyogenic differentiation of
9-15c cells, and the frequency of cardiomyogenic differentiation was increased by
co-culturing with fetal cardiomyocytes. Single-cell-derived mesenchymal stem
cells overexpressing Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 behaved like cardiac transient
amplifying cells, and still retained their plasticity in vivo.

PMID: 17208226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Indian J Hum Genet. 2007 Jan;13(1):30-2. doi: 10.4103/0971-6866.32032.

Missense mutation G296S in GATA4 is not responsible for cardiac septal defects.

Ramegowda S(1), Kumar A, Savitha MR, Krishnamurthy B, Doddaiah N, Ramachandra NB.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Studies in Zoology, University of
Mysore, Manasagangotri, Mysore - 570 006, India.

BACKGROUND: The most common type of congenital heart disease is the cardiac
septal defects, which has reported to be caused by a missense mutation (G296S) in
exon 3 of the GATA4 gene.
AIMS: The present study was undertaken to find out whether GATA4 gene is the
prime cause of the septal defects in Mysore population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GATA4 gene analyses were undertaken on 21 confirmed CHD
cases by PCR and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Analysis of this particular mutation in 21 septal defect 
patients revealed that none of the patients had the mutation, indicating that
this mutation is population specific or septal defect in Mysore population is
caused due to mutations in other regions of the GATA4 gene.

PMCID: PMC3168151
PMID: 21957339  [PubMed]


204. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2006;18(6):303-14.

Identification of small signalling molecules promoting cardiac-specific
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Sachinidis A(1), Schwengberg S, Hippler-Altenburg R, Mariappan D, Kamisetti N,
Seelig B, Berkessel A, Hescheler J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology,
Cologne, Germany. a.sachinidis@uni-koeln.de

Identification of signalling cascades involved in cardiomyogenesis is crucial for
optimising the generation of cardiomyocytes from embryonic stem cells (ES cells) 
(in vitro). We used a transgenic ES cell lineage expressing enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the control of the alpha-myosin heavy chain
(alpha-MHC) promoter (palphaMHC-EGFP) to investigate the effects of 33 small
molecules interfering with several signalling cascades on cardiomyogenesis.
Interestingly, the L-Type Ca2+ channel blocker Verapamil as well as Cyclosporin, 
an inhibitor of the protein phosphatase 2B, exerted the most striking
pro-cardiomyogenic effect. Forskolin (adenylate cyclase stimulator) exerted the
most striking anti-cardiomyogenic effect. The cardiomyogenic effect of
Cyclosporin and Verapamil correlated with an expression of early cardiac markers 
Nkx2.5 and GATA4. Compared to the effects on late developmental stage embryoid
bodies (EBs) stimulation of early developmental stage EBs (1-day old) with
Verapamil or Cyclosporin for 48 h resulted in a potent cardiomyogenic effect.
Accordingly, enhanced expression of alpha-MHC mRNA and EGFP mRNA was observed
after stimulation of the early developmental stage EBs for 48 h. No expression of
alpha-smooth muscle actin or platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
(PECM-1) as well as of neuronal genes (Nestin, Neurofilament H) has been observed
demonstrating a preferentially pro-cardiomyogenic effect by both molecules.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17170517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2007 Feb;18(1):117-31. Epub 2006 Nov 24.

Re-employment of developmental transcription factors in adult heart disease.

Oka T(1), Xu J, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Division of Molecular
Cardiovascular Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229,
USA.

A finite number of transcription factors constitute a combinatorial code that
orchestrates cardiac development and the specification and differentiation of
myocytes. Many, if not all of these same transcription factors are re-employed in
the adult heart in response to disease stimuli that promote hypertrophic
enlargement and/or dilated cardiomyopathy, as part of the so-called "fetal gene
program". This review will discuss the transcription factors that regulate the
hypertrophic growth response of the adult heart, with a special emphasis on those
regulators that participate in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC1855184
PMID: 17161634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Apr;36(4):391-7. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Gata4 is necessary for normal pulmonary lobar development.

Ackerman KG(1), Wang J, Luo L, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, Beier DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School New
Research Building 458, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
kackerman@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Mutations of Fog2 in mice result in a phenotype that includes pulmonary lobar
defects. To determine whether formation of the accessory lobe bronchus is
mediated by a Gata family cofactor, we evaluated embryonic lungs from mice
carrying missense mutations that cause loss of FOG-GATA protein interaction.
Lungs from embryos carrying a missense mutation in Gata6 were structurally
normal, while lungs from embryos carrying mutations of either Gata4 or of both
Gata4 and Gata6 had a structural phenotype that matched the Fog2 mutant
phenotype. Expression analysis showed that Gata4 and Fog2 are expressed in the
ventral and medial pulmonary mesenchyme during secondary budding. Although Gata4 
has not previously been suspected as playing a role in lung development, we have 
found that a Fog2-Gata4 interaction is critical for the development of normal
pulmonary lobar structure, and this phenotype is not influenced by the additional
loss of Gata6 interaction. Fog2 and Gata4 in the early pulmonary mesenchyme
participate in patterning the secondary bronchus of the accessory lobe.

PMCID: PMC1899327
PMID: 17142311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cardiovasc Res. 2007 Jan 1;73(1):82-91. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

Characterization of the cardiac KCNE1 gene promoter.

Mustapha Z(1), Pang L, Nattel S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center and Department of Medicine, Montreal Heart Institute and
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: KCNE1 encodes an essential cardiac slow delayed-rectifier potassium
current (I(Ks)) beta-subunit (minK). Varying minK expression is important in
disease-related remodeling and species-dependent expression. This study addressed
5'-regulatory elements that potentially control KCNE1 transcription.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The transcriptional start site of human KCNE1 (HKCNE1) was
determined with 5'RACE. Of four isoforms, the putative promoter driving the
isoforms constituting >80% expression in human hearts was further analyzed. A
1625-bp region 5' to the transcriptional start site was subcloned into
luciferase-reporter plasmid (PGL3-Basic). The full promoter sequence increased
luciferase expression 31-fold in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (NRMs). A much
smaller 327-bp core promoter maintained activity 21-29 fold. The core promoter
conferred cardiomyocyte-preferential expression, with an activity in NRMs
4.9-fold greater than in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHOs), compared to
approximately 2.0 for the full-length promoter. Site-directed mutagenesis of all 
three GATA elements in the core promoter reduced its activity by >50% and
attenuated cardiomyocyte-preferential expression. Mutagenesis of the second GATA 
element alone decreased promoter activity by approximately 50%. GATA4 knockdown
with siRNA inhibited approximately 40% of core promoter activity in NRMs.
Angiotensin-II increased HKCNE1 promoter activity, but only in the presence of
intact GATA elements. The typically low-level I(Ks) expression in mouse and
rabbit is related to low minK expression. Cloning of the mouse KCNE1 (MKCNE1)
5'-regulatory region showed approximately 50% sequence identity to human. MKCNE1 
had only 1 GATA element in the region corresponding to the human core promoter
and had less promoter activity (11.7 vs 29.0-fold PGL3-Basic for human).
CONCLUSION: Promoter elements in the HKCNE1 5'-end, particularly GATA binding
sites, may be important in tissue, disease and species-related transcriptional
regulation of I(Ks).

PMID: 17141204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Dec;132(6):1262-71. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Myocardial transcription factors are modulated during pathologic cardiac
hypertrophy in vivo.

Azakie A(1), Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Surgery, San Francisco,
Calif 94143, USA. azakiet@surgery.ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVES: In the current study we describe and characterize a novel ovine model
of biventricular hypertrophy and heart failure and evaluate the role of selected 
cardiac transcription factors in the regulation of cardiac gene expression during
pathologic hypertrophy in vivo. The cardiac troponin T promoter is used as a
model gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transient transfections of ovine cardiomyocytes in culture
show that Sp1, transcriptional enhancer factor-1, and myocyte enhancer factor-2
activate cardiac troponin T promoter constructs. Cotransfection of Sp3 inhibits
cardiac troponin T promoter activity and represses Sp1-mediated activation of the
cardiac troponin T promoter. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, transcriptional
enhancer factor-1, myocyte enhancer factor-2, NKX2.5, GATA-4, and Sp factors bind
the cardiac troponin T promoter in vivo. To assess the role of cardiac
transcription during pathologic hypertrophy, in vivo, we created surgical
aorta-pulmonary shunts in utero in fetal lambs. Two weeks after spontaneous
delivery, shunted lambs showed failure to thrive, significant biventricular
hypertrophy, and heart failure. Shunted hearts had significant increases in
myosin and cardiac troponin T protein expression. There was a shift in expression
to the high-molecular-weight fetal isoforms. Transcriptional enhancer factor-1,
myocyte enhancer factor-2, GATA-4, NKX2.5, and Sp1 transcription factor levels
were increased in all heart chambers of shunted animals. Sp3 expression was
decreased in shunted ventricles. Immunoprecipitated Sp3 was associated with
significant increases in histone acetyl transferase activity and decreases in
histone-deacetylase activity.
CONCLUSION: The shunted neonatal lamb is a valid, novel model of pathologic
biventricular hypertrophy. During pathologic hypertrophy myocardial
transactivators are upregulated while repressors are downregulated.

PMID: 17140938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Stem Cells. 2007 Mar;25(3):679-88. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Nitric oxide signaling in oxytocin-mediated cardiomyogenesis.

Danalache BA(1), Paquin J, Donghao W, Grygorczyk R, Moore JC, Mummery CL,
Gutkowska J, Jankowski M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neuroendocrinologie Développementale, Département de Chimie et 
de Biochimie, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Oxytocin (OT), a hormone recently identified in the heart, induces embryonic and 
cardiac somatic stem cells to differentiate into cardiomyocytes (CM), possibly
through nitric oxide (NO). We verified this hypothesis using P19 cells and P19
Clone 6 derivatives expressing a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter linked 
to cardiac myosin light chain-2v promoter. OT treatment of these cells induced
beating cell colonies that were fully inhibited by
N,G-nitro-L-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME), an inhibitor of NO synthases (NOS),
partially reduced by 1400W, an inhibitor of inducible NOS, and ODQ, an inhibitor 
of NO-sensitive guanylyl cyclases. The NO generator
S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) reversed the L-NAME inhibition of cell
beating and GFP expression. In OT-induced cells, L-NAME significantly decreased
transcripts of the cardiac markers Nkx2.5, MEF2c, alpha-myosin heavy chain, and
less, GATA4, endothelial NOS, and atrial natriuretic peptide, as well as the
skeletal myocyte (SM) marker myogenin. Image analysis of OT-induced P19Cl6-GFP
cells revealed ventricular CM coexpressing sarcomeric alpha-actinin and GFP, with
some cells exclusively expressing alpha-actinin, most likely of the SM phenotype.
The OT-mediated production of CM, but not SM, was diminished by L-NAME. In P19
cells, exogenously added OT stimulated the expression of its own transcript,
which was reduced in the presence of L-NAME. Surprisingly, L-NAME alone decreased
the expression of anti-stage specific embryonic antigen-1 marker of the
undifferentiated state and induced some beating colonies as well as GFP in
P19Cl6-GFP cells. Collectively, our data suggest that the pleiotropic action of
NO is involved in the initiation of CM differentiation of P19 cells and
maintenance of their undifferentiated state.

PMID: 17138963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biosci Bioeng. 2006 Oct;102(4):304-10.

Culture of mouse embryonic stem cells on photoimmobilized polymers.

Konno T(1), Kawazoe N, Chen G, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medical Bioreactor Project, Kanagawa Academy of Science and
Technology, KSP East 309, 3-2-1 Sakado, Takatsu-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 213-0012, 
Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were cultured on four types of polymer with
different surface properties. The polymers were poly(acrylic acid),
polyallylamine, gelatin, and poly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl
phosphorylcholine-co-methacrylic acid) (PMAc50), and were coupled with
azidophenyl groups and photoimmobilized on conventional polystyrene cell-culture 
dishes. Mouse ES cells were cultured on the immobilized polymer surfaces, and
cell morphology, cell growth, staining for alkaline phosphatase, activation of
the transcription factor stat3, and expression of the octamer-binding protein 3/4
(Oct3/4) transcription factor and the zinc finger-containing transcription factor
(GATA4) were observed. Morphology and growth rate were significantly affected by 
the polymer surface properties. The ES cells attached to gelatin or
polyallylamine surfaces; however, colonies formed on the former but not the
latter. In addition, significant enhancement of growth was observed on the
gelatin surface. In contrast, ES cells aggregated to form an embryoid body on the
photoimmobilized poly(acrylic acid) surface and the PMAc50 surface, although cell
growth was reduced. Significant enhancement of aggregation of ES cells on the
PMAc50 surface was observed in morphology and gene expression analyses.

PMID: 17116576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jan;27(2):622-32. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Myocardin sumoylation transactivates cardiogenic genes in pluripotent 10T1/2
fibroblasts.

Wang J(1), Li A, Wang Z, Feng X, Olson EN, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, The Texas A&M University Health
Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Myocardin, a serum response factor (SRF)-dependent cofactor, is a potent
activator of smooth muscle gene activity but a poor activator of cardiogenic
genes in pluripotent 10T1/2 fibroblasts. Posttranslational modification of GATA4,
another myocardin cofactor, by sumoylation strongly activated cardiogenic gene
activity. Here, we found that myocardin's activity was strongly enhanced by
SUMO-1 via modification of a lysine residue primarily located at position 445 and
that the conversion of this residue to arginine (K445R) impaired myocardin
transactivation. PIAS1 was involved in governing myocardin activity via its E3
ligase activity that stimulated myocardin sumoylation on an atypical sumoylation 
site(s) and by its physical association with myocardin. Myocardin initiated the
expression of cardiac muscle-specified genes, such as those encoding cardiac
alpha-actin and alpha-myosin heavy chain, in an SRF-dependent manner in 10T1/2
fibroblasts, but only in the presence of coexpressed SUMO-1/PIAS1. Thus, SUMO
modification acted as a molecular switch to promote myocardin's role in
cardiogenic gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1800801
PMID: 17101795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Tissue Cell. 2006 Dec;38(6):345-51. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Research of cardiomyocyte precursors in adult rat heart.

Bellafiore M(1), Sivverini G, Cappello F, David S, Palma A, Farina F, Zummo G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Anatomy Section, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of
Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy. bellafiore@unipa.it

Recent reports supported the existence of stem cells in adult hearts. However,
phenotype and localization of these cells have not been completely described and 
it is unknown if cardiac regenerative potential differs from one subject to
another. The aims of our work were to identify different populations of cardiac
stem cells by the analysis of specific markers and to evaluate the expression
variability of these markers in 12 adult rat hearts. The expression of CD9, taube
nuss and nanog suggests the presence of stem cells from the earliest stages of
embryogenesis in adult myocardium. Their different expression could be associated
to the degree of stem cell differentiation. CD34 and c-Kit antibodies were used
to detect stem cells committed to one or more specific tissue lineages and we
found a strong immunoreactivity for CD34 exclusively in the endothelial cells and
a low positivity for c-Kit in the interstitium and next to the vessels. Moreover,
as c-Kit expression highly differed within all examined hearts, we suggest that
cardiomyogenic potential is different among the various subjects.
Undifferentiated cells with myogenic-committed phenotype expressing GATA-4 and
nestin were found, respectively, in the interstitial and myocardial cells and in 
few interstitial cells. Therefore, the physiologic turn over of cardiomyocytes
may occur in adult hearts as it has been shown in many others organs. The study
of myogenic potential could be important to identify markers specific of stem
cells in in vivo adult myocardium that may be used to purify these cells and
evaluate their regenerative ability.

PMID: 17101162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):H751-7. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

Acute intermittent hypoxia activates myocardial cell survival signaling.

Park AM(1), Nagase H, Vinod Kumar S, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, NW403
Medical-Dental Bldg., 3900 Reservoir Rd. NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Intermittent hypoxia (IH) with repeated episodes of hypoxia-normoxia cycle has
been shown to exert preconditioning-like cardioprotective effects. To understand 
the mechanism of these events, we investigated the changes in cardiac gene
expression in response to acute IH. Mice were subjected to five cycles of 2 min
of 10% O(2) plus 2 min of 21% O(2). RNA was isolated, and gene array analysis was
performed. Results show that the expression of antiapoptotic genes, such as Bcl-2
and Bcl-x(L), were increased after acute IH. GATA-4 regulates transcription of
these genes, and, consistently, GATA-4 activity was increased by acute IH.
Although the phosphorylation of GATA-4 has been shown to regulate its activity,
no changes in GATA-4 phosphorylation status by acute IH were noted. Gene
transcription of gata4 was increased by acute IH, and this might be responsible
for the enhanced GATA activity. To understand the mechanism of acute IH
activation of gata4 gene transcription, we identified a promoter region of the
mouse gata4 gene that is 1,000 bp immediately upstream from the transcriptional
start site. In cardiac muscle cells, truncation of 1,000 to 250 bp did not alter 
the transcriptional activity, suggesting that the proximal 250-bp region contains
important transcriptional regulatory sites. We further found that acute IH
activates factors which bind to the proximal 100-bp region. Thus acute IH
activates not yet identified factors that bind to the proximal 100-bp region of
the gata4 promoter and, in turn, increases gata4 gene transcription, leading to
enhanced expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L).

PMID: 17098826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 15;263(1-2):181-9. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Prostaglandin E2 increases cyp19 expression in rat granulosa cells: implication
of GATA-4.

Cai Z(1), Kwintkiewicz J, Young ME, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, United States.

The expression of Cyp19, the key gene of estrogen biosynthesis, in granulosa
cells (GC) is essential for follicular growth and coordination of the ovulatory
process. The goal of this study was to examine the effect of PGE2 and PGF2alpha
on Cyp19 expression in undifferentiated and luteinized GC (UGC and LGC). In UGC, 
PGE2 increased Cyp19 mRNA and Cyp19 protein levels whereas PGF2alpha had no
effect. In LGC, PGF2alpha decreased Cyp19 expression whereas PGE2 had no effect. 
Gene-reporter experiments demonstrated that PGE2 increases Cyp19 transcription in
UGC. A protein kinase A inhibitor blocked PGE2-induced increase in Cyp19 promoter
activity. PGE2 increased GATA-4 binding to the Cyp19 promoter. Mutation of the
GATA binding site resulted in the loss of PGE2 stimulation. This study
demonstrates that PGE2 stimulates Cyp19 expression in rat GC and suggests that
GATA-4 may mediate (at least in part) the stimulatory effect of PGE2.

PMCID: PMC1779458
PMID: 17097802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jan;236(1):203-13.

GATA-4 is required for sex steroidogenic cell development in the fetal mouse.

Bielinska M(1), Seehra A, Toppari J, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-4 is expressed in Sertoli cells, steroidogenic
Leydig cells, and other testicular somatic cells. Previous studies have
established that interaction between GATA-4 and its cofactor FOG-2 is necessary
for proper Sry expression and all subsequent steps in testicular organogenesis,
including testis cord formation and differentiation of both Sertoli and fetal
Leydig cells. Since fetal Leydig cell differentiation depends on Sertoli
cell-derived factors, it has remained unclear whether GATA-4 has a cell
autonomous role in Leydig cell development. We used two experimental systems to
explore the role of GATA-4 in the ontogeny of testicular steroidogenic cells.
First, chimeric mice were generated by injection of Gata4-/- ES cells into Rosa26
blastocysts. Analysis of the resultant chimeras showed that in developing testis 
Gata4-/- cells can contribute to fetal germ cells and interstitial fibroblasts
but not fetal Leydig cells. Second, wild-type or Gata4-/- ES cells were injected 
into the flanks of intact or gonadectomized nude mice and the resultant teratomas
examined for expression of steroidogenic markers. Wild-type but not Gata4-/- ES
cells were capable of differentiating into gonadal-type steroidogenic lineages in
teratomas grown in gonadectomized mice. In chimeric teratomas derived from
mixtures of GFP-tagged Gata4+/+ ES cells and unlabeled Gata4-/- ES cells, sex
steroidogenic cell differentiation was restricted to GFP-expressing cells.
Collectively these data suggest that GATA-4 plays an integral role in the
development of testicular steroidogenic cells.

PMCID: PMC2174205
PMID: 17096405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;34(8):733-8.

[Effect of cardiotrophin-1 on cardiac transcription factor GATA4 expression in
rat cardiomyocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao HN(1), Wang Y, Li S, Jiang MN, Tang JH, Jia YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) on the GATA4
expression and related signaling pathways (JAK-STAT3, ERK1/2 and PI3-K) in rat
cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR and EMSA, we measured the dose and time
dependent effects of CT-1 on GATA4 mRNA and binding activity in cultured rat
cardiomyocytes. Parthenolide (a STAT inhibitor), U-0126 (an ERK inhibitor) and
LY-294002 (a PI3-K inhibitor) alone or in combination were added to the culture
medium to assess the role of above signaling pathways in CT-1 mediated effects.
RESULTS: GATA4 mRNA expression significantly increased at 3 h post 0.1 nmol/L
CT-1 exposure, peaked at 6 h and remained high till 24 h post exposure. The GATA4
binding activity began to increase at 10 min and peaked at 60 min and returned to
baseline level 180 min. Six hours post CT-1 (0.01 nmol/L, 0.1 nmol/L, 1 nmol/L)
exposure, the GATA4 mRNA expression increased in a dose-dependent manner. The
GATA4 binding activity peaked with 0.1 nmol/L CT-1 and higher dose did not
further increase the binding activity. U-0126 increased the GATA4 mRNA expression
and enhanced the GATA4 binding activity and these effects could be partially
attenuated with addition of Parthenolide. Parthenolide also prevented the
increase of GATA4 mRNA and binding activity induced by CT-1. LY-294002 had no
effects GATA4 mRNA and binding activity.
CONCLUSION: CT-1 increases the GATA4 mRNA expression and binding activity in rat 
cardiomyocytes via STAT3/ERK1/2 pathways and these effects are independent of
PI3-K pathway.

PMID: 17081402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(6):R64.

GATA3 protein as a MUC1 transcriptional regulator in breast cancer cells.

Abba MC(1), Nunez MI, Colussi AG, Croce MV, Segal-Eiras A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
mabba777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that members of the GATA-binding
protein (GATA) family (GATA4 and GATA5) might have pivotal roles in the
transcriptional upregulation of mucin genes (MUC2, MUC3 and MUC4) in
gastrointestinal epithelium. The zinc-finger GATA3 transcription factor has been 
reported to be involved in the growth control and differentiation of breast
epithelial cells. In SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) studies we
observed an intriguing significant correlation between GATA3 and MUC1 mRNA
expression in breast carcinomas. We therefore designed the present study to
elucidate whether MUC1 expression is regulated by GATA3 in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Promoter sequence analysis of the MUC1 gene identified six GATA cis
consensus elements in the 5' flanking region (GATA1, GATA3 and four GATA-like
sequences). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays were employed to study the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site.
GATA3 and MUC1 expression was analyzed in vitro with a GATA3 knockdown assay.
Furthermore, expression of GATA3 and MUC1 genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR 
and immunohistochemistry on breast cancer-specific tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: We confirmed the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site on the MUC1
promoter region in the MCF7 cell line. We determined that GATA3 knockdown assays 
led to a decrease in MUC1 protein expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. In addition,
we detected a statistically significant correlation in expression between GATA3
and MUC1 genes at the mRNA and protein levels both in normal breast epithelium
and in breast carcinomas (p = 0.01). GATA3 expression was also highly associated 
with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status (p = 0.0001) and tumor
grade (p = 0.004) in breast carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence indicating that GATA3 is probably a
mediator for the transcriptional upregulation of MUC1 expression in some breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC1797033
PMID: 17078870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3359-69.

Nuclear receptor NR5A2 is required for proper primitive streak morphogenesis.

Labelle-Dumais C(1), Jacob-Wagner M, Paré JF, Bélanger L, Dufort D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
McGill University, RVH, Montreal, Canada.

NR5A2, also known as liver receptor homologue 1 (LRH-1) and fetoprotein
transcription factor (FTF), is an orphan nuclear receptor involved in the
regulation of cholesterol metabolism and steroidogenesis in the adult. NR5A2 was 
also shown to be expressed during early mouse embryogenesis. Consistent with its 
early expression pattern, a targeted disruption of this gene leads to embryonic
lethality around the gastrulation period. To characterize the embryonic phenotype
resulting from NR5A2 loss of function, we undertook morphological and marker gene
analyses and showed that NR5A2-/- embryos display growth retardation, epiblast
disorganization, a mild embryonic-extraembryonic constriction, as well as
abnormal thickening of the proximo-posterior epiblast. We demonstrated that,
although initial specification of the anterior-posterior axis occurred in the
absence of NR5A2, primitive streak formation was impaired and neither embryonic
nor extraembryonic mesoderm was generated. Moreover, although the visceral
endoderm does not show major morphological abnormalities in NR5A2-/- embryos, a
decrease in the expression level of HNF4 and GATA4 was observed. Aggregation
experiments demonstrated that, in the presence of wild-type tetraploid cells,
NR5A2 mutant cells in the epiblast are capable of undergoing normal gastrulation.
Therefore, our results suggest a requirement for NR5A2 in extraembryonic tissues 
and identify a novel role of this gene in proper primitive streak morphogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17075876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 15;301(2):602-14. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Impaired mesenchymal cell function in Gata4 mutant mice leads to diaphragmatic
hernias and primary lung defects.

Jay PY(1), Bielinska M, Erlich JM, Mannisto S, Pu WT, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University and St. Louis Children's
Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is an often fatal birth defect that is
commonly associated with pulmonary hypoplasia and cardiac malformations. Some
investigators hypothesize that this constellation of defects results from genetic
or environmental triggers that disrupt mesenchymal cell function in not only the 
primordial diaphragm but also the thoracic organs. The alternative hypothesis is 
that the displacement of the abdominal viscera in the chest secondarily perturbs 
the development of the heart and lungs. Recently, loss-of-function mutations in
the gene encoding FOG-2, a transcriptional co-regulator, have been linked to CDH 
and pulmonary hypoplasia in humans and mice. Here we show that mutagenesis of the
gene for GATA-4, a transcription factor known to functionally interact with
FOG-2, predisposes inbred mice to a similar set of birth defects. Analysis of
wild-type mouse embryos demonstrated co-expression of Gata4 and Fog2 in
mesenchymal cells of the developing diaphragm, lungs, and heart. A significant
fraction of C57Bl/6 mice heterozygous for a Gata4 deletion mutation died within 1
day of birth. Developmental defects in the heterozygotes included midline
diaphragmatic hernias, dilated distal airways, and cardiac malformations.
Heterozygotes had any combination of these defects or none. In chimeric mice,
Gata4(-/-) cells retained the capacity to contribute to cells in the
diaphragmatic central tendon and lung mesenchyme, indicating that GATA-4 is not
required for differentiation of these lineages. We conclude that GATA-4, like its
co-regulator FOG-2, is required for proper mesenchymal cell function in the
developing diaphragm, lungs, and heart.

PMCID: PMC1808541
PMID: 17069789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. EMBO J. 2006 Nov 1;25(21):5201-13. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

The Kruppel-like transcription factor KLF13 is a novel regulator of heart
development.

Lavallée G(1), Andelfinger G, Nadeau M, Lefebvre C, Nemer G, Horb ME, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

In humans, congenital heart defects occur in 1-2% of live birth, but the
molecular mechanisms and causative genes remain unidentified in the majority of
cases. We have uncovered a novel transcription pathway important for heart
morphogenesis. We report that KLF13, a member of the Krüppel-like family of
zinc-finger proteins, is expressed predominantly in the heart, binds
evolutionarily conserved regulatory elements on cardiac promoters and activates
cardiac transcription. KLF13 is conserved across species and knockdown of KLF13
in Xenopus embryos leads to atrial septal defects and hypotrabeculation similar
to those observed in humans or mice with hypomorphic GATA-4 alleles. Physical and
functional interaction with GATA-4, a dosage-sensitive cardiac regulator,
provides a mechanistic explanation for KLF13 action in the heart. The data
demonstrate that KLF13 is an important component of the transcription network
required for heart development and suggest that KLF13 is a GATA-4 modifier; by
analogy to other GATA-4 collaborators, mutations in KLF13 may be causative for
congenital human heart disease.

PMCID: PMC1630408
PMID: 17053787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Oct;1759(10):491-6. Epub 2006 Sep 16.

The human Cx40 promoter polymorphism -44G-->A differentially affects
transcriptional regulation by Sp1 and GATA4.

Firouzi M(1), Bierhuizen MF, Kok B, Teunissen BE, Jansen AT, Jongsma HJ,
Groenewegen WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Yalelaan 
50, 3584 CM Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Expression of the tissue-specific gap junction protein connexin(Cx)40 is
regulated by the interaction of ubiquitous and tissue-specific factors such as
Sp1 and GATA4. Cardiac Cx40 expression is altered under pathological conditions
such as atrial fibrillation. A human promoter polymorphism, a G-->A change at
position -44 that has been associated with atrial-specific arrhythmias, is
located between the TBE-NKE-Sp and GATA consensus transcription factor binding
sites important for the regulation of the mouse Cx40 gene. The presence of the
A-allele at position -44 in promoter-reporter constructs significantly reduces
promoter activity. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and luciferase
reporter assays in various cell types, we show that Sp1 and GATA4 are important
regulators of human Cx40 gene transcription and that the -44 G-->A polymorphism
negatively affects the promoter regulation by the transcription factors Sp1 and
GATA4.

PMID: 17050003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):230-42. Epub 2006 Sep 16.

Differential regulation of Tbx5 protein expression and sub-cellular localization 
during heart development.

Bimber B(1), Dettman RW, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 can interact with Nkx2.5 and Gata4
transcription factors to synergistically regulate heart-specific genes in the
nucleus. While a nuclear role for Tbx5 is clearly defined, we have previously
shown that Tbx5 shuttles from nuclear to cytoplasmic sites, forming a complex
with the PDZ-LIM protein LMP4 on the actin cytoskeleton. In this study, using a
developmental series of chicken hearts, we provide the first evidence for
differential Tbx5 protein expression and sub-cellular localization during
cardiogenesis. At the tissue level, we show temporally and spatially restricted
Tbx5 co-expression with LMP4. In cells co-expressing LMP4 and Tbx5 we demonstrate
dynamic Tbx5 re-localization from exclusively nuclear to nuclear and cytoplasmic 
expression in the atrio-ventricular cushion. Furthermore, in coronary vessel
development we show exclusive cytoplasmic localization of Tbx5, indicating a
function for Tbx5 in the cytoplasm. In addition, we discover unknown regulation
of Tbx5 and LMP4 expression in epicardial tissue, suggesting a specific role for 
Tbx5 in epicardial formation. These studies provide in vivo significance of the
LMP4/Tbx5 protein interaction, suggesting both nuclear and cytoplasmic roles for 
Tbx5. The shuttling between nuclear and cytoplasmic sites reveals a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in chicken heart development
allowing new insights for a better understanding of the molecular basis of
hand/heart birth defects associated with TBX5 mutations.

PMCID: PMC1876776
PMID: 17045582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 15;119(Pt 20):4305-14.

HDAC activity regulates entry of mesoderm cells into the cardiac muscle lineage.

Karamboulas C(1), Swedani A, Ward C, Al-Madhoun AS, Wilton S, Boisvenue S,
Ridgeway AG, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5C1, Canada.

Class II histone deacetylases (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7 and HDAC9) have been shown to 
interact with myocyte enhancer factors 2 (MEF2s) and play an important role in
the repression of cardiac hypertrophy. We examined the role of HDACs during the
differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma stem cells into cardiomyocytes.
Treatment of aggregated P19 cells with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A induced 
the entry of mesodermal cells into the cardiac muscle lineage, shown by the
upregulation of transcripts Nkx2-5, MEF2C, GATA4 and cardiac alpha-actin.
Furthermore, the overexpression of HDAC4 inhibited cardiomyogenesis, shown by the
downregulation of cardiac muscle gene expression. Class II HDAC activity is
inhibited through phosphorylation by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK).
Expression of an activated CaMKIV in P19 cells upregulated the expression of
Nkx2-5, GATA4 and MEF2C, enhanced cardiac muscle development, and activated a
MEF2-responsive promoter. Moreover, inhibition of CaMK signaling downregulated
GATA4 expression. Finally, P19 cells constitutively expressing a
dominant-negative form of MEF2C, capable of binding class II HDACs, underwent
cardiomyogenesis more efficiently than control cells, implying the relief of an
inhibitor. Our results suggest that HDAC activity regulates the specification of 
mesoderm cells into cardiomyoblasts by inhibiting the expression of GATA4 and
Nkx2-5 in a stem cell model system.

PMID: 17038545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biol Reprod. 2007 Jan;76(1):85-95. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

The proximal Gata4 promoter directs reporter gene expression to sertoli cells
during mouse gonadal development.

Mazaud Guittot S(1), Tétu A, Legault E, Pilon N, Silversides DW, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laval University, Québec City, Québec,
Canada G1K 7P4.

The GATA4 transcription factor is an important developmental determinant for many
organs, such as the heart, gut, and testis. Despite this pivotal role, our
understanding of the transcriptional mechanisms that control the proper
spatiotemporal expression of the GATA4 gene remains limited. We have generated
transgenic mice expressing a green fluorescent protein (GFP) marker under the
control of rat Gata4 5' flanking sequences. Several GATA4-expressing organs
displayed GFP fluorescence, including the heart, intestine, and pancreas. In the 
gonads, while GATA4 is expressed in pregranulosa, granulosa, and theca ovarian
cells, and Sertoli, Leydig, and peritubular testicular cells, the first 5 kb of
Gata4 regulatory sequences immediately upstream of exon 1 were sufficient to
direct GFP reporter expression only in testis and, specifically, in Sertoli
cells. Onset of GFP expression occurred after Sertoli cell commitment and was
maintained in these cells throughout development to adulthood. In vitro studies
revealed that the first 118 bp of the Gata4 promoter is sufficient for full basal
activity in several GATA4-expressing cell lines. Promoter mutagenesis and
DNA-binding experiments identified two GC-box motifs and, particularly, one E-box
element within this -118-bp region that are crucial for its activity. Further
analysis revealed that members of the USF family of transcription factors,
especially USF2, bind to and activate the Gata4 promoter via this critical E-box 
motif.

PMID: 17021344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 15;119(Pt 20):4315-21. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Disruption of MEF2 activity in cardiomyoblasts inhibits cardiomyogenesis.

Karamboulas C(1), Dakubo GD, Liu J, De Repentigny Y, Yutzey K, Wallace VA,
Kothary R, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5C1, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 15;119(Pt 20):4367.
    J Cell Sci. 2007 Jan 1;120(Pt 1):200.

Myocyte enhancer factors (MEF2s) bind to muscle-specific promoters and activate
transcription. Drosophila Mef2 is essential for Drosophila heart development,
however, neither MEF2C nor MEF2B are essential for the early stages of murine
cardiomyogenesis. Although Mef2c-null mice were defective in the later stages of 
heart morphogenesis, differentiation of cardiomyocytes still occurred. Since
there are four isoforms of MEF2 factors (MEF2A, MEF2B, MEF2C and MEF2D), the
ability of cells to differentiate may have been confounded by genetic redundancy.
To eliminate this variable, the effect of a dominant-negative MEF2 mutant
(MEF2C/EnR) during cardiomyogenesis was examined in transgenic mice and P19
cells. Targeting the expression of MEF2C/EnR to cardiomyoblasts using an Nkx2-5
enhancer in the P19 system resulted in the loss of both cardiomyocyte development
and the expression of GATA4, BMP4, Nkx2-5 and MEF2C. In transiently transgenic
mice, MEF2C/EnR expression resulted in embryos that lacked heart structures and
exhibited defective differentiation. Our results show that MEF2C, or genes
containing MEF2 DNA-binding sites, is required for the efficient differentiation 
of cardiomyoblasts into cardiomyocytes, suggesting conservation in the role of
MEF2 from Drosophila to mammals.

PMID: 17003108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):271-8. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Epicardial cells of human adults can undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and obtain characteristics of smooth muscle cells in vitro.

van Tuyn J(1), Atsma DE, Winter EM, van der Velde-van Dijke I, Pijnappels DA, Bax
NA, Knaän-Shanzer S, Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Poelmann RE, van der Laarse A, van
der Wall EE, Schalij MJ, de Vries AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, P.O. Box
9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Myocardial and coronary development are both critically dependent on epicardial
cells. During cardiomorphogenesis, a subset of epicardial cells undergoes an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invades the myocardium to
differentiate into various cell types, including coronary smooth muscle cells and
perivascular and cardiac interstitial fibroblasts. Our current knowledge of
epicardial EMT and the ensuing epicardium-derived cells (EPDCs) comes primarily
from studies of chick and mouse embryonic development. Due to the absence of an
in vitro culture system, very little is known about human EPDCs. Here, we report 
for the first time the establishment of cultures of primary epicardial cells from
human adults and describe their immunophenotype, transcriptome, transducibility, 
and differentiation potential in vitro. Changes in morphology and beta-catenin
staining pattern indicated that human epicardial cells spontaneously undergo EMT 
early during ex vivo culture. The surface antigen profile of the cells after EMT 
closely resembles that of subepithelial fibroblasts; however, only EPDCs express 
the cardiac marker genes GATA4 and cardiac troponin T. After infection with an
adenovirus vector encoding the transcription factor myocardin or after treatment 
with transforming growth factor-beta1 or bone morphogenetic protein-2, EPDCs
obtain characteristics of smooth muscle cells. Moreover, EPDCs can undergo
osteogenesis but fail to form adipocytes or endothelial cells in vitro. Cultured 
epicardial cells from human adults recapitulate at least part of the
differentiation potential of their embryonic counterparts and represent an
excellent model system to explore the biological properties and therapeutic
potential of these cells.

PMID: 16990583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 26;103(39):14471-6. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Gata4 is required for maintenance of postnatal cardiac function and protection
from pressure overload-induced heart failure.

Bisping E(1), Ikeda S, Kong SW, Tarnavski O, Bodyak N, McMullen JR, Rajagopal S, 
Son JK, Ma Q, Springer Z, Kang PM, Izumo S, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

An important event in the pathogenesis of heart failure is the development of
pathological cardiac hypertrophy. In cultured cardiomyocytes, the transcription
factor Gata4 is required for agonist-induced hypertrophy. We hypothesized that,
in the intact organism, Gata4 is an important regulator of postnatal heart
function and of the hypertrophic response of the heart to pathological stress. To
test this hypothesis, we studied mice heterozygous for deletion of the second
exon of Gata4 (G4D). At baseline, G4D mice had mild systolic and diastolic
dysfunction associated with reduced heart weight and decreased cardiomyocyte
number. After transverse aortic constriction (TAC), G4D mice developed overt
heart failure and eccentric cardiac hypertrophy, associated with significantly
increased fibrosis and cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Inhibition of apoptosis by
overexpression of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor prevented TAC-induced
heart failure in G4D mice. Unlike WT-TAC controls, G4D-TAC cardiomyocytes
hypertrophied by increasing in length more than width. Gene expression profiling 
revealed up-regulation of genes associated with apoptosis and fibrosis, including
members of the TGF-beta pathway. Our data demonstrate that Gata4 is essential for
cardiac function in the postnatal heart. After pressure overload, Gata4 regulates
the pattern of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and protects the heart from load-induced
failure.

PMCID: PMC1636702
PMID: 16983087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34430-40. Epub 2006 Sep 10.

Regulation of Ncx1 expression. Identification of regulatory elements mediating
cardiac-specific expression and up-regulation.

Xu L(1), Renaud L, Müller JG, Baicu CF, Bonnema DD, Zhou H, Kappler CS, Kubalak
SW, Zile MR, Conway SJ, Menick DR.

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425,
USA.

The Na+-Ca2+ exchanger (NCX1) is up-regulated in hypertrophy and is often found
up-regulated in end-stage heart failure. Studies have shown that the change in
its expression contributes to contractile dysfunction. We have previously shown
that the 1831-bp Ncx1 H1 (1831Ncx1) promoter directs cardiac-specific expression 
of the exchanger in both development and in the adult, and is sufficient for the 
up-regulation of Ncx1 in response to pressure overload. Here, we utilized
adenoviral mediated gene transfer and transgenics to identify minimal regions and
response elements that mediate Ncx1 expression in the heart. We demonstrate that 
the proximal 184 bp of the Ncx1 H1 (184Ncx1) promoter is sufficient for
expression of reporter genes in adult cardiomyocytes and for the correct
spatiotemporal pattern of Ncx1 expression in development but not for
up-regulation in response to pressure overload. Mutational analysis revealed that
both the -80 CArG and the -50 GATA elements were required for expression in
isolated adult cardiomyocytes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in adult
cardiocytes demonstrate that SRF and GATA4 are associated with the proximal
region of the endogenous Ncx1 promoter. Transgenic lines were established for the
1831Ncx1 promoter-luciferase containing mutations in the -80 CArG or -50 GATA
element. No luciferase activity was detected during development, in the adult, or
after pressure overload in any of the -80 CArG transgenic lines. The Ncx1 -50
GATA mutant promoter was sufficient for driving the normal spatiotemporal pattern
of Ncx1 expression in development and for up-regulation in response to pressure
overload but importantly, expression was no longer cardiac restricted. This work 
is the first in vivo study that demonstrates which cis elements are important for
Ncx1 regulation.

PMCID: PMC3096005
PMID: 16966329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Feb 15;100(3):629-41.

Upregulations of Gata4 and oxytocin receptor are important in cardiomyocyte
differentiation processes of P19CL6 cells.

Uchida S(1), Fuke S, Tsukahara T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Ishikawa, Japan.

Oxytocin induces P19 cells to differentiate into cardiomyocytes possibly through 
the oxytocin/oxytocin receptor system. We added oxytocin to the growth medium of 
P19CL6, a subline of P19, but they did not differentiate into cardiomyocytes as
indicated by RT-PCR and Western blotting results. During the cardiac commitment
time of P19CL6 cells, the mRNA expression levels of the oxytocin receptor were
upregulated by the addition of oxytocin as well as DMSO, but an upregulation of
Gata4 expression levels was only observed for the cells induced by DMSO. The in
silico analysis of the upstream sequence of the oxytocin receptor predicted
putative binding sites for Gata4 and Nkx2.5. These results suggest that
upregulations of the oxytocin receptor and Gata4 are important for cardiomyocyte 
differentiation processes.

PMID: 16960874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mech Dev. 2006 Oct;123(10):730-45. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

A role for GATA factors in Xenopus gastrulation movements.

Fletcher G(1), Jones GE, Patient R, Snape A.

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, New 
Hunt's House, Guys Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Gastrulation movements in Xenopus laevis are becoming increasingly well
characterised, however the molecular mechanisms involved are less clear. Active
migration of the leading edge mesendoderm across the fibronectin-coated
blastocoel roof is necessary for further development of tissues such as head
mesoderm, heart, blood and liver. The zinc finger transcription factors GATA4 and
GATA6 are expressed in this migratory tissue during gastrulation, but their role 
here is unknown. This study further characterises the expression of GATA4 and 6
during gastrulation, and investigates their function in migratory behaviour.
Gain-of-function experiments with these GATA factors induce cell spreading,
polarisation and migration in non-motile presumptive ectoderm cells. Expression
of a dominant-interfering form of GATA6, which inhibits transactivation of GATA
targets, severely impairs the ability of dorsal leading edge mesendoderm to
spread and translocate on fibronectin. Mosaic inhibition of GATA activity
indicates that GATA factors function cell autonomously to induce cell spreading
and movement in dorsal mesendoderm. Knockdown of specific GATA factors using
anti-sense morpholinos indicates that GATA4 and GATA6 both contribute to dorsal
mesendoderm migration in vitro. GATA4 and GATA6 are known to be involved in
cell-specification of mesoderm and endoderm-derived tissues, but this is the
first description of an additional role for these factors in cell migration.

PMID: 16949798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32820-30. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

GATA-4 incompletely substitutes for GATA-1 in promoting both primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis in vivo.

Hosoya-Ohmura S(1), Mochizuki N, Suzuki M, Ohneda O, Ohneda K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Vertebrate GATA transcription factors have been classified into two subgroups;
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 are expressed in hematopoietic cells, whereas GATA-4, 
GATA-5, and GATA-6 are expressed in mesoendoderm-derived tissues. We previously
discovered that expression of GATA-2 or GATA-3 under the transcriptional control 
for the Gata1 gene eliminates lethal anemia in Gata1 germ line mutant mice
(Gata1.05/Y). Here, we show that the GATA-4 expression by the same regulatory
cassette prolongs the life span of Gata1.05/Y embryos from embryonic day 12.5 to 
15.5 but fails to abrogate its embryonic lethality. Gata1.05/Y mice bearing the
GATA-4 transgene showed impaired maturation of both primitive and definitive
erythroid cells and defective erythroid cell expansion in fetal liver. Moreover, 
the incidence of apoptosis was observed prominently in primitive erythroid cells.
In contrast, a GATA-4-GATA-1 chimeric protein prepared by linking the N-terminal 
region of GATA-4 to the C-terminal region of GATA-1 significantly promoted the
differentiation and survival of primitive erythroid cells, although this protein 
is still insufficient for rescuing Gata1.05/Y embryos from lethal anemia. These
data thus show a functional incompatibility between hematopoietic and endodermal 
GATA factors in vivo and provide evidence indicating specific roles of the
C-terminal region of GATA-1 in primitive erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16945928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):9060-70. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Gata4 is essential for the maintenance of jejunal-ileal identities in the adult
mouse small intestine.

Bosse T(1), Piaseckyj CM, Burghard E, Fialkovich JJ, Rajagopal S, Pu WT,
Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)GI/Cell Biology, EN 720, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gata4, a member of the zinc finger family of GATA transcription factors, is
highly expressed in duodenum and jejunum but is nearly undetectable in distal
ileum of adult mice. We show here that the caudal reduction of Gata4 is conserved
in humans. To test the hypothesis that the regional expression of Gata4 is
critical for the maintenance of jejunal-ileal homeostasis in the adult small
intestine in vivo, we established an inducible, intestine-specific model that
results in the synthesis of a transcriptionally inactive Gata4 mutant. Synthesis 
of mutant Gata4 in jejuna of 6- to 8-week-old mice resulted in an attenuation of 
absorptive enterocyte genes normally expressed in jejunum but not in ileum,
including those for the anticipated targets liver fatty acid binding protein
(Fabp1) and lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH), and a surprising induction of
genes normally silent in jejunum but highly expressed in ileum, specifically
those involved in bile acid transport. Inactivation of Gata4 resulted in an
increase in the goblet cell population and a redistribution of the
enteroendocrine subpopulations, all toward an ileal phenotype. The gene encoding 
Math1, a known activator of the secretory cell fate, was induced approximately
75% (P < 0.05). Gata4 is thus an important positional signal required for the
maintenance of jejunal-ileal identities in the adult mouse small intestine.

PMCID: PMC1636804
PMID: 16940177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Horm Metab Res. 2006 Jul;38(7):452-4.

Metabolic learning in the intestine: adaptation to nutrition and luminal factors.

Schmitz G(1), Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany. gerd.schmitz@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

There is increasing evidence that the magnitude and potential of intestinal
nutrient absorption (sugars, fatty acids, cholesterol and triglycerides) and
intestinal defense function are regulated by metabolic learning phenomena, and
are influenced by dietary energy content and exercise. Metabolic overload
syndromes, mainly obesity, and chronic malabsorption disorders such as
inflammatory bowel disease and celiac disease have been defined as extreme
phenotypes. Metabolic learning processes depend on developmental and
transcriptional control systems of intestinal epithelial cell differentiation.
The physiological differentiation zone of enterocytes is linked to the
beta-catenin system, apolipoprotein apoA-IV and the master transcription factors 
Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and GATA4. In addition to these developmental regulatory
transcription factors, nuclear receptors including RXR, LXR, PPAR, PXR, and CAR
have been implicated in the generation of more absorptive enterocytes with a more
differentiated phenotype on the one hand, and dedifferentiated cells with reduced
capacity of detoxification and defense causing loss of junction control and
barrier defects on the other. Large-scale analysis of gene expression profiles
and identification of key pathways and master regulatory transcription factors
will help dissect the role of nutritional and environmental factors as well as
pharmacological intervention on mucosal homeostasis and disease, with potential
applications for diagnosis and therapy.

PMID: 16933181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Genes Cells. 2006 Sep;11(9):1115-23.

NANOG maintains self-renewal of primate ES cells in the absence of a feeder
layer.

Yasuda SY(1), Tsuneyoshi N, Sumi T, Hasegawa K, Tada T, Nakatsuji N, Suemori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Nanog is a homeodomain transcription factor that is expressed specifically in
undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and has been shown to be essential in 
the maintenance of pluripotency in mouse ES cells. To examine the function of
NANOG in primate ES cells, we generated transgenic monkey ES cell lines
expressing three- to seven-fold higher levels of NANOG protein compared to
wild-type ES cells. These NANOG over-expressing cell lines retained their
undifferentiated state in the absence of a feeder layer, as shown by expression
of undifferentiated ES cell markers such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and OCT-4.
We also demonstrated that in vitro differentiation of transgenic cell lines was
mostly restricted to the ectodermal lineage, as examined by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Knockdown experiments using
NANOG small interfering (si) RNA resulted in induction of differentiation markers
such as AFP, GATA4 and GATA6 for the endoderm and CDX2 for the trophectoderm.
These results suggest that NANOG plays a crucial role in maintaining the
pluripotent state of primate ES cells.

PMID: 16923129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 6;348(4):1419-28. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Analysis of nuclear reprogramming in cloned miniature pig embryos by expression
of Oct-4 and Oct-4 related genes.

Lee E(1), Lee SH, Kim S, Jeong YW, Kim JH, Koo OJ, Park SM, Hashem MA, Hossein
MS, Son HY, Lee CK, Hwang WS, Kang SK, Lee BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnololgy, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Xenotransplantation is a rapidly expanding field of research and cloned miniature
pigs have been considered as a model animal for it. However, the efficiency of
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is extremely low, with most clones resulting
in early lethality and several kinds of aberrant development. A possible
explanation for the developmental failure of SCNT embryos is insufficient
reprogramming of the somatic cell nucleus by the oocyte. In order to test this,
we analyzed the reprogramming capacity of differentiated fibroblast cell nuclei
and embryonic germ cell nuclei with Oct-4 and Oct-4 related genes (Ndp5211,
Dppa2, Dppa3, and Dppa5), which are important for embryonic development, Hand1
and GATA-4, which are important for placental development, as molecular markers
using RT-PCR. The Oct-4 expression level was significantly lower (P<0.05) in
cloned hatched blastocysts derived from fibroblasts and many of
fibroblast-derived clones failed to reactivate at least one of the tested genes, 
while most of the germ cell clones and control embryos correctly expressed these 
genes. In conclusion, our results suggest that the reprogramming of
fibroblast-derived cloned embryos is highly aberrant and this improper
reprogramming could be one reason of the early lethality and post-implantation
anomalies of somatic cell-derived clones.

PMID: 16920069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3607-18. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Development of heart valves requires Gata4 expression in endothelial-derived
cells.

Rivera-Feliciano J(1), Lee KH, Kong SW, Rajagopal S, Ma Q, Springer Z, Izumo S,
Tabin CJ, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cardiac malformations due to aberrant development of the atrioventricular (AV)
valves are among the most common forms of congenital heart disease. At localized 
swellings of extracellular matrix known as the endocardial cushions, the
endothelial lining of the heart undergoes an epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) to form the mesenchymal progenitors of the AV valves. Further growth and
differentiation of these mesenchymal precursors results in the formation of
portions of the atrial and ventricular septae, and the generation of thin,
pliable valves. Gata4, which encodes a zinc finger transcription factor, is
expressed in the endothelium and mesenchyme of the AV valves. Using a Tie2-Cre
transgene, we selectively inactivated Gata4 within endothelial-derived cells.
Mutant endothelium failed to undergo EMT, resulting in hypocellular cushions.
Mutant cushions had decreased levels of Erbb3, an EGF-family receptor essential
for EMT in the atrioventricular cushions. In Gata4 mutant embryos, Erbb3
downregulation was associated with impaired activation of Erk, which is also
required for EMT. Expression of a Gata4 mutant protein defective in interaction
with Friend of Gata (FOG) cofactors rescued the EMT defect, but resulted in a
decreased proliferation of mesenchyme and hypoplastic cushions that failed to
septate the ventricular inlet. We demonstrate two novel functions of Gata4 in
development of the AV valves. First, Gata4 functions as an upstream regulator of 
an Erbb3-Erk pathway necessary for EMT, and second, Gata4 acts to promote cushion
mesenchyme growth and remodeling.

PMCID: PMC2735081
PMID: 16914500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Sep 26;257-258:65-74. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

LRH-1/NR5A2 cooperates with GATA factors to regulate inhibin alpha-subunit
promoter activity.

Robert NM(1), Miyamoto Y, Taniguchi H, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, CHUL Research Centre (CHUQ), Québec City,
Que, Canada.

Inhibin alpha is the common subunit of the dimeric inhibin proteins known for
their role in suppressing pituitary FSH secretion. In this study, we have
examined the role of GATA factors and the nuclear receptor, LRH-1/NR5A2, in the
regulation of inhibin alpha-subunit promoter activity. The inhibin alpha promoter
contains two GATA-binding motifs that can be activated by GATA4 or GATA6. The
GATA-dependence of the promoter was demonstrated by downregulating GATA
expression in MA-10 cells using siRNA technology. We next examined whether GATA
factors could cooperate with LRH-1, a factor recently proposed to be an important
regulator of inhibin alpha-subunit transcription. Both GATA4 and GATA6 strongly
synergized with LRH-1. Consistent with the cAMP-dependence of the inhibin
alpha-subunit promoter, GATA/LRH-1 synergism was markedly enhanced by PKA and the
co-activator protein CBP. Thus, our results identify LRH-1 as a new
transcriptional partner for GATA factors in the regulation of inhibin
alpha-subunit gene expression.

PMID: 16893604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):415-29. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Gata6 is an important regulator of mouse pancreas development.

Decker K(1), Goldman DC, Grasch CL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Gata4, Gata5, and Gata6 represent a subfamily of zinc-finger transcriptional
regulators that are important in the development and differentiation of numerous 
tissues, including many endodermally-derived organs. We demonstrate that Gata4
and Gata6 have overlapping expression patterns in the early pancreatic
epithelium. Later, Gata4 becomes restricted to exocrine tissue and Gata6 becomes 
restricted to a subset of endocrine cells. In addition, we show Gata6, but not
Gata4, physically interacts with Nkx2.2, an essential islet transcription factor.
To begin determining the roles that Gata4 and Gata6 play during pancreatic
development, we expressed Gata4-Engrailed and Gata6-Engrailed dominant repressor 
fusion proteins in the pancreatic epithelium and in the islet. At e17.5,
transgenic Gata6-Engrailed embryos exhibit two distinct phenotypes: a complete
absence of pancreas or a reduction in pancreatic tissue. In the embryos that do
form pancreas, there is a significant reduction of all pancreatic cell types,
with the few differentiated endocrine cells clustered within, or in close
proximity to, enlarged ductal structures. Conversely, the majority of transgenic 
Gata4-Engrailed embryos do not have a pancreatic phenotype. This study suggests
that Gata6 is an important regulator of pancreas specification.

PMCID: PMC2824170
PMID: 16887115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2848-63. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Origin and identity of adrenocortical tumors in inhibin knockout mice:
implications for cellular plasticity in the adrenal cortex.

Looyenga BD(1), Hammer GD.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Division of Endocrinology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2200, USA.

Inhibin knockout (Inha-/-) mice develop gonadal sex-cord tumors and--when
gonadectomized--adrenocortical tumors. Previous reports demonstrated that
adrenocortical tumors from Inha-/- mice produce estrogen and depend on
gonadotropin signaling for initiation. Here we show that, in addition to
producing estrogen, the adrenocortical tumors display a global change in cellular
identity, composed of two unique cell types expressing differing arrays of genes 
normally restricted to theca and granulosa cells of the ovary. Many of these
genes are also induced in wild-type adrenals after gonadectomy or upon chronic
gonadotropin stimulation, suggesting that the adrenal cortex normally contains a 
population of pluripotent cells that can be driven toward an adrenal or gonadal
identity given the appropriate pituitary stimuli. A central feature of this
altered cellular identity is the switch from predominant expression of Gata6
(endogenous to the adrenal cortex) to Gata4, which defines cellular identity in
the ovary. We show that stable transfection of Gata4 in cultured adrenocortical
cells is sufficient to activate ovarian-specific genes of both theca and
granulose lineages. Spatial analysis of Gata4 expression reveals a distinct
pattern of localization to the supcapsular region of the adrenal, which contains 
undifferentiated progenitor cells that continuously populate the adrenocortical
zones. Although both wild-type and Inha-/- mice display this pattern, only
Inha-/- mice produce tumors composed of these Gata4-positive cells. These data
suggest that Inha-/- adrenocortical tumors cells are derived from pluripotent
adrenocortical progenitor cells that adopt a gonadal fate due to the convergent
loss of inhibin and chronic exposure to elevated gonadotropins.

PMID: 16873442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006 Dec;33(12):1019-31. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Identification of Geotrichum candidum at the species and strain level: proposal
for a standardized protocol.

Gente S(1), Sohier D, Coton E, Duhamel C, Gueguen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Alimentaire, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, 
Esplanade de la Paix, 14032 Caen cedex, France, stephanie.gente@unicaen.fr

In this study, the M13 primer was used to distinguish Geotrichum candidum from
the anamorphic and teleomorphic forms of other arthrospore-forming species
(discriminatory power = 0.99). For intraspecific characterization, the GATA4
primer showed the highest level of discrimination for G. candidum among the 20
microsatellite primers tested. A molecular typing protocol (DNA concentration,
hybridization temperature and type of PCR machine) was optimized through a series
of intra- and interlaboratory trials. This protocol was validated using 75
strains of G. candidum, one strain of G. capitatum and one strain of G. fragrans,
and exhibited a discrimination score of 0.87. This method could therefore be used
in the agro-food industries to identify and to evaluate biodiversity and trace
strains of G. candidum. The results show that the GATA4 primer might be used to
differentiate strains according to their ecological niche.

PMID: 16855820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 25;103(30):11189-94. Epub 2006 Jul 17.

A threshold of GATA4 and GATA6 expression is required for cardiovascular
development.

Xin M(1), Davis CA, Molkentin JD, Lien CL, Duncan SA, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The zinc-finger transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 play critical roles in
embryonic development. Mouse embryos lacking GATA4 die at embryonic day (E) 8.5
because of failure of ventral foregut closure and cardiac bifida, whereas GATA6
is essential for development of the visceral endoderm. Although mice that are
heterozygous for either a GATA4 or GATA6 null allele are normal, we show that
compound heterozygosity of GATA4 and GATA6 results in embryonic lethality by
E13.5 accompanied by a spectrum of cardiovascular defects, including thin-walled 
myocardium, ventricular and aortopulmonary septal defects, and abnormal smooth
muscle development. Myocardial hypoplasia in GATA4/GATA6 double heterozygous
mutant embryos is associated with reduced proliferation of cardiomyocytes,
diminished expression of the myogenic transcription factor MEF2C (myocyte
enhancer factor 2C), and down-regulation of beta-myosin heavy chain expression, a
key determinant of cardiac contractility. These findings reveal a threshold of
GATA4 and GATA6 activity that is required for gene expression in the developing
cardiovascular system and underscore the potential of recessive mutations to
perturb the delicate regulation of cardiovascular development.

PMCID: PMC1544063
PMID: 16847256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Thyroid. 2006 Jun;16(6):537-44.

Expression of endoderm stem cell markers: evidence for the presence of adult stem
cells in human thyroid glands.

Thomas T(1), Nowka K, Lan L, Derwahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, St. Hedwig Hospital and
Humboldt University Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Adult stem cells have been detected in several human tissues. The
object of this study was to investigate whether they also occur in the human
thyroid gland.
DESIGN: The expression of the stem cell marker Oct- 4 and the early endodermal
markers GATA-4 and HNF4alpha was analyzed in histologic slides and cultured cells
derived from goiters, in the FRTL5 cell line, and the HTh74, HTC, C643, and
XTC133 thyroid carcinoma cell lines.
MAIN OUTCOME: Stem cell markers were detectable in all primary cultures whereas
in the differentiated FRTL5 cell line no expression was observed. Expression of
stem cell marker mRNA was not affected by thyrotropin (TSH) stimulation and did
not decrease when cells underwent several passages. Immunostaining of cultured
cells and of histologic slides of goitrous tissues showed only single cells that 
were immunoreactive for Oct-4, GATA-4, and HNF4a. Expression of Oct-4 but not of 
endodermal marker GATA-4 was also detectable in some thyroid carcinoma cell
lines. Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis demonstrated cell
populations that were positive for either Oct-4, GATA-4, or HNF4alpha but
negative for thyroglobulin. When these putative, FACS-sorted stem cell
populations were further analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), expression of all stem cell markers and of Pax8 but not of
thyroglobulin mRNA was detectable.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide evidence for the presence of adult stem and
precursor cells of endodermal origin in the human thyroid gland.

PMID: 16839255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 1;119(9):2078-83.

Hypermethylation of the GATA gene family in esophageal cancer.

Guo M(1), House MG, Akiyama Y, Qi Y, Capagna D, Harmon J, Baylin SB, Brock MV,
Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors promotes the normal development of the
gastrointestinal tract during embryogenesis and determines tissue differentiation
in adult gut epithelium. Loss of GATA-4 and GATA-5 has been reported in human
gastric and colon cancer. We examined GATA-4,-5 and -6 gene expression in
established esophageal squamous cancer cell lines and the relationship to DNA
methylation in the promoter region of these genes. GATA-4 and GATA-5 expression
was absent in most esophageal cancer cell lines, but was restored upon treatment 
with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. For each of the cell lines
without detectable GATA gene expression, aberrant methylation of the promoter
region CpG-island was detected by methylation specific PCR. We confirmed these
results with genomic bisulfite sequencing. GATA-6 expression was found in each of
the cell lines. GATA-4/-5 promoter methylation was not detected in normal
esophageal mucosa, but GATA-4 methylation was present in 27 of 44 (61%) squamous 
carcinomas and 31 of 44 (71%) adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, while GATA-5
methylation was present in 14 of 44 (32%) squamous carcinomas and 24 of 44 (55%) 
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Our studies demonstrate frequent silencing of
GATA-4 and GATA-5, but not GATA-6, in human esophageal neoplasia associated with 
gene promoter hypermethylation.

PMID: 16823849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Sci (Lond). 2006 Jul;111(1):35-46.

Molecular mechanisms controlling the coupled development of myocardium and
coronary vasculature.

Bhattacharya S(1), Macdonald ST, Farthing CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
shoumo.bhattacharya@well.ox.ac.uk

Cardiac failure affects 1.5% of the adult population and is predominantly caused 
by myocardial dysfunction secondary to coronary vascular insufficiency. Current
therapeutic strategies improve prognosis only modestly, as the primary cause --
loss of normally functioning cardiac myocytes -- is not being corrected. Adult
cardiac myocytes are unable to divide and regenerate to any significant extent
following injury. New cardiac myocytes are, however, created during embryogenesis
from progenitor cells and then by cell division from existing cardiac myocytes.
This process is intimately linked to the development of coronary vasculature from
progenitors originating in the endothelium, the proepicardial organ and neural
crest. In this review, we systematically evaluate approx. 90 mouse mutations that
impair heart muscle growth during development. These studies provide genetic
evidence for interactions between myocytes, endothelium and cells derived from
the proepicardial organ and the neural crest that co-ordinate myocardial and
coronary vascular development. Conditional knockout and transgenic rescue
experiments indicate that Vegfa, Bmpr1a (ALK3), Fgfr1/2, Mapk14 (p38), Hand1,
Hand2, Gata4, Zfpm2 (FOG2), Srf and Txnrd2 in cardiac myocytes, Rxra and Wt1 in
the proepicardial organ, EfnB2, Tek, Mapk7, Pten, Nf1 and Casp8 in the
endothelium, and Bmpr1a and Pax3 in neural crest cells are key molecules
controlling myocardial development. Coupling of myocardial and coronary
development is mediated by BMP (bone morphogenetic protein), FGF (fibroblast
growth factor) and VEGFA (vascular endothelial growth factor A) signalling, and
also probably involves hypoxia. Pharmacological targeting of these molecules and 
pathways could, in principle, be used to recreate the embryonic state and achieve
coupled myocardial and coronary vascular regeneration in failing hearts.

PMID: 16764556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Jun;48(5):283-95.

Development of the endoderm and gut in medaka, Oryzias latipes.

Kobayashi D(1), Jindo T, Naruse K, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We performed an extensive analysis of endodermal development and gut tube
morphogenesis in the medaka embryo by histology and in situ hybridization. The
markers used in these analyses included sox17, sox32, foxA2, gata-4, -5, -6 and
shh. sox17, sox32, foxA2, and gata-5 and -6 are expressed in the early endoderm
to the onset of gut tube formation. Sections of medaka embryos hybridized with
foxA2, a pan-endodermal marker during gut morphogenesis, demonstrated that gut
tube formation is initiated in the anterior portion and that the anterior and
mid/posterior gut undergo distinct morphogenetic processes. Tube formation in the
anterior endoderm that is fated to the pharynx and esophagus is much delayed and 
appears to be independent of gut morphogenesis. The overall aspects of medaka gut
development are similar to those of zebrafish, except that zebrafish tube
formation initiates at both the anterior and posterior portions. Our results
therefore describe both molecular and morphological aspects of medaka digestive
system development that will be necessary for the characterization of medaka
mutants.

PMID: 16759279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 May 20;119(10):832-9.

Effects of endothelin-1 on differentiation of cardiac myocyte induced from rabbit
bone marrow stromal cells.

Dong HY(1), Zhang ZM, Zhou ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Neurobiological Research, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221002,
China.

BACKGROUND: Cardiomyocyte transplantation for the therapy of myocardial ischaemia
is being paid close attention. However, how the microenvironment controls the
differentiation of transplanted bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) is unknown.
Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a cytokine, increases during myocardial infarction, but it
is not known whether ET-1 is responsible for the fate of transplanted BMSCs. In
the present study, we investigated the effects of ET-1 on differentiation and
maturation of induced rabbit BMSCs, in vitro, to elucidate the cellular
biological mechanisms.
METHODS: The proliferation of BMSCs isolated from femur of rabbits was induced by
ET-1 only, by 5-azacytidine (5-aza) or ET-1 combined with 5-aza. After 4 weeks of
induced culturing, the differentiation rate and the diameter of induced myocyte
like cells were estimated and the expressions of GATA-4 protein and
phosphorylation level were assayed by Western-blot, RT-PCR analysis of
beta-myosin heavy chain (MHC). mRNA expression, levels of troponin-I by
immunohistochemical staining and ultrastructure of induce-cultured BMSCs were
also determined.
RESULTS: By induction with ET-1 and 5-aza, mean cell diameter of induced BMSCs
was larger than induced with 5-aza [(6.26 +/- 0.22) microm cf (5.29 +/- 0.19)
microm] (P < 0.001). There was no difference in rate of differentiation of
myocyte like cells between the groups induced with 5-aza and ET-1 combined with
5-aza [(29.82 +/- 0.23)% cf (29.94 +/- 0.18)%] (P > 0.05). The expressions of
GATA-4 protein and phosphorylation were enhanced significantly in groups induced 
with ET-1 combined with 5-aza (P < 0.05). In the group induced with ET-1 combined
with 5-aza, expression of beta-MHC mRNA was higher than control [(0.122 +/-
0.008) cf (0.022 +/- 0.003)] (P < 0.01), and more troponin-I positive cells were 
also detected in this group. Differentiated BMSCs showed formations of
myofilaments and primitive sarcomere, i.e., morphological characteristics of
myocyte like cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that induced culturing of BMSCs by ET-1 combined
with 5-aza can express cardiomyocytic characteristics whereas ET-1 alone could
not induce BMSCs to differentiate to myocyte like cells. ET-1 upregulates the
expression of GATA-4 protein and phosphorylation level of induced BMSCs, and
rapidly promotes the differentiation and maturation of myocyte like cells from
BMSCs.

PMID: 16732986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;36(3):557-68.

GATA-4 is a granulosa cell factor employed in inhibin-alpha activation by the
TGF-beta pathway.

Anttonen M(1), Parviainen H, Kyrönlahti A, Bielinska M, Wilson DB, Ritvos O,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology, Biomedicum Helsinki,
Finland.

Part of heterodimeric inhibin, inhibin-alpha is crucial for mammalian ovarian
function. Regulation of inhibin-alpha expression in granulosa cells is both
endocrine, primarily by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and paracrine,
primarily by members of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)
superfamily. Smad proteins transmit TGF-beta signals to the nucleus, but the
cooperating transcription factors involved in inhibin-alpha promoter activation
remain unknown. Transcription factor GATA-4 regulates inhibin-alpha in gonadal
cells, and the FSH cascade activates GATA-4. We hypothesized that the TGF-beta
signalling cascade and GATA-4 also cooperate to regulate inhibin-alpha
expression. In KK-1 granulosa tumour cells, which resemble normal granulosa cells
and express inhibin-alpha, we found that TGF-beta upregulated GATA-4 expression. 
Transient transfection experiments in KK-1 cells demonstrated that dominant
negative GATA-4 variants or mutations of GATA-binding sites in the inhibin-alpha 
promoter attenuated TGF-beta-induced gene activation. In GATA-4-deficient COS-7
cells, TGF-beta enhanced the expression of the inhibin-alpha promoter only in the
presence of exogenous GATA-4. Smad3, but not Smad2, cooperated with GATA-4 in the
transcriptional activation of the inhibin-alpha promoter, and immunoprecipitation
experiments in KK-1 cells revealed a physical Smad3:GATA-4 interaction. Our data 
suggest that GATA-4, interacting with Smad3, is a cofactor for TGF-beta
signalling to activate inhibin-alpha in granulosa cells.

PMID: 16720723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Dyn. 2006 Aug;235(8):2030-9.

Bmp2 and Gata4 function additively to rescue heart tube development in the
absence of retinoids.

Ghatpande S(1), Brand T, Zile M, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. sg395@email.med.yale.edu

We used the vitamin A-deficient (VAD) quail model to investigate the
retinoid-dependent mechanism that regulates heart tube development. We showed
previously that decreased levels of Gata4 in cardiogenic mesoderm and endoderm
correlate with the cardiomyopathy caused by VAD, but that this could be rescued
by transplanting normal anterior endoderm. Bmp2 is a known cardiogenic factor
that is expressed normally in lateral plate mesoderm and cardiac-associated
pharyngeal endoderm. Here we show that (like Gata4) transcripts encoding Bmp2 and
BMP-dependent signaling activity are decreased throughout the heart-forming
region of the VAD embryo. Addition of Bmp2 protein or forced expression of Gata4 
in cultured VAD embryos leads to a partial rescue of the cardiomyopathy, and
addition of both Bmp2 and Gata4 has an additive positive effect. Our data are
consistent with a requirement for retinoid signaling to maintain expression of
Bmp2, which regulates Gata4, and in addition acts with Gata4 to regulate genes
important for normal morphogenesis of the primitive heart tube.

PMID: 16691562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Jun 27;252(1-2):92-101. Epub 2006 May 8.

Transcriptional activation of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR)
gene: GATA-4 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta confer synergistic
responsiveness in hormone-treated rat granulosa and HEK293 cell models.

Silverman E(1), Yivgi-Ohana N, Sher N, Bell M, Eimerl S, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) mediates translocation of
cholesterol to the inner membranes of steroidogenic mitochondria, where it serves
as a substrate for steroid synthesis. Transcription of StAR in the gonads and
adrenal cells is upregulated by trophic hormones, involves downstream signaling
pathways and a cohort of trans-factors acting as activators or suppressors of
StAR transcription. This study suggests that a 21 basepair long sequence
positioned at -81/-61 of the murine StAR promoter is sufficient to confer a
robust hormonal activation of transcription in ovarian granulosa cells treated
with FSH. We show that recombinant GATA-4 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta
(C/EBPbeta) bind to the promoter at -66/-61 and -81/-70 and activate
transcription of a reporter gene when co-expressed in heterologous human
embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells. In this cell model, C/EBPbeta and GATA-4
synergize in a sequence dependent manner and p300/CBP further maximizes their
joint activities. Inhibitors of the transcriptional activators, such as
liver-enriched inhibiting protein (C/EBPbeta-LIP), Friend of GATA-4 (FOG-2)
protein and the viral E1A protein abolished the respective factor-dependent
activities in HEK293 cells. Binding assays suggest that a dual binding of
C/EBPbeta and GATA-4 to the promoter depends on the molar ratio of the factors
present while demonstrating GATA-4 predominant association with the promoter DNA.
This pattern may reflect on StAR expression at the time of corpus luteum
formation when C/EBPbeta levels peak, as does StAR expression.

PMID: 16682116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Development. 2006 May;133(10):1955-66.

Global analysis of the transcriptional network controlling Xenopus endoderm
formation.

Sinner D(1), Kirilenko P, Rankin S, Wei E, Howard L, Kofron M, Heasman J,
Woodland HR, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation and Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45299, USA.

A conserved molecular pathway has emerged controlling endoderm formation in
Xenopus zebrafish and mice. Key genes in this pathway include Nodal ligands and
transcription factors of the Mix-like paired homeodomain class, Gata4-6
zinc-finger factors and Sox17 HMG domain proteins. Although a linear epistatic
pathway has been proposed, the precise hierarchical relationships between these
factors and their downstream targets are largely unresolved. Here, we have used a
combination of microarray analysis and loss-of-function experiments to examine
the global regulatory network controlling Xenopus endoderm formation. We
identified over 300 transcripts enriched in the gastrula endoderm, including most
of the known endoderm regulators and over a hundred uncharacterized genes.
Surprisingly only 10% of the endoderm transcriptome is regulated as predicted by 
the current linear model. We find that Nodal genes, Mixer and Sox17 have both
shared and distinct sets of downstream targets, and that a number of unexpected
autoregulatory loops exist between Sox17 and Gata4-6, between Sox17 and
Bix1/Bix2/Bix4, and between Sox17 and Xnr4. Furthermore, we find that Mixer does 
not function primarily via Sox17 as previously proposed. These data provides new 
insight into the complexity of endoderm formation and will serve as valuable
resource for establishing a complete endoderm gene regulatory network.

PMID: 16651540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Circ Res. 2006 Apr 28;98(8):985-7.

Partnering up for cardiac hypertrophy.

Konhilas JP, Leinwand LA.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2006 Apr 28;98(8):1089-97.

PMCID: PMC2674848
PMID: 16645146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. FASEB J. 2006 Jun;20(8):1182-4. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Embryonic stem cells utilize reactive oxygen species as transducers of mechanical
strain-induced cardiovascular differentiation.

Schmelter M(1), Ateghang B, Helmig S, Wartenberg M, Sauer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Aulweg 129 Giessen 
35392, Germany.

Growing stem cells are subjected to mechanical forces, which may initiate
differentiation programs. Mechanical strain stimulated cardiovascular
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as evaluated by quantification
of contracting cardiac foci and capillary areas, respectively. Mechanical strain 
rapidly elevated intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). After 24 h
up-regulation of NADPH oxidase subunits p22-phox, p47-phox, p67-phox, and Nox-4
as well as Nox-1 and Nox-4 mRNA was observed. In parallel, mechanical strain
increased hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) mRNA and protein as well as MEF2C and GATA-4 mRNA, which are
involved in cardiovascular development. Furthermore, phosphorylation of
extracellular-regulated kinase 1,2 (ERK1,2), p38, and c-jun N-terminal kinase
(c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK)) was observed. Stimulation of cardiovascular
commitment, HIF-1alpha, VEGF, and MEF2C expression as well as MAPK activation
were abolished by free radical scavengers, whereas GATA-4 expression was
increased. Cardiomyogenesis was inhibited by the p38 inhibitor SB203580, the
ERK1,2 inhibitor UO126, and the JNK inhibitor SP600125.
Vasculogenesis/angiogenesis was blunted following inhibition of ERK1,2 and JNK,
whereas p38 inhibition was ineffective. Our data outline a role of ROS as
mechanotransducing molecules in mechanical strain-stimulated cardiovascular
differentiation of ES cells, and point toward a microenvironment of elevated ROS 
required for signaling cascades initiating cardiovascular differentiation
programs.

PMID: 16636108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mech Dev. 2006 Apr;123(4):297-311. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Wnt2 is a direct downstream target of GATA6 during early cardiogenesis.

Alexandrovich A(1), Arno M, Patient RK, Shah AM, Pizzey JA, Brewer AC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London SE5 9PJ, UK.

The GATA4, 5 and 6 subfamily of transcription factors are potent transactivators 
of transcription expressed within the precardiac mesoderm. However, little is
known of the immediate downstream targets of GATA-factor regulation during the
earliest stages of cardiogenesis. Using the P19-CL6 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell
line as an in vitro model of cardiogenesis, we show that GATA6 is the most
abundantly expressed of the GATA factors in presumptive cardiac cells.
Consequently, we performed a microarray screen comparing mRNA from control EC
cells, early in the cardiac differentiation pathway, with those in which GATA6
had been overexpressed. These studies identified 103 genes whose expression
changed significantly and this was verified in a representative array of these
genes by real-time RT-PCR. We show that early cardiac expression of one of these 
genes, Wnt2, mirrors that of GATA6 in vitro and in vivo. In addition, its
upregulation by GATA6 in differentiating EC cells is mediated by the direct
binding of GATA-factor(s) to the cognate Wnt2 promoter, suggesting Wnt2 is an
immediate downstream target of GATA-factor regulation during early cardiogenesis.

PMID: 16621466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Gastroenterology. 2006 Apr;130(4):1233-44.

Stomach development is dependent on fibroblast growth factor 10/fibroblast growth
factor receptor 2b-mediated signaling.

Spencer-Dene B(1), Sala FG, Bellusci S, Gschmeissner S, Stamp G, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research
Institute, London, England. b.spencer-dene@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) and their receptors (Fgfrs)
are important intercellular signaling molecules that are essential to mammalian
embryonic development. The signaling pathways between endoderm-derived gastric
epithelium and the surrounding mesenchyme are largely unknown; however, the
developmental expression profile of the IIIb isoform of Fgfr2 (Fgfr2b) and its
main ligand, Fgf10, suggest that they may be strong candidates. Mice lacking
either component (Fgfr2b-/- or Fgf10-/-) were examined to determine the role of
Fgfr2b-mediated signaling during gastric organogenesis.
METHODS: Stomachs from embryonic day 13.5-18.5 Fgfr2b-/-, Fgf10-/-, and wild-type
littermates were collected and analyzed by conventional histology,
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Fgfr2b-/- and Fgf10-/- fetuses had stomachs smaller than wild-type,
consisting of relatively proportionate forestomach but disproportionately reduced
glandular stomach, the mucosa of which has low cytoarchitectural complexity with 
a spiral arrangement of large mucosal folds. During mid to late fetal stages
(embryonic day 15.5-18.5), epithelial differentiation to mucous and chief cell
lineages was rudimentary, with no expression of several early cytodifferentiation
markers including GATA4, GATA6, and H+/K+-adenosine triphosphatase and abnormal
expression of members of the hedgehog family of signaling molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: Fgfr2b and Fgf10 are part of a signaling network with Sonic hedgehog
and Indian hedgehog that are essential to anterior-posterior and radial
patterning in gastric development.

PMID: 16618415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 31;25(39):5446-61. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Histone modifications silence the GATA transcription factor genes in ovarian
cancer.

Caslini C(1), Capo-chichi CD, Roland IH, Nicolas E, Yeung AT, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111-2497, USA.

Altered expression of GATA factors was found and proposed as the underlying
mechanism for dedifferentiation in ovarian carcinogenesis. In particular, GATA6
is lost or excluded from the nucleus in 85% of ovarian tumors and GATA4
expression is absent in majority of ovarian cancer cell lines. Here, we evaluated
their DNA and histone epigenetic modifications in five ovarian epithelial and
carcinoma cell lines (human 'immortalized' ovarian surface epithelium (HIO)-117, 
HIO-114, A2780, SKOV3 and ES2). GATA4 and GATA6 gene silencing was found to
correlate with hypoacetylation of histones H3 and H4 and loss of histone
H3/lysine K4 tri-methylation at their promoters in all lines. Conversely, histone
H3/lysine K9 di-methylation and HP1gamma association were not observed, excluding
reorganization of GATA genes into heterochromatic structures. The histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, but not the DNA methylation inhibitor
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, re-established the expression of GATA4 and/or GATA6 in
A2780 and HIO-114 cells, correlating with increased histone H3 and H4
acetylation, histone H3 lysine K4 methylation and DNase I sensitivity at the
promoters. Therefore, altered histone modification of the promoter loci is one
mechanism responsible for the silencing of GATA transcription factors and the
subsequent loss of a target gene, the tumor suppressor Disabled-2, in ovarian
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16607277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;23(2):134-7.

Two novel missense mutations of GATA4 gene in Chinese patients with sporadic
congenital heart defects.

Tang ZH(1), Xia L, Chang W, Li H, Shen F, Liu JY, Wang Q, Liu MG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genome Research, College of Life Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430074 P.R.China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify mutations in GATA4 gene in Chinese patients with sporadic 
congenital heart defects (CHD).
METHODS: Single stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis was performed 
to screen for mutations in all six exons and exon-intron boundaries of GATA4 in
31 individuals with CHD. Direct DNA sequencing was used to identify the specific 
mutations.
RESULTS: Two novel missense mutations, V267M in exon 4, V380M in exon 6, and one 
polymorphism in intron 6 of GATA4 were identified.
CONCLUSION: The above identified two novel GATA4 mutations associated with CHD in
Chinese patients. This suggests that the transcription factor GATA4 may play an
important role in cardiogenesis.

PMID: 16604480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):H1997-2006.

Transcription factor CHF1/Hey2 suppresses cardiac hypertrophy through an
inhibitory interaction with GATA4.

Xiang F(1), Sakata Y, Cui L, Youngblood JM, Nakagami H, Liao JK, Liao R, Chin MT.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Research Unit, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.

Pathological cardiac hypertrophy is considered a precursor to clinical heart
failure. Understanding the transcriptional regulators that suppress the
hypertrophic response may have profound implications for the treatment of heart
disease. We report the generation of transgenic mice that overexpress the
transcription factor CHF1/Hey2 in the myocardium. In response to the
alpha-adrenergic agonist phenylephrine, they show marked attenuation in the
hypertrophic response compared with wild-type controls, even though blood
pressure is similar in both groups. Isolated myocytes from transgenic mice
demonstrate a similar resistance to phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy in vitro,
providing further evidence that the protective effect of CHF1/Hey2 is mediated at
the myocyte level. Induction of the hypertrophy marker genes ANF, BNP, and
beta-MHC in the transgenic cells is concurrently suppressed in vivo and in vitro,
demonstrating that the induction of hypertrophy-associated genes is repressed by 
CHF1/Hey2. Transfection of CHF1/Hey2 into neonatal cardiomyocytes suppresses
activation of an ANF reporter plasmid by the transcription factor GATA4, which
has previously been shown to activate a hypertrophic transcriptional program.
Furthermore, CHF1/Hey2 binds GATA4 directly in coimmunoprecipitation assays and
inhibits the binding of GATA4 to its recognition sequence within the ANF
promoter. Our findings demonstrate that CHF1/Hey2 functions as an
antihypertrophic gene, possibly through inhibition of a GATA4-dependent
hypertrophic program.

PMCID: PMC2692281
PMID: 16603706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):730-42.

The Rac and Rho hall of fame: a decade of hypertrophic signaling hits.

Brown JH(1), Del Re DP, Sussman MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Over the last decade, the Rho family GTPases have gained considerable recognition
as powerful regulators of actin cytoskeletal organization. As with many high
profile signal transducers, these molecules soon attracted the attention of the
cardiovascular research community. Shortly thereafter, two prominent members
known as RhoA and Rac1 were linked to agonist-induced gene expression and
myofilament organization using the isolated cardiomyocyte cell model. Subsequent 
creation of transgenic mouse lines provided evidence for more complex roles of
RhoA and Rac1 signaling. Clues from in vitro and in vivo studies suggest the
involvement of numerous downstream targets of RhoA and Rac1 signaling including
serum response factor, NF-kappaB, and other transcription factors, myofilament
proteins, ion channels, and reactive oxygen species generation. Which of these
contribute to the observed phenotypic effects of enhanced RhoA and Rac activation
in vivo remain to be determined. Current research efforts with a more
translational focus have used statins or Rho kinase blockers to assess RhoA and
Rac1 as targets for interventional approaches to blunt hypertrophy or heart
failure. Generally, salutary effects on remodeling and ischemic damage are
observed, but the broad specificity and multiple cellular targets for these drugs
within the myocardium demands caution in interpretation. In this review, we
assess the evolution of knowledge related to Rac1 and RhoA in the context of
hypertrophy and heart failure and highlight the direction that future exploration
will lead.

PMID: 16574914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):715-6.

GATA4 and the two sides of gene expression reprogramming.

Perrino C, Rockman HA.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):837-45.

PMID: 16574910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14893-906. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

p204 protein overcomes the inhibition of the differentiation of P19 murine
embryonal carcinoma cells to beating cardiac myocytes by Id proteins.

Ding B(1), Liu CJ, Huang Y, Yu J, Kong W, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.

We reported in the accompanying article (Ding, B., Liu, C., Huang, Y., Hickey, R.
P., Yu, J., Kong, W., and Lengyel, P. (2006) J. Biol. Chem. 281, 14882-14892)
that (i) the p204 protein is required for the differentiation of murine P19
embryonal carcinoma stem cells to beating cardiac myocytes, and (ii) the
expression of p204 in the differentiating P19 cells is synergistically
transactivated by the cardiac transcription factors Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. Here
we report that endogenous or ectopic inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins
inhibited the differentiation of P19 cells to myocytes. This was in consequence
of the binding of Id1, Id2, or Id3 protein to the Gata4 and Nkx2.5 proteins and
the resulting inhibitions (i) of the binding of these transcription factors to
each other and to DNA and (ii) of their synergistic transactivation of the
expression of various genes, including atrial natriuretic factor and Ifi204
(encoding p204). p204 overcame this inhibition by Id proteins in consequence of
(i) binding and sequestering Id proteins, (ii) accelerating their ubiquitination 
and degradation by proteasomes, and (iii) decreasing the level of Id proteins in 
the nucleus by increasing their translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. 
Points (ii) and (iii) depended on the presence of the nuclear export signal in
p204. In the course of the differentiation, Gata4, Nkx2.5, and p204 were
components of a positive feedback loop. This loop arose in consequence of it that
p204 overcame the inhibition of the synergistic activity of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 by
the Id proteins.

PMID: 16556596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14882-92. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

p204 is required for the differentiation of P19 murine embryonal carcinoma cells 
to beating cardiac myocytes: its expression is activated by the cardiac Gata4,
Nkx2.5, and Tbx5 proteins.

Ding B(1), Liu CJ, Huang Y, Hickey RP, Yu J, Kong W, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.

Among 10 adult mouse tissues tested, the p204 protein levels were highest in
heart and skeletal muscle. We described previously that the MyoD-inducible p204
protein is required for the differentiation of cultured murine C2C12 skeletal
muscle myoblasts to myotubes. Here we report that p204 was also required for the 
differentiation of cultured P19 murine embryonal carcinoma stem cells to beating 
cardiac myocytes. As shown by others, this process can be triggered by dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO). We established that DMSO induced the formation of 204RNA and
p204. Ectopic p204 could partially substitute for DMSO in inducing
differentiation, whereas ectopic 204 antisense RNA inhibited the differentiation.
Experiments with reporter constructs, including regulatory regions from the
Ifi204 gene (encoding p204) in P19 cells and in cultured newborn rat cardiac
myocytes, as well as chromatin coimmunoprecipitations with transcription factors,
revealed that p204 expression was synergistically transactivated by the cardiac
Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5 transcription factors. Furthermore, ectopic p204
triggered the expression of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 in P19 cells. p204 contains a
nuclear export signal and was partially translocated to the cytoplasm during the 
differentiation. p204 from which the nuclear export signal was deleted was not
translocated, and it did not induce differentiation. The various mechanisms by
which p204 promoted the differentiation are reported in the accompanying article 
(Ding, B., Liu, C., Huang, Y., Yu, J., Kong, W., and Lengyel, P. (2006) J. Biol. 
Chem. 281, 14893-14906).

PMID: 16556595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):755-66. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather
than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription.

Usui T(1), Preiss JC, Kanno Y, Yao ZJ, Bream JH, O'Shea JJ, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2006 Apr 17;203(4):1129.

T helper type 1 (Th1) development is facilitated by interrelated changes in key
intracellular factors, particularly signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)4, T-bet, and GATA-3. Here we show that CD4+ cells from
T-bet-/- mice are skewed toward Th2 differentiation by high endogenous GATA-3
levels but exhibit virtually normal Th1 differentiation provided that GATA-3
levels are regulated at an early stage by anti-interleukin (IL)-4 blockade of
IL-4 receptor (R) signaling. In addition, under these conditions, Th1 cells from 
T-bet-/- mice manifest IFNG promotor accessibility as detected by histone
acetylation and deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity. In related studies, we show
that the negative effect of GATA-3 on Th1 differentiation in T-bet-/- cells
arises from its ability to suppress STAT4 levels, because if this is prevented by
a STAT4-expressing retrovirus, normal Th1 differentiation is observed. Finally,
we show that retroviral T-bet expression in developing and established Th2 cells 
leads to down-regulation of GATA-3 levels. These findings lead to a model of T
cell differentiation that holds that naive T cells tend toward Th2
differentiation through induction of GATA-3 and subsequent down-regulation of
STAT4/IL-12Rbeta2 chain unless GATA-3 levels or function is regulated by T-bet.
Thus, the principal function of T-bet in developing Th1 cells is to negatively
regulate GATA-3 rather than to positively regulate the IFNG gene.

PMCID: PMC2118252
PMID: 16520391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):837-45. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Cardiac-specific deletion of Gata4 reveals its requirement for hypertrophy,
compensation, and myocyte viability.

Oka T(1), Maillet M, Watt AJ, Schwartz RJ, Aronow BJ, Duncan SA, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):715-6.

The transcription factor GATA4 is a critical regulator of cardiac gene expression
where it controls embryonic development, cardiomyocyte differentiation, and
stress responsiveness of the adult heart. Traditional deletion of Gata4 caused
embryonic lethality associated with endoderm defects and cardiac malformations,
precluding an analysis of the role of GATA4 in the adult myocardium. To address
the function of GATA4 in the adult heart, Gata4-loxP-targeted mice (Gata4fl/fl)
were crossed with mice containing a beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) or
alpha-MHC promoter-driven Cre transgene, which produced viable mice that survived
into adulthood despite a 95% and 70% loss of GATA4 protein, respectively.
However, cardiac-specific deletion of Gata4 resulted in a progressive and
dosage-dependent deterioration in cardiac function and dilation in adulthood.
Moreover, pressure overload stimulation induced rapid decompensation and heart
failure in cardiac-specific Gata4-deleted mice. More provocatively, Gata4-deleted
mice were compromised in their ability to hypertrophy following pressure overload
or exercise stimulation. Mechanistically, cardiac-specific deletion of Gata4
increased cardiomyocyte TUNEL at baseline in embryos and adults as they aged, as 
well as dramatically increased TUNEL following pressure overload stimulation.
Examination of gene expression profiles in the heart revealed a number of
profound alterations in known GATA4-regulated structural genes as well as genes
with apoptotic implications. Thus, GATA4 is a necessary regulator of cardiac gene
expression, hypertrophy, stress-compensation, and myocyte viability.

PMID: 16514068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biol Pharm Bull. 2006 Mar;29(3):410-9.

GATA-4 gene organization and analysis of its promoter.

Ohara Y(1), Atarashi T, Ishibashi T, Ohashi-Kobayashi A, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

The mouse GATA-4 gene is separated by six introns, and this gene organization is 
conserved in rodents and man. The transcriptional start site of the GATA-4 gene
is essentially the same in rat heart, stomach and testis, and in cultured cells
expressing GATA-4 such as TM3, TM4, I-10 and P19.CL6 cells. The 5'-upstream of
the GATA-4 gene is also conserved in rodents and man. We examined its promoter
activity by means of luciferase reporter gene assay using testis-derived TM3 and 
TM4 cells. The GC-boxes and E-box located in the several tens of base pairs
upstream of the transcriptional start sites of the GATA-4 gene were found to be
critical for its promoter activity in these cells, consistent with the mode of
transcription characteristics of the TATA-less promoter. P19.CL6 cells
differentiate into beating cardiomyocytes upon induction by DMSO, accompanied by 
stimulation of the transcription of heart-specific genes including GATA-4.
Interestingly, they exhibit increased luciferase reporter gene activity upon
induction by DMSO. Both proximal tandem GC-boxes and the E-box are also
contributed to the reporter gene activity in P19.CL6 cells.

PMID: 16508137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cardiovasc Res. 2006 Apr 1;70(1):117-25. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and stem cell factor improve endogenous
repair after myocardial infarction.

Kanellakis P(1), Slater NJ, Du XJ, Bobik A, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Laboratory, Baker Heart Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were, first, to determine if granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and stem cell factor (SCF) improved left
ventricular function in the setting of a reperfusion model of myocardial
infarction (MI) and, second, to evaluate the effects of G-CSF/SCF on cellular
repair and, in particular, the fate of bone marrow cells homing to the site of
tissue injury.
METHODS: MI was induced in mice by transient ligation of the left descending
coronary artery. G-CSF/SCF were administered for 5 days after MI. Cardiac
function was assessed 28 days after MI. The effect of G-CSF/SCF on the cellular
composition of the infarct region was assessed by immunohistochemistry. MI was
performed in mice reconstituted with bone marrow cells expressing DsRed to track 
the fate of bone marrow-derived cells within the infarct region.
RESULTS: G-CSF/SCF-treated mice had significantly improved left ventricular (LV) 
function as determined by LV developed pressure, LV+/-dp/dt(max/min), and LV
end-diastolic pressure. G-CSF alone produced similar improvements in cardiac
function. These improvements in LV function were associated with 70% more blood
vessels and a doubling of cells expressing cardiomyocyte-specific transcription
factors GATA-4, Nkx2.5 and alpha-actinin cells within the infarct zone. Cells
within the infarct expressing stromal-derived factor also increased by 200%. To
elucidate the origin of these cells, bone marrow chimeras, where hematopoietic
cells expressed the fluorescent marker DsRed, were treated with G-CSF/SCF after
MI. Bone marrow-derived, DsRed-expressing cells in the infarct region of
G-CSF/SCF-treated chimeras increased by an average of 12-fold; however, the vast 
majority of DsRed cells expressed the hematopoietic-specific marker CD45 but not 
blood vessel or cardiomyocyte markers.
CONCLUSIONS: G-CSF/SCF therapy improved cardiac function when delivered after MI,
increasing the number of blood vessels and cells of cardiomyogenic lineage.
However, these cells were of myocardial rather than bone marrow origin.

PMID: 16497284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2006 Mar;27(3):311-20.

Icariin-mediated expression of cardiac genes and modulation of nitric oxide
signaling pathway during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into
cardiomyocytes in vitro.

Zhu DY(1), Lou YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031, China.

AIM: To investigate effects of icariin on cardiac gene expression and the
modulation of nitric oxide (NO) signal transduction during the differentiation of
embryonic stem (ES) cells into cardiomyocytes in vitro.
METHODS: The expression levels of cardiac developmental-dependent genes were
measured using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
chronotropic responses of cardiomyocytes to b-adrenoceptor stimulation were
determined. The levels of cAMP and cGMP in ES cells were measured using
radioimmunoassay. Endogenous NO levels were measured by using the Griess
reaction. Aminoguanidine (AG) was used to confirm the influence of icariin on the
endogenous NO signal pathway.
RESULTS: Icariin significantly elevated mRNA levels of cardiac transcription
factors GATA4 and Nkx2.5, and cardiac-specific alpha-MHC, MLC-2v and beta-AR
genes in a concentration- and time-dependent manner (P<0.05). Cardiomyocytes
derived from embryoid body (EB) treated with icariin were more sensitive to
isoprenaline (P<0.01). Treatment of ES cells with icariin resulted in a continued
elevation in the cAMP/cGMP ratio before a shift to the cardiomyocyte phenotype
(P<0.05). AG decreased the NO level, and delayed and decreased the incidence of
contracting EB to only approximately 35% on d 5+11, an effect that could be
rescued by icariin. When cells were cocultured with icariin and AG, the
percentage of beating EB reached a peak level of 73% on d 5+11 (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The inducible effects of icariin were partly related to increase in
the expression of cardiac developmental-dependent genes, and elevation of the
cAMP/cGMP ratio in ES cells, as well as upregulation of endogenous NO generation 
during the early stages of cardiac development.

PMID: 16490167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2006;71 Suppl 1:S71-6, 6.

hhLIM is involved in cardiomyogenesis of embryonic stem cells.

Zheng B(1), Wen JK, Han M.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Laboratory of Medical Biotechnology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China.

Proteins of the LIM family play important roles in a variety of fundamental
biological processes including cell lineage specification and organ development. 
Here we examined the function in cardiogenesis of a new member of the LIM family,
hhLIM, by molecular analysis of early stages of cardiomyocyte differentiation in 
hhLIM-deficient P19 cell line and P19 cells stably overexpressing hhLIM. The
results indicate that hhLIM is a potent transcriptional activator of several
cardiac muscle-specific genes. Inhibition of hhLIM expression by antisense
transcripts can interfere with expression of cardiac muscle genes and block
development of beating cardiomyocytes in P19 embryonic stem cells. Overexpression
of hhLIM in P19 cells can enhance expression of cardiac marker genes Nkx2.5 and
GATA-4 and potentiate development of cardiomyocyte-like morphology. These
findings suggest that, in addition to its role in activation of the cardiac
genetic program, hhLIM may be the nuclear target of inductive factor for
precardiac cells.

PMID: 16487072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 17;98(5):651-8. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Quantitative trait loci modifying cardiac atrial septal morphology and risk of
patent foramen ovale in the mouse.

Kirk EP(1), Hyun C, Thomson PC, Lai D, Castro ML, Biben C, Buckley MF, Martin IC,
Moran C, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
Australia.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart disease (CHD) occurring
in 5 to 7 per 10,000 live births. Mutations in 5 human genes (NKX2.5, TBX5,
GATA4, MYHC, ACTC) are known to cause dominant ASD, but these account for a
minority of cases. Human and mouse data suggest that ASD exists in an anatomical 
continuum with milder septal variants patent foramen ovale (PFO) and atrial
septal aneurysm, strongly associated with ischemic stroke and migraine. We have
previously shown in inbred mice that the incidence of PFO strongly correlates
with length of the interatrial septum primum, defining a quantitative trait
underlying PFO risk. To better understand genetic causation of atrial septal
abnormalities, we mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) influencing septal
morphology using mouse strains (QSi5 and 129T2/SvEms) maximally informative for
PFO incidence and 3 quantitative septal anatomical traits including septum primum
length. [QSi5x129T2/SvEms]F2 intercross animals (n=1437) were phenotyped and a
whole genome scan performed at an average 17-cM interval. Statistical methodology
scoring PFO as a binary phenotype was developed as a confirmatory mapping
technique. We mapped 7 significant and 6 suggestive QTL modifying quantitative
phenotypes, with 4 supported by binary analysis. Quantitative traits, although
strongly associated with PFO (P<0.001), correlated poorly with each other and in 
all but 1 case QTL for different traits were nonoverlapping. Thus, multiple
anatomical processes under separate genetic control contribute to risk of PFO.
Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of modeling the genetic basis of common 
CHD using animal genetic and genomic technologies.

PMID: 16484617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Hum Mutat. 2006 Mar;27(3):293-4.

A novel mutation in the GATA4 gene in patients with Tetralogy of Fallot.

Nemer G(1), Fadlalah F, Usta J, Nemer M, Dbaibo G, Obeid M, Bitar F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
gn08@aub.edu.lb

In vertebrates, heart formation which integrates different structures and cell
types is a complex process that involves a network of genes regulated by
transcription factors. Proper spatiotemporal expression of these factors ensure
the highly needed tight control of each step in organogenesis. A mistake at any
step from cell-commitment to valve formation will have a major impact on heart
morphogenesis and function leading to congenital heart disease (CHD). Cardiac
abnormalities occur with an incidence of one per 100 live births and represent
25% of all congenital malformations. As an alternative approach to
linkage-analysis of familial cases of CHD, we started screening familial and
sporadic cases of CHDs in a highly consanguineous population for mutations in
genes encoding cardiac-enriched transcription factors. The evolutionarily
conserved role of these proteins in cardiac development suggested a role in CHD. 
In this study, we report a mutation in the gene encoding GATA4, one of the
earliest markers of heart development. This mutation was found in two out of 26
patients with Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), and in none of the 94 patients with
different phenotypes included in the study, nor in 223 healthy individuals. The
heterozygous mutation results in an amino acid substitution in the first zinc
finger of GATA4 that reduced its transcriptional activation of downstream target 
genes, without affecting GATA4 ability to bind DNA, nor its interaction with
ZFPM2.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16470721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. FASEB J. 2006 Apr;20(6):800-2. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Transcription factor gata4 regulates cardiac BCL2 gene expression in vitro and in
vivo.

Kobayashi S(1), Lackey T, Huang Y, Bisping E, Pu WT, Boxer LM, Liang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of South Dakota School of
Medicine, South Dakota Health Research Foundation, Sioux Falls, South Dakota
57105, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-4 protects cardiomyocytes against
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Here, we report the identification of Bcl2 as
a direct target gene of GATA4 that may mediate the prosurvival function of GATA4 
in cardiomyocytes. Bcl2 transcript and protein levels were reduced by doxorubicin
in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes (NRVC) and in mouse heart as
determined by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. The reduction in Bcl2 was
prevented by overexpression of GATA4 in NRVC and in transgenic mouse heart. Also,
expression of GATA4 increased baseline Bcl2 levels by 30% in NRVC and 2.7-fold in
transgenic heart, indicating the sufficiency of GATA4 to up-regulate Bcl2 gene
expression. GATA4 knockdown by siRNA reduced Bcl2 levels by 48% in NRVC,
suggesting that GATA4 is required for Bcl2 constitutive gene expression.
Transfection of HEK cells with GATA4 plasmids activated Bcl2 promoter and
elevated Bcl2 protein levels. Deletion and mutagenesis analysis revealed that a
consensus GATA motif at base -266 on the promoter conserved across multiple
species is partially responsible for the promoter activity. Electrophoretic
mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that GATA4
directly bound to this GATA site. Together, these results indicate that GATA4
positively regulates cardiac Bcl2 gene expression in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 16469847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 21;103(8):2719-24. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

In search of rat stem Leydig cells: identification, isolation, and
lineage-specific development.

Ge RS(1), Dong Q, Sottas CM, Papadopoulos V, Zirkin BR, Hardy MP.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Leydig cells (LCs) are thought to differentiate from spindle-shaped precursor
cells that exhibit some aspects of differentiated function, including
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3betaHSD) activity. The precursor cells
ultimately derive from undifferentiated stem LCs (SLCs), which are postulated to 
be present in testes before the onset of precursor cell differentiation. We
searched for cells in the neonatal rat testis with the abilities to: (i)
proliferate and expand indefinitely in vitro (self renew); (ii) differentiate
(i.e., 3betaHSD and ultimately synthesize testosterone); and (iii) when
transplanted into host rat testes, colonize the interstitium and subsequently
differentiate in vivo. At 1 week postpartum, spindle-shaped cells were seen in
the testicular interstitium that differed from the precursor cells in that they
were 3betaHSD-negative, luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor (LHR)-negative, and
platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFR alpha)-positive. These cells
were purified from the testes of 1-week-old rats. The cells contained proteins
known to be involved in LC development, including GATA4, c-kit receptor, and
leukemia inhibitory factor receptor. The putative SLCs expanded over the course
of 6 months while remaining undifferentiated. When treated in media that
contained thyroid hormone, insulin-like growth factor I, and LH, 40% of the
putative SLCs came to express 3betaHSD and to synthesize testosterone. When
transplanted into host rat testes from which LCs had been eliminated, the
putative SLCs colonized the interstitium and subsequently expressed 3betaHSD,
demonstrating their ability to differentiate in vivo. We conclude that these
cells are likely to be the sought-after SLCs.

PMCID: PMC1413776
PMID: 16467141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Circulation. 2006 Feb 7;113(5):679-90.

Histone acetyltransferase activity of p300 is required for the promotion of left 
ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction in adult mice in vivo.

Miyamoto S(1), Kawamura T, Morimoto T, Ono K, Wada H, Kawase Y, Matsumori A,
Nishio R, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Left ventricular (LV) remodeling after myocardial infarction is
associated with hypertrophy of surviving myocytes and represents a major process 
that leads to heart failure. One of the intrinsic histone acetyltransferases,
p300, serves as a coactivator of hypertrophy-responsive transcriptional factors
such as a cardiac zinc finger protein GATA-4 and is involved in its hypertrophic 
stimulus-induced acetylation and DNA binding. However, the role of p300-histone
acetyltransferase activity in LV remodeling after myocardial infarction in vivo
is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To solve this problem, we have generated transgenic mice
overexpressing intact p300 or mutant p300 in the heart. As the result of its
2-amino acid substitution in the p300-histone acetyltransferase domain, this
mutant lost its histone acetyltransferase activity and was unable to activate
GATA-4-dependent transcription. The two kinds of transgenic mice and the
wild-type mice were subjected to myocardial infarction or sham operation at the
age of 12 weeks. Intact p300 transgenic mice showed significantly more
progressive LV dilation and diminished systolic function after myocardial
infarction than wild-type mice, whereas mutant p300 transgenic mice did not show 
this.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that cardiac overexpression of p300
promotes LV remodeling after myocardial infarction in adult mice in vivo and that
histone acetyltransferase activity of p300 is required for these processes.

PMID: 16461841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Stem Cells. 2006 Jun;24(6):1467-75. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after RNA interference-mediated
silencing of OCT4 and Nanog.

Hough SR(1), Clements I, Welch PJ, Wiederholt KA.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Division, Gene Regulation Group, Invitrogen
Corporation, Carlsbad, California 92008, USA. shelley.hough@invitrogen.com

RNA interference (RNAi) holds great promise as a tool to study the basic biology 
of stem cells or to direct differentiation in a specific manner. Barriers to
achieving efficient and specific gene silencing in RNAi experiments include
limitations in transfection efficiency and in the efficacy and specificity of
RNAi silencing effectors. Here, we combine methods of efficient lipid-mediated
delivery with chemically modified RNAi compounds to silence genes related to
pluripotency, in order to direct differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.
After transfection of embryonic stem cells with OCT4- or Nanog-targeted RNAi
compounds, levels of OCT4 or Nanog transcript and protein were reduced
accordingly. Reduction in OCT4 expression correlated with induction of
trophectoderm genes Cdx2, Hand1, and PL-1, with formation of cells with
trophoblast giant cell phenotype after 6 days. Reduction in Nanog expression
correlated with induction of extraembryonic endoderm genes GATA4, GATA6, and
laminin B1, with subsequent generation of groups of cells with parietal endoderm 
phenotype. Our results indicate that transient inhibition of OCT4 or Nanog by
RNAi compounds is sufficient to induce differentiation toward extraembryonic
lineages, which supports the model that these transcription factors function in a
dose-dependent manner to influence cell fate.

PMID: 16456133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8877-87. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

In vivo regulation of Grp78/BiP transcription in the embryonic heart: role of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response element and GATA-4.

Mao C(1), Tai WC, Bai Y, Poizat C, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

The transcriptional activation of GRP78, which controls multiple signaling
pathways of the unfolded protein response, has been used extensively as an
indicator for the onset of endoplasmic reticulum stress in tissue culture
systems. Here we investigate the mechanism of Grp78 induction during mouse
embryonic development. Our results reveal that in transgenic mouse models,
reporter gene activity driven by the Grp78 promoter is strongly activated during 
early embryonic heart development but subsides in later stages. This activation
is strictly dependent on a 100-base pair region of the Grp78 promoter containing 
the endoplasmic reticulum stress response elements (ERSEs). Previous studies
establish that endoplasmic reticulum stress induces in vivo binding of YY1 and
the nuclear form of ATF6 to the ERSE. Since the expression of YY1 as well as ATF6
is ubiquitous in the mouse embryo, activation of the Grp78 promoter in the early 
embryonic heart may involve a specific mechanism. Here we report that GATA-4, a
transcription factor essential for heart development, binds to the Grp78 promoter
in vivo and activates the ERSE, which does not contain a consensus GATA binding
site. GATA-4 cooperatively activates the Grp78 promoter with YY1, and the DNA
binding domain of YY1 is necessary and sufficient for this cooperation. In
addition, GATA-4 activation of the Grp78 promoter is enhanced by the nuclear form
of ATF6, and this synergy is further potentiated by YY1. These results suggest
that during early heart organogenesis, Grp78 can be activated through cooperation
between the cell type-specific transcription factors and ERSE-binding factors.

PMID: 16452489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1384-90.

GATA5 activation of the progesterone receptor gene promoter in breast cancer
cells is influenced by the +331G/A polymorphism.

Huggins GS(1), Wong JY, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA.

Previously, a modest association was observed between the progesterone receptor
+331G/A gene variant and breast cancer risk. Here, in a larger sample of breast
cancer cases and controls (n = 1,322/n = 1,953) nested in the Nurses' Health
Study cohort, we confirm a significant association (odds ratio, 1.41; 95%
confidence interval, 1.10-1.79) and suggest a molecular model. The association of
the +331G/A variant with breast cancer was particularly strong among obese women 
(body mass index > 30; odds ratio, 2.87; 95% confidence interval, 1.40-5.90). To 
help understand the molecular mechanism by which this variant may predispose
women to breast cancer, we identified nearby transcription factor binding sites. 
This search predicted a binding site for the GATA family of transcriptional
regulators adjacent to this hPR polymorphism. Importantly, we found GATA3, GATA4,
and GATA6 are expressed in normal breast tissue and two breast cancer cell lines,
whereas GATA5 is minimally expressed in normal mammary tissue and more strongly
expressed in two breast cancer cell lines. This finding was relevant because
GATA5 bound the site adjacent to the +331G/A polymorphism, and activated the hPR 
(-711 to +822)-luciferase reporter plasmid in breast cancer cells. Overexpression
of GATA5 increased expression of the endogenous hPR transcript, and GATA5 more
strongly activated an hPR promoter construct encoding the PR-B isoform. Finally, 
hPR promoter constructs including the +331A were more strongly activated by GATA5
than constructs including +331G. Our findings suggest that GATA5 interacts with
the +331G/A polymorphism to stimulate hPR-B expression in mammary cells, which
may contribute to breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16452193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Circulation. 2006 Jan 31;113(4):535-43.

Preventive effect of erythropoietin on cardiac dysfunction in doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyopathy.

Li L(1), Takemura G, Li Y, Miyata S, Esaki M, Okada H, Kanamori H, Khai NC,
Maruyama R, Ogino A, Minatoguchi S, Fujiwara T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Doxorubicin is a highly effective antineoplastic drug, but its
clinical use is limited by its adverse side effects on the heart. We investigated
possible protective effects of erythropoietin against doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyopathy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cardiomyopathy was induced in mice by a single
intraperitoneal injection of doxorubicin (15 mg/kg). In some cases, human
recombinant erythropoietin (5000 U/kg) was started simultaneously. Two weeks
later, left ventricular dilatation and dysfunction were apparent in mice given
doxorubicin but were significantly attenuated by erythropoietin treatment.
Erythropoietin also protected hearts against doxorubicin-induced cardiomyocyte
atrophy and degeneration, myocardial fibrosis, inflammatory cell infiltration,
and downregulation of expression of GATA-4 and 3 sarcomeric proteins, myosin
heavy chain, troponin I, and desmin. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression was upregulated 
in doxorubicin-treated hearts, and that, too, was attenuated by erythropoietin.
No doxorubicin-induced apoptotic effects were seen, nor were any changes seen in 
the expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha or transforming growth
factor-beta1. Antiatrophic and GATA-4 restoring effects of erythropoietin were
demonstrated in the in vitro experiments with cultured cardiomyocytes exposed to 
doxorubicin, which indicated the direct cardioprotective effects of
erythropoietin beyond erythropoiesis. Cardiac erythropoietin receptor expression 
was downregulated in doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy but was restored by
erythropoietin. Among the downstream mediators of erythropoietin receptor
signaling, activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase was reduced by
doxorubicin but restored by erythropoietin. By contrast, erythropoietin was
ineffective when administered after cardiac dysfunction was established in the
chronic stage.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates a protective effect of erythropoietin
against doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 16449733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Biol Int. 2006 Apr;30(4):301-7. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate induces differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem cells into cardiomyocytes.

Chen Y(1), Shao JZ, Xiang LX, Guo J, Zhou QJ, Yao X, Dai LC, Lu YL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Wenshan Road 232, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310012, PR China.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, derived from blastocyst-stage of early mammalian
embryos, have the potential to differentiate into derivatives of all three
embryonic germ layers. Here we reported the first evidence that murine
pluripotent ES cells could be induced to differentiate into cardiomyocytes by
cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) in vitro. Spontaneously beating of
cardiac cell clusters began to be observed within the outgrowths of embryoid
bodies (EBs) as early as 2 days after the onset of differentiation. By days 5-8
after induction, a maximum level of cardiomyocyte differentiation could be
achieved. Incubation of EBs with cAMP at concentrations ranging from 0.01 mg/L to
1 mg/L resulted in a significant elevation in differentiation rate, reaching a
maximum value of 44.0 +/- 1.3% at 0.03 mg/L of exposure. At 0.03 mg/L
concentration point, an approximately 8.1-fold increase in cardiomyocyte
differentiation was observed in comparison with 5.4 +/- 0.9% of untreated
controls. The differentiation rate induced by cAMP was shown to be similar to
that of RA/DMSO treated controls, indicating that cAMP has the same inducing
effect as RA/DMSO. However, no significant co-inducing effects between cAMP and
RA/DMSO were seen. Cardiomyocytes were evident as they expressed cardiac cell
specific genes and protein markers including GATA4, Nkx2.5, beta-MHC, atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF) and alpha-actin when analyzed by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemical staining. The results 
from the present study suggested a novel role of cAMP in cardiomyocyte
differentiation and provided a new research model for the study of cardiac cell
biology.

PMID: 16448825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 1;291(1):96-109. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Retinoic acid signaling is essential for formation of the heart tube in Xenopus.

Collop AH(1), Broomfield JA, Chandraratna RA, Yong Z, Deimling SJ, Kolker SJ,
Weeks DL, Drysdale TA.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Health Research Institute, 800 Commissioners Rd. E. London, Ontario,
Canada N6C 2V5.

Retinoic acid is clearly important for the development of the heart. In this
paper, we provide evidence that retinoic acid is essential for multiple aspects
of cardiogenesis in Xenopus by examining embryos that have been exposed to
retinoic acid receptor antagonists. Early in cardiogenesis, retinoic acid alters 
the expression of key genes in the lateral plate mesoderm including Nkx2.5 and
HAND1, indicating that early patterning of the lateral plate mesoderm is, in
part, controlled by retinoic acid. We found that, in Xenopus, the transition of
the heart from a sheet of cells to a tube required retinoic acid signaling. The
requirement for retinoic acid signaling was determined to take place during a
narrow window of time between embryonic stages 14 and 18, well before heart tube 
closure. At the highest doses used, the lateral fields of myocardium fail to
fuse, intermediate doses lead to a fusion of the two sides but failure to form a 
tube, and embryos exposed to lower concentrations of antagonist form a heart tube
that failed to complete all the landmark changes that characterize looping. The
myocardial phenotypes observed when exposed to the retinoic acid antagonist
resemble the myocardium from earlier stages of cardiogenesis, although precocious
expression of cardiac differentiation markers was not seen. The morphology of
individual cells within the myocardium appeared immature, closely resembling the 
shape and size of cells at earlier stages of development. However, the failures
in morphogenesis are not merely a slowing of development because, even when
allowed to develop through stage 40, the heart tubes did not close when embryos
were exposed to high levels of antagonist. Indeed, some aspects of left-right
asymmetry also remained even in hearts that never formed a tube. These results
demonstrate that components of the retinoic acid signaling pathway are necessary 
for the progression of cardiac morphogenesis in Xenopus.

PMCID: PMC3539789
PMID: 16423341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Jan 15;40(2):260-74. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Transcriptional regulation of the NADPH oxidase isoform, Nox1, in colon
epithelial cells: role of GATA-binding factor(s).

Brewer AC(1), Sparks EC, Shah AM.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Cardiology, GKT School of Medicine and
Dentistry, New Medical School Building, Bessemer Road, London SE5 9PJ, UK.
alison.brewer@kcl.ac.uk

Nonphagocytic NADPH oxidases (Noxs) are major sources of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and exist as a family of isoenzymes with tissue-restricted expression and
functions. Nox1, expressed in colon epithelium and vascular smooth muscle, is
suggested to be involved in innate immune defense and cell growth or
proliferation. The transcriptional regulation of Nox1 appears to be particularly 
important in the modulation of its activity but the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. Here we have identified the functional Nox1 promoter in human colon
epithelial Caco-2 cells, and show that a 520-bp genomic fragment encompassing the
CAP site is sufficient to direct high levels of expression of a linked reporter
gene in these cells. Deletion analyses together with electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) suggest that maximal promoter activity is dependent
on a GATA-binding site, conserved between human and mouse, within the proximal
promoter region. The ability of mouse GATA factors to transactivate the Nox1
promoter was demonstrated in Cos-7 cells and site-directed mutagenesis of the
conserved GATA-binding site further demonstrates that the regulation of Nox1
transcription is mediated by the direct binding of a GATA factor to the Nox1
proximal promoter. We also identified more distal, upstream regions which act to 
repress significantly expression from the Nox1 promoter.

PMID: 16413408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Biol Reprod. 2006 May;74(5):798-806. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

Adult sertoli cells are not terminally differentiated in the Djungarian hamster: 
effect of FSH on proliferation and junction protein organization.

Tarulli GA(1), Stanton PG, Lerchl A, Meachem SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton Victoria, 3168,
Australia.

Sertoli cell number is considered to be stable and unmodifiable by hormones after
puberty in mammals, although recent data using the seasonal breeding adult
Djungarian hamster (Phodopus sungorus) model challenged this assertion by
demonstrating a decrease in Sertoli cell number after gonadotropin depletion and 
a return to control levels following 7 days of FSH replacement. The present study
aimed to determine whether adult Sertoli cells are terminally differentiated
using known characteristics of cellular differentiation, including proliferation,
junction protein localization, and expression of particular maturational markers,
in the Djungarian hamster model. Adult long-day (LD) photoperiod (16L:8D)
hamsters were exposed to short-day (SD) photoperiod (8L:16D) for 11 wk to
suppress gonadotropins and then received exogenous FSH for up to 10 days. Sertoli
cell proliferation was assessed by immunofluorescence by the colocalization of
GATA4 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen and quantified by stereology.
Markers of Sertoli cell maturation (immature, cytokeratin 18 [KRT18]; mature,
GATA1) and junction proteins (actin, espin, claudin 11 [CLDN11], and tight
junction protein 1 [TJP1, also known as ZO-1]) also were localized using confocal
immunofluorescence. In response to FSH treatment, proliferation was upregulated
within 2 days compared with SD controls (90% vs. 0.2%, P < 0.001) and declined
gradually thereafter. In LD hamsters, junction proteins colocalized at the basal 
aspect of Sertoli cells, consistent with inter-Sertoli cell junctions, and were
disordered within the Sertoli cell cytoplasm in SD animals. Exogenous FSH
treatment promptly restored localization of these junction markers to the LD
phenotype. Protein markers of maturity remain consistent with those of adult
Sertoli cells. It is concluded that adult Sertoli cells are not terminally
differentiated in the Djungarian hamster and that FSH plays an important role in 
governing the differentiation process. It is proposed that Sertoli cells can
enter a transitional state, exhibiting features common to both undifferentiated
and differentiated Sertoli cells.

PMID: 16407497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6442-7. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

Leukemia inhibitory factor induces endothelial differentiation in cardiac stem
cells.

Mohri T(1), Fujio Y, Maeda M, Ito T, Iwakura T, Oshima Y, Uozumi Y, Segawa M,
Yamamoto H, Kishimoto T, Azuma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Evaluation of Medicines and Therapeutics, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita City, Osaka, Japan.

The importance of interleukin 6 (IL-6)-related cytokines in cardiac homeostasis
has been studied extensively; however, little is known about their biological
significance in cardiac stem cells. Here we describe that leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF), a member of IL-6-related cytokines, activated STAT3 and ERK1/2 in
cardiac Sca-1+ stem cells. LIF stimulation resulted in the induction of
endothelial cell-specific genes, including VE-cadherin, Flk-1, and CD31, whereas 
neither smooth muscle nor cardiac muscle marker genes such as GATA4, GATA6,
Nkx-2.5, and calponin were up-regulated. Immunocytochemical examination showed
that about 25% of total cells were positively stained with anti-CD31 antibody 14 
days after LIF stimulation. Immunofluorescent microscopic analyses identified the
Sca-1+ cells that were also positively stained with anti-von Willebrand factor
antibody, indicating the differentiating process of Sca-1+ cells into the
endothelial cells. IL-6, which did not activate STAT3 and ERK1/2, failed to
induce the differentiation of cardiac stem cells into the endothelial cells. In
cardiac stem cells, the transduction with dominant negative STAT3 abrogated the
LIF-induced endothelial differentiation. And the inhibition of ERK1/2 with the
MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126 also prevented the differentiation of Sca-1+ cells into
endothelial cells. Thus, both STAT3 and ERK1/2 are required for LIF-mediated
endothelial differentiation in cardiac stem cells. Collectively, it is proposed
that LIF regulates the commitment of cardiac stem cells into the endothelial cell
lineage, contributing to neovascularization in the process of tissue remodeling
and/or regeneration.

PMID: 16407199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Exp Mol Med. 2005 Dec 31;37(6):601-7.

Identification and functional characterization of an alternative splice variant
within the fourth exon of human nanog.

Kim JS(1), Kim J, Kim BS, Chung HY, Lee YY, Park CS, Lee YS, Lee YH, Chung IY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology,
Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Nanog, a homeodomain (HD) transcription factor, plays a critical role in the
maintenance of embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal. Here, we report the
identification of an alternatively-spliced variant of nanog. This variant lacked 
a stretch of amino acids (residues 168-183) located between the HD and
tryptophan-repeat (WR) of the previously-reported full length sequence,
suggesting that the deleted sequence functions as a linker and possibly affects
the flexibility of the C-terminal transactivation domain relative to the DNA
binding domain. Expression of mRNA encoding the splice variant, designated as
nanog-delta 48, was much lower than that of the full length version in human ES
cells. The ratio of nanog-delta 48 transcript to full length transcript
increased, however, in multipotent adult progenitor cells. EMSA analysis revealed
that both forms of Nanog were able to bind a nanog binding sequence with roughly 
the same affinity. A reporter plasmid assay also showed that both variants of
nanog modestly repressed transactivation of gata-4, whose expression is proposed 
to be inhibited by nanog, with comparable potency. We conclude that, despite the 
difference in primary structure and expression pattern in various stem cells, the
alternatively-spliced variant of Nanog has similar activity to that of the full
length version.

PMID: 16391521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):426-32. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Spatio-temporal patterns of intestine-specific transcription factor expression
during postnatal mouse gut development.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 750 Welch Road, Suite 116, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The small intestine matures from a primitive tube into morphologically and
functionally distinct regions during gut development. Maximal expression of the
genes encoding the digestive enzymes lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and
sucrase-isomaltase is spatially restricted to distinct segments along the
anterior-posterior axis of the small intestine and is temporally regulated during
postnatal maturation. Transcription factors capable of interacting with the
intestinal lactase and sucrase gene promoters are candidate regulators of
spatio-temporal patterning during gut development and maturation. We aimed to
quantitatively examine and compare the relative expression levels of a set of
intestine-specific transcription factors along the anterior-posterior gut axis
during postnatal maturation. Our analysis was focused on the transcription
factors capable of regulating the intestinal lactase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes. A real-time PCR protocol was used to quantitatively examine and compare
spatially and temporally the relative transcript abundance levels for
intestine-specific factors during postnatal intestinal maturation. Distinct
spatial expressions patterns were detected along the length of the small
intestine for PDX-1, Cdx-2, GATA-4, GATA-5, GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and CDP
transcription factor genes. There is a general decline in transcript abundance
for the factor genes during postnatal maturation. Defining the spatio-temporal
expression patterns for intestine-specific transcription factor genes contributes
to investigation of the roles that factor gradients play in mediating gut
development and differentiation.

PMID: 16377257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 28;241(2):281-8. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Involvement of GATA-4/-5 transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis.

Wakana K(1), Akiyama Y, Aso T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To clarify the role of GATA transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis, we
analyzed the expression and methylation states of GATA-4/-5/-6 in eight human
ovarian cancer cell lines. GATA-4/-5 were methylated in three and two cell lines 
without their expression, respectively. Methylation of GATA-4/-5 was also
detected in nine and five of 15 primary ovarian cancers, respectively. GATA-6 was
not methylated in any cases. We transiently over-expressed GATA-5 in the JHOC-5
cell line using an adenovirus system, resulting in that apoptosis was induced and
apoptosis-related genes, such as Apaf-1, were up-regulated. These data suggest
that GATA-4/-5 may be involved in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16337738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jan;27(1):118.

HEY2 mutations in malformed hearts.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai Fuchs Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hey2 (gridlock) is an
important determinant of mammalian heart development, but its role in human
ventricular septal defects is unknown. Hey2 functions as a repressor through the 
bHLH domain. By direct sequencing, we analyzed the sequences encoding the bHLH
domain of the human HEY2 in 52 explanted hearts of unrelated patients with
complex cardiac malformations, notably ventricular (VSD) and atrioventricular
septal defects (AVSD). We found three nonsynonymous mutations, namely, c.286A>G
(p.Thr96Ala), c.293A>C (p.Asp98Ala), and c.299T>C (p.Leu100Ser) affecting the
second helix of HEY2 in the diseased cardiac tissues of two patients with AVSD.
This result suggests a possible role of HEY2 in the regulation of ventricular
septation in humans. Since the two AVSD patients carried also binding domain
mutations in other cardiac-specific transcription factors, e.g. NKX2-5, TBX5, and
GATA4, breakdown of combinatorial interactions of transcription factors may have 
contributed to the complexity of their cardiac malformations.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16329098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Clin Perinatol. 2005 Dec;32(4):845-55, vii.

Cardiac development: new concepts.

Gruber PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Suite 8527, 34th Street and Civic Center
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. pgruber@mail.med.upenn.edu

Understanding normal development is a prerequisite to unraveling the mechanisms
that underlie congenital heart disease, a critical step if one is to design
rational new therapies. Over the past 20 years, human molecular genetics and
developmental biology have provided a group of powerful tools to uncover a number
of now well-defined pathways. There is now a confluence of new technologies and
experimental systems that may allow for a more profound understanding in the near
future.

PMID: 16325665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):482-93. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Fog1 is required for cardiac looping in zebrafish.

Walton RZ(1), Bruce AE, Olivey HE, Najib K, Johnson V, Earley JU, Ho RK, Svensson
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cardiology, University of Chicago, 5841 S. 
Maryland Ave, MC6088, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

To further our understanding of FOG gene function during cardiac development, we 
utilized zebrafish to examine FOG's role in the early steps of heart
morphogenesis. We identified fragments of three fog genes in the zebrafish
genomic database and isolated full-length coding sequences for each of these
genes by using a combination of RT-PCR and 5'-RACE. One gene was similar to
murine FOG-1 (fog1), while the remaining two were similar to murine FOG-2 (fog2a 
and fog2b). All Fog proteins were able to physically interact with GATA4 and
function as transcriptional co-repressors. Whole-mount in situ hybridization
revealed fog1 expression in the heart, the hematopoietic system, and the brain,
while fog2a and fog2b expression was restricted to the brain. Injection of
zebrafish embryos with a morpholino directed against fog1 resulted in embryos
with a large pericardial effusion and an unlooped heart tube. This looping defect
could be rescued by co-injection of mRNA encoding murine FOG-1, but not by mRNA
encoding FOG-1 lacking the FOG repression motif. Taken together, these results
demonstrate the importance of FOG proteins for zebrafish cardiac development and 
suggest a previously unappreciated role for FOG proteins in heart looping that is
dependent on the FOG repression motif.

PMCID: PMC2804444
PMID: 16316643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Dec 15;139(3):236-8.

CRELD1 and GATA4 gene analysis in patients with nonsyndromic atrioventricular
canal defects.

Sarkozy A, Esposito G, Conti E, Digilio MC, Marino B, Calabrò R, Pizzuti A,
Dallapiccola B.

PMID: 16278904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Hered. 2005;96(7):759-63. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Exclusion of candidate genes for canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal.

Kothapalli K(1), Kirkness E, Pujar S, Van Wormer R, Meyers-Wallen VN.

Author information: 
(1)J. A. Baker Institute for Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

In mammals, the Y-linked SRY gene is normally responsible for testis induction,
yet testis development can occur in the absence of Y-linked genes, including SRY.
The canine model of SRY-negative XX sex reversal could lead to the discovery of
novel genes in the mammalian sex determination pathway. The autosomal genes
causing testis induction in this disorder in dogs, humans, pigs, and horses are
presently unknown. In goats, a large deletion is responsible for sex reversal
linked to the polled (hornless) phenotype. However, this region has been excluded
as being causative of the canine disorder, as have WT1 and DMRT1 in more recent
studies. The purpose of this study was to determine whether microsatellite marker
alleles near or within five candidate genes (GATA4, FOG2, LHX1, SF1, SOX9) are
associated with the affected phenotype in a pedigree of canine SRY-negative XX
sex reversal. Primer sequences flanking nucleotide repeats were designed within
genomic sequences of canine candidate gene homologues. Fluorescence-labeled
polymorphic markers were used to screen a subset of the multigenerational
pedigree, and marker alleles were determined by software. Our results indicate
that the mutation causing canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal in this pedigree is
unlikely to be located in regions containing these candidates.

PMID: 16267164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(22):9829-44.

Convergence of protein kinase C and JAK-STAT signaling on transcription factor
GATA-4.

Wang J(1), Paradis P, Aries A, Komati H, Lefebvre C, Wang H, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110, Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W
1R7, Canada.

Angiotensin II (AII), a potent vasoactive hormone, acts on numerous organs via
G-protein-coupled receptors and elicits cell-specific responses. At the level of 
the heart, AII stimulation alters gene transcription and leads to cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy. Numerous intracellular signaling pathways are activated in this
process; however, which of these directly link receptor activation to
transcriptional regulation remains undefined. We used the atrial natriuretic
factor (ANF) gene (NPPA) as a marker to elucidate the signaling cascades involved
in AII transcriptional responses. We show that ANF transcription is activated
directly by the AII type 1 receptor and precedes the development of myocyte
hypertrophy. This response maps to STAT and GATA binding sites, and the two
elements transcriptionally cooperate to mediate signaling through the JAK-STAT
and protein kinase C (PKC)-GATA-4 pathways. PKC phosphorylation enhances GATA-4
DNA binding activity, and STAT-1 functionally and physically interacts with
GATA-4 to synergistically activate AII and other growth factor-inducible
promoters. Moreover, GATA factors are able to recruit STAT proteins to target
promoters via GATA binding sites, which are sufficient to support synergy. Thus, 
STAT proteins can act as growth factor-inducible coactivators of tissue-specific 
transcription factors. Interactions between STAT and GATA proteins may provide a 
general paradigm for understanding cell specificity of cytokine and growth factor
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1280254
PMID: 16260600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 16;338(2):1236-40. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

GATA4-mediated cardiac hypertrophy induced by d-myo-inositol
1,4,5-tris-phosphate.

Zhu Z(1), Zhu S, Liu D, Yu Z, Yang Y, van der Giet M, Tepel M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hypertension and Metabolic Diseases, Department of Hypertension and
Endocrinology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
Hypertension Institute, Chongqing, PR China. zhuzming@mail.dph-fsi.com

We evaluated the effects of d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate on cardiac
hypertrophy. d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate augmented cardiac hypertrophy as
evidenced by its effects on DNA synthesis, protein synthesis, and expression of
immediate-early genes c-myc and c-fos, beta-myosin heavy chain, and alpha-actin. 
The administration of d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate increased the
expression of nuclear factor of activated T-cells and cardiac-restricted zinc
finger transcription factor (GATA4). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR showed that
d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate-induced GATA4 mRNA was significantly enhanced
even in the presence of the calcineurin inhibitor, cyclosporine A. The effect of 
d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate was blocked after inhibition of
inositol-trisphosphate receptors but not after inhibition of
c-Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/mitogen-activated protein
kinase (ERK) or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. The study shows
that d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-tris-phosphate-induced cardiac hypertrophy is mediated 
by GATA4 but independent from the calcineurin pathway.

PMID: 16259952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochem Soc Trans. 2005 Dec;33(Pt 6):1534-6.

Generation of embryos directly from embryonic stem cells by tetraploid embryo
complementation reveals a role for GATA factors in organogenesis.

Duncan SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. duncans@mcw.edu

Gene targeting in ES (embryonic stem) cells has been used extensively to study
the role of proteins during embryonic development. In the traditional procedure, 
this requires the generation of chimaeric mice by introducing ES cells into
blastocysts and allowing them to develop to term. Once chimaeric mice are
produced, they are bred into a recipient mouse strain to establish germline
transmission of the allele of interest. Although this approach has been used very
successfully, the breeding cycles involved are time consuming. In addition, genes
that are essential for organogenesis often have roles in the formation of
extra-embryonic tissues that are essential for early stages of post-implantation 
development. For example, mice lacking the GATA transcription factors, GATA4 or
GATA6, arrest during gastrulation due to an essential role for these factors in
differentiation of extra-embryonic endoderm. This lethality has frustrated the
study of these factors during the development of organs such as the liver and
heart. Extraembryonic defects can, however, be circumvented by generating clonal 
mouse embryos directly from ES cells by tetraploid complementation. Here, we
describe the usefulness and efficacy of this approach using GATA factors as an
example.

PMID: 16246163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Exp Neurol. 2005 Dec;196(2):235-43. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Sertoli cells improve survival of motor neurons in SOD1 transgenic mice, a model 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Hemendinger R(1), Wang J, Malik S, Persinski R, Copeland J, Emerich D, Gores P,
Halberstadt C, Rosenfeld J.

Author information: 
(1)Carolinas Neuromuscular/ALS-MDA Center, Division of Neurology, Carolinas
Medical Center, 1000 Blythe Blvd, Charlotte, NC 28203, USA.

Cell replacement therapy has been widely suggested as a treatment for multiple
diseases including motor neuron disease. A variety of donor cells have been
tested for treatment including isolated preparations from bone marrow and
embryonic spinal cord. Another cell source, Sertoli cells, have been successfully
used in models of diabetes, Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. The
ability of these cells to secrete cytoprotective proteins and their role as
'nurse cells' supporting the function of other cell types in the testes suggest
their potential use as neuroprotective cells. The current study examines the
ability of Sertoli cells injected into the parenchyma of the spinal cord to
protect motor neurons in a mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Seventy
transgenic mice expressing the mutant (G93A) human Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase
(SOD1) received a unilateral spinal injection of Sertoli-enriched testicular
cells into the L4-L5 ventral horn (1 x 10(5) cells total) prior to the onset of
clinical symptoms. The animals were euthanized at the end stage of the disease.
Histological and morphometric analyses of the transplant site were performed. A
significant increase in the number of surviving ChAT positive motor neurons was
found ipsilateral to the injection compared with contralateral and uninjected
spinal cord. The ipsilateral increase in motor neuron density was dependent upon 
proximity to the injection site. Sections rostral or caudal to the injection site
did not display a similar difference in motor neuron density. Implantation of a
Sertoli-cell-enriched preparation has a significant neuroprotective benefit to
vulnerable motor neurons in the SOD1 transgenic model. The therapeutic benefit
may be the result of secreted neurotrophic factors present at a critical stage of
motor neuron degeneration in this model.

PMID: 16242126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Stem Cells. 2006 Mar;24(3):624-30. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Crucial transcription factors in endoderm and embryonic gut development are
expressed in gut-like structures from mouse ES cells.

Matsuura R(1), Kogo H, Ogaeri T, Miwa T, Kuwahara M, Kanai Y, Nakagawa T, Kuroiwa
A, Fujimoto T, Torihashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent and retain the potential to form 
an organ similar to the gut showing spontaneous contractions in vitro. The
morphological features of these structures and their formation, as assessed using
the hanging drop method to produce embryoid bodies (EBs), seem to be similar to
those in vivo. To determine whether the same molecular mechanisms are involved in
the formation process, the expression pattern of transcription factors regulating
endoderm and gut development in the mouse embryo was examined by in situ
hybridization and compared with in vivo expression. Expression of gene products
was also examined by immunohistochemistry, and expression colocalization was
analyzed with double staining. The results showed that all factors examined, that
is, Sox17, Id2, HNF3beta/Foxa2, and GATA4, were expressed in both EBs and
gut-like structures. Moreover, their expression patterns were similar to those in
the mouse embryo. EBs after the hanging drop period and before outgrowth already 
expressed all factors that were colocalized with each other in EB epithelial
structures. These findings suggest that the origin of the gut-like structure is
determined during the hanging drop period and that the gut-like structure is
formed as the epithelial structure in EBs during the hanging drop period. They
also indicate that the in vitro system using mouse ES cells mimics in vivo
development and should prove useful in the study of molecular mechanisms for
endoderm and gut development.

PMID: 16210401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8960-70.

Hey basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors are repressors of GATA4 and
GATA6 and restrict expression of the GATA target gene ANF in fetal hearts.

Fischer A(1), Klattig J, Kneitz B, Diez H, Maier M, Holtmann B, Englert C,
Gessler M.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institute, Physiological Chemistry I, University of Wuerzburg, 
Germany.

The Hey basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors are downstream effectors of 
Notch signaling in the cardiovascular system. Mice lacking Hey2 develop cardiac
hypertrophy, often associated with congenital heart defects, whereas combined
Hey1/Hey2 deficiency leads to severe vascular defects and embryonic lethality
around embryonic day E9.5. The molecular basis of these disorders is poorly
understood, however, since target genes of Hey transcription factors in the
affected tissues remain elusive. To identify genes regulated by Hey factors we
have generated a conditional Hey1 knockout mouse. This strain was used to
generate paired Hey2- and Hey1/2-deficient embryonic stem cell lines. Comparison 
of these cell lines by microarray analysis identified GATA4 and GATA6 as
differentially expressed genes. Loss of Hey1/2 leads to elevated GATA4/6 and ANF 
mRNA levels in embryoid bodies, while forced expression of Hey factors strongly
represses expression of the GATA4 and GATA6 promoter in various cell lines. In
addition, the promoter activity of the GATA4/6 target gene ANF was inhibited by
Hey1, Hey2, and HeyL. Protein interaction and mutation analyses suggest that
repression is due to direct binding of Hey proteins to GATA4 and GATA6, blocking 
their transcriptional activity. In Hey2-deficient fetal hearts we observed
elevated mRNA levels of ANF and CARP. Expression of ANF and Hey2 is normally
restricted to the trabecular and compact myocardial layer, respectively.
Intriguingly, loss of Hey2 leads to ectopic ANF expression in the compact layer, 
suggesting a direct role for Hey2 in limiting ANF expression in this cardiac
compartment.

PMCID: PMC1265774
PMID: 16199874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;57(6):801-10. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

The effect of cytostatic drug treatment on intestine-specific transcription
factors Cdx2, GATA-4 and HNF-1alpha in mice.

de Koning BA(1), Lindenbergh-Kortleve DJ, Pieters R, Rings EH, Büller HA, Renes
IB, Einerhand AW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastro-enterology, Erasmus
MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
b.dekoning@erasmusmc.nl

Chemotherapy-induced intestinal damage is a very important dose-limiting side
effect for which there is no definitive prophylaxis or treatment. This is in part
due to the lack of understanding of its pathophysiology and impact on intestinal 
differentiation. The objective of this study was to investigate the gene
expression of the small intestinal transcription factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, GATA-4
in an experimental model of methotrexate (MTX)-induced intestinal damage, and to 
correlate these alterations with histological damage, epithelial proliferation
and differentiation. HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are critical transcription
factors in epithelial differentiation, and in combination they act as promoting
factors of the sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene, an enterocyte-specific
differentiation marker which is distinctly downregulated after MTX treatment.
Mice received two doses of MTX i.v. on two consecutive days and were sacrificed
1, 3 and 7 or 9 days after final injection. Segments of the jejunum were taken
for morphological, immunohistochemical and quantitative analyses. Intestinal
damage was most severe at day 3 and was associated with decreased expression of
the transcriptional factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4, which correlated well
with decreased expression of SI, and seemed inversely correlated with enhanced
proliferation of epithelial crypt cells. During severe damage, the epithelium was
preferentially concerned with proliferation rather than differentiation, most
likely in order to restore the small intestinal barrier function rather than
maintaining its absorptive function. Since HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are
critical for intestine-specific gene expression and therefore crucial in
epithelial differentiation, these results may explain, at least in part, why
intestinal differentiation is compromised during MTX treatment.

PMID: 16163540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):574-86. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Perception of differentiation cues by GATA factors in primitive endoderm lineage 
determination of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Rula ME, Smedberg JL, Vanderveer L, Parmacek MS, Morrisey EE, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer and Tumor Cell Biology Programs, Department of Medical
Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA
19111-2497, USA.

The formation of the primitive endoderm covering the inner cell mass of early
mouse embryos can be simulated in vitro by the differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells in culture following either aggregation of suspended cells or
stimulation of cell monolayers with retinoic acid. The developmentally regulated 
transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 have determining role in mouse
extraembryonic endoderm development. We analyzed the in vitro differentiation of 
mouse embryonic stem cells deficient of GATA factors and conclude that GATA-4 is 
required for ES cells to perceive a cell positioning (cell aggregation) signal
and GATA-6 is required to sense morphogenic (retinoic acid) signal. The
collaboration between GATA-6 and GATA-4, or GATA-6 and GATA-5 which can
substitute for GATA-4, is involved in the perception of differentiation cues by
embryonic stem cells in their determination of endoderm lineage. This study
indicates that the lineage differentiation of ES cells can be manipulated by the 
expression of GATA factors.

PMID: 16162334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Dec;90(12):6529-35. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

High GATA-4 expression associates with aggressive behavior, whereas low
anti-Müllerian hormone expression associates with growth potential of ovarian
granulosa cell tumors.

Anttonen M(1), Unkila-Kallio L, Leminen A, Butzow R, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8), 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 
mikko.anttonen@helsinki.fi

CONTEXT: Granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) are ovarian malignancies that produce
estrogens, inhibins, and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH). The molecular pathogenesis
of GCTs is likely to involve defects in the genes regulating normal granulosa
cell proliferation during folliculogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to test the role of factors regulating
the normal granulosa cell function, i.e. AMH, inhibin-alpha, SF-1 (steroidogenic 
factor-1), and GATA transcription factors in the pathobiology and clinical
behavior of GCTs.
DESIGN: We selected randomly a cohort of 80 GCT patients treated at our
university hospital during 1971-2003, analyzed protein expression in the tumor
samples embedded on a tissue microarray by immunohistochemistry, and correlated
the data to clinical and histopathological parameters.
RESULTS: We found no significant differences in the immunoreactivity levels of
inhibin-alpha, GATA-6, FOG-2 (friend of GATA-2), or SF-1 in GCTs compared with
normal granulosa cells. AMH expression was, however, low (i.e. reduced) in 69% of
GCTs and correlated inversely with tumor size (P = 0.0025). In contrast, GATA-4
expression was high (i.e. resembled normal granulosa cells) in 44% of GCTs and
correlated positively with clinical stage and recurrence (P = 0.0232 and P =
0.0038, respectively). Fifty of the 80 patients had a follow-up for at least 10
yr, and 13 of them had recurrence(s). In multivariate analysis of recurrence, the
high GATA-4 expression remained the only independent factor (risk ratio, 9.2; 95%
confidence interval, 2.0-43.3; P = 0.0048).
CONCLUSIONS: The more aggressive GCTs retain a high GATA-4 expression, whereas
the larger tumors lose the proliferation-suppressing AMH expression. The high
GATA-4 expression in GCTs may serve as a marker of poor prognosis.

PMID: 16159935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Aug;14(4):425-39.

GATA factors lie upstream of Nkx 2.5 in the transcriptional regulatory cascade
that effects cardiogenesis.

Brewer AC(1), Alexandrovich A, Mjaatvedt CH, Shah AM, Patient RK, Pizzey JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, King's College Hospital, London SE5 9RS, UK.

Members of the GATA-4, -5, and -6 subfamily of transcription factors are
co-expressed with the homeoprotein Nkx 2.5 in the precardiac mesoderm during the 
earliest stages of its specification and are known to be important determinants
of cardiac gene expression. Ample evidence suggests that GATA factors and Nkx 2.5
cross-regulate each other's expression; however, the temporal order of the
expression of these transcription factors in vivo remains unresolved, and thus
precise definition of the role of the products of the genes they transcribe in
early development has been difficult to assess. We employed P19 CL6 mouse
embryonic carcinoma cells as a model to investigate this problem, because these
cells, like embryonic stem cells, can be induced to differentiate along multiple 
lineages. Here we demonstrate that when P19 CL6 cells are induced to
differentiate to a cardiogenic lineage, the expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 is
up-regulated prior to the transcriptional activation of Nkx 2.5. Moreover,
over-expression of GATA-4 or -6 at the time of Nkx 2.5 induction results in a
significant up-regulation of endogenous Nkx 2.5 transcription. Finally, it is
known that a Nkx-dependent enhancer is necessary for GATA-6 expression within
cardiomyocytes of the developing mouse embryo. We demonstrate that within
undifferentiated P19 CL6 cells, GATA-6 expression is subject to active repression
by a novel upstream element that possesses binding sites for factors involved in 
transcriptional repression that are conserved between mammalian species.

PMID: 16137232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Dev Dyn. 2005 Oct;234(2):355-62.

GATA-4:FOG interactions regulate gastric epithelial development in the mouse.

Jacobsen CM(1), Mannisto S, Porter-Tinge S, Genova E, Parviainen H, Heikinheimo
M, Adameyko II, Tevosian SG, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is a key participant in cytodifferentiation of the
mouse hindstomach. Here we show that GATA-4 cooperates with a Friend-of-GATA
(FOG) cofactor to direct gene expression in this segment of gut.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that GATA-4 and FOG-1 are co-expressed in
hindstomach epithelial cells from embryonic days (E) 11.5 to 18.5. The other
member of the mammalian FOG family, FOG-2, was not detected in gastric
epithelium. To show that GATA-4:FOG interactions influence stomach development,
we analyzed Gata4(ki/ki) mice, which express a mutant GATA-4 that cannot bind FOG
cofactors. Sonic Hedgehog, an endoderm-derived signaling molecule normally
down-regulated in the distal stomach, was over-expressed in hindstomach
epithelium of E11.5 Gata4(ki/ki) mice, and there was a concomitant decrease in
fibroblast growth factor-10 in adjacent mesenchyme. We conclude that functional
interaction between GATA-4 and a member of the FOG family, presumably FOG-1, is
required for proper epithelial-mesenchymal signaling in the developing stomach.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16127717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Tumour Biol. 2005 Sep-Oct;26(5):265-73. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, and their potential downstream effectors
in ovarian germ cell tumors.

Mannisto S(1), Butzow R, Salonen J, Leminen A, Heikinheimo O, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology, Biomedicum, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Ovarian germ cell tumors (GCTs) are histologically heterogeneous neoplasms
originating from activated germ cells, the oocyte stem cells. These rare tumors
often contain many different tissues mixed together, and malignant components are
occasionally hidden within benign tissues thus complicating the diagnosis. The
reasons for the variable differentiation of germ cells are still largely unknown.
As transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 as well as their downstream factors
(e.g. HNF-4, BMP-2 and Ihh) are essential for normal yolk sac development, we
studied their expression in 19 ovarian GCTs. Endodermal markers were expressed
distinctively in different GCT types. The malignant endoderm in yolk sac tumors
expressed all factors of endodermal development included in the study.
Dysgerminomas, on the contrary, expressed only GATA-4 and, in a minority of
cases, Ihh and BMP-2. The results suggest that GATA-4 and GATA-6 detected in the 
ovarian GCTs have retained their normal function. The fact that GATA-6 and HNF-4 
are expressed exclusively in endodermal tissues indicates that these
transcription factors play a role in the differentiation of germ cells towards
the endodermal phenotype. Analysis of the nuclear transcription factors in tumor 
tissue could serve as a new informative diagnostic tool for ovarian GCTs.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16110260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Endocrinology. 2005 Nov;146(11):4905-16. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Protein kinase A-dependent synergism between GATA factors and the nuclear
receptor, liver receptor homolog-1, regulates human aromatase (CYP19) PII
promoter activity in breast cancer cells.

Bouchard MF(1), Taniguchi H, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, T1-49, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université Research Centre, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Ste-Foy, Quebec, Canada G1V
4G2.

Cancers, including that of the breast, are the result of multiple contributing
factors including aberrant gene expression. Indeed, the CYP19 gene encoding P450 
aromatase, the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthesis, is up-regulated in breast
tumors predominantly via the cAMP-responsive gonad-type PII promoter, ultimately 
leading to increased intratumoral estrogen production and tumor growth. Thus,
identifying the molecular factors involved in aromatase PII promoter regulation
is essential for our understanding and treatment of the disease. Because we have 
previously shown activity of the murine aromatase PII promoter to be markedly
up-regulated by GATA factors with respect to the gonads, we hypothesized that
GATA factors are also key determinants of human PII promoter-driven aromatase
transcription in breast tumors. We now show that GATA3 and GATA4 are indeed
expressed in several breast cancer cells lines. Consistent with the cAMP
dependence of the PII promoter, activation elicited by GATA3 or GATA4 alone and
the striking synergism between GATA3 or GATA4 and the nuclear receptor liver
receptor homolog (LRH)-1 was intimately linked to forskolin treatment or
overexpression of protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunit. PKA-mediated
phosphorylation increases the interaction between GATA3 and LRH-1 and the
requirement for PKA in aromatase PII promoter stimulation involves at least three
specific amino acid residues: GATA3 Ser308, GATA4 Ser261, and LRH-1 Ser469.
Finally, we show that the human LRH-1 promoter is itself a target for GATA
factors. Thus, taken together, our results suggest that GATA factors likely
contribute to aberrant aromatase expression in breast tumors through two
distinct, yet complementary mechanisms.

PMID: 16109788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2005;565:349-57; discussion 405-15.

Mutations of transcription factors in human with heart disease for understanding 
the development and mechanisms of congenital cardiovascular heart disease.

Matsuoka R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Division of Genomic Medicine, Institute of
Advanced Biomedical Engineering and Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

PMID: 16106988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Genesis. 2005 Oct;43(2):59-70.

Generation of a conditionally null allele of the laminin alpha1 gene.

Alpy F(1), Jivkov I, Sorokin L, Klein A, Arnold C, Huss Y, Kedinger M,
Simon-Assmann P, Lefebvre O.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U682 Strasbourg, F67200, Development and Physiopathology of the
Intestine and Pancreas, University Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Laminins are heterotrimeric glycoproteins of the basement membranes. Laminin 1
(alpha1, beta1, gamma1) is the major laminin expressed during early mouse
embryogenesis. To gain access to the physiological function of laminin alpha1
chain, we developed a conditionally null allele of its encoding gene (Lama1)
using the cre/loxP system. Floxed-allele-carrying mice (Lama1(flox/flox)) display
no overt phenotype. Lama1(flox/flox) mice were crossed with transgenic deleter
mice (CMV-Cre) to generate Lama1-deficient mice (Lama1(Delta/Delta)).
Lama1(Delta/Delta) embryos die during the early postimplantation period after
embryonic day 6.5. They lack Reichert's membrane, an extraembryonic basement
membrane in which laminin alpha1 is normally highly expressed. In parallel,
Lama1(Delta/Delta) embryos display 1) parietal and visceral endoderm
differentiation defects with altered expression of cytokeratin 19 and GATA4,
respectively, and 2) an induction of apoptosis. This new mouse model is of
particular interest as it will allow time- and tissue-specific inactivation of
the Lama1 gene in various organs.

genesis 43:59-70, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16100707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Anim Sci. 2005 Sep;83(9):2111-22.

Testicular development of Zebu bulls after chronic treatment with a
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist.

Jiménez-Severiano H(1), Mussard ML, Fitzpatrick LA, D'Occhio MJ, Ford JJ, Lunstra
DD, Kinder JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210,
USA.

The objective was to compare testis characteristics of Zebu bulls treated with
the GnRH agonist, deslorelin, at different times and for different durations
during their development. An additional objective was to determine the usefulness
of a stain for the transcription factor GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA-4) as a
specific marker for Sertoli cell nuclei in cattle. Bulls (54) were allocated to
nine groups (n = 6) and received s.c. deslorelin implants as follows: G1 = from
birth to 3 mo of age; G2 = from 3 to 6 mo; G3 = from 6 to 9 mo; G4 = from 9 to 12
mo; G5 = from birth to 15 mo; G6 = from 3 to 15 mo; G7 = from 6 to 15 mo; G8 =
from 12 to 15 mo; and G9 (control) = no implant. Bulls were castrated at 19 mo of
age. Paraffin sections (10 microm) were subjected to quantitative morphometry and
GATA-4 immunohistochemistry. At castration, all bulls in the control group (6/6) 
had attained puberty (scrotal circumference > or = 28 cm), whereas a smaller
proportion (P < 0.05) had reached puberty in G2 (2/5) and G6 (1/6). Bulls in G2
and G6 also had a lesser (P < 0.05) testis weight compared with the control
group. Total volume of seminiferous epithelium and total daily sperm production
in G2 and G6 were only half that observed in the control group. Spermatids were
observed in less than 50% of seminiferous tubules in G2, G6, and G7 compared with
82% in the control group (P < 0.05). Staining for GATA-4 was specific for and
abundant in the Sertoli cell nucleus in both pre- and postpubertal bulls, and no 
other cell nucleus inside the seminiferous tubule was positive for GATA-4. Total 
number of Sertoli cells was not affected by treatment (P = 0.45), but nuclear
volume was smaller in G2 and G6 (P < 0.05) compared with the control group. In
conclusion, treatment of Zebu bulls with deslorelin had no apparent beneficial
effect on testis development and delayed puberty when treatment was initiated at 
3 mo of age. Staining for GATA-4 was a useful method for identifying and
quantifying Sertoli cell nuclei in both pre- and postpubertal bulls.

PMID: 16100066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35417-23. Epub 2005 Aug 8.

Identification of a repressor in the first intron of the human alpha2(I) collagen
gene (COL1A2).

Antoniv TT(1), Tanaka S, Sudan B, De Val S, Liu K, Wang L, Wells DJ, Bou-Gharios 
G, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Organogenesis, Research Division of the Hospital
for Special Surgery, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The human and mouse genes that code for the alpha2 chain of collagen I (COL1A2
and Col1a2, respectively) share a common chromatin structure and nearly identical
proximal promoter and far upstream enhancer sequences. Despite these homologies, 
species-specific differences have been reported regarding the function of
individual cis-acting elements, such as the first intron sequence. In the present
study, we have investigated the transcriptional contribution of the unique open
chromatin site in the first intron of COL1A2 using a transgenic mouse model.
DNase I footprinting identified a cluster of three distinct areas of nuclease
protection (FI1-3) that span from nucleotides +647 to +760, relative to the
transcription start site, and which contain consensus sequences for GATA and
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) transcription factors. Gel mobility shift and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays corroborated this last finding by
documenting binding of GATA-4 and IRF-1 and IRF-2 to the first intron sequence.
Moreover, a short sequence encompassing the three footprints was found to inhibit
expression of transgenic constructs containing the COL1A2 proximal promoter and
far upstream enhancer in a position-independent manner. Mutations inserted into
each of the footprints restored transgenic expression to different extents. These
results therefore indicated that the unique open chromatin site of COL1A2
corresponds to a repressor, the activity of which seems to be mediated by the
concerted action of GATA and IRF proteins. More generally, the study reiterated
the existence of species-specific difference in the regulatory networks of the
mammalian alpha2(I) collagen coding genes.

PMID: 16091368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Anim Reprod Sci. 2006 Jun;93(1-2):76-87. Epub 2005 Aug 8.

Differences in gene expression patterns between somatic cell nuclear transfer
embryos constructed with either rabbit granulosa cells or their derivatives.

Inoue F(1), Matsuda J, Ohkoshi K, Furusawa T, Takahashi S, Sasada H, Sato E,
Tokunaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Differentiation Laboratory, Developmental Biology Department, 
National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan. 
fukashi@affrc.go.jp

Successful production of offspring by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is
affected by the nature of the donor cells used. The purpose of this study was to 
determine whether characteristic changes induced in donor cells by culture
conditions influenced gene expression patterns in the resultant SCNT embryos.
Rabbit granulosa cells (rGC) were cultured under different conditions, either
with or without hCG, and the two derivative cell types obtained (named
respectively cGC+ and cGC-) were used as donor cells for SCNT. There were
characteristic differences between fresh rGC and the two derivative cell types:
p450scc expression and progesterone secretion were both higher in cGC+ than in
cGC-; expression of bmp4 and fgfr2 was decreased in cGC+ and cGC- compared with
rGC; and cGC+ and cGC- cell types gained collagenIV expression. Use of fresh rGC,
or cGC+ and cGC- derivative cells, did not alter either the developmental
potencies of SCNT oocytes or cell numbers at the blastocyst stage. The expression
patterns of four genes (bmp4, fgfr2, gata4, oct3/4) in SCNT embryos and in
fertilized embryos were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. We found that oct3/4 was
expressed in all embryos. The expression patterns of the other three genes showed
considerable variation between the different types of embryo: bmp4 was found in
most fertilized embryos but only some of rGC and none of cGC+ and cGC- derived
SCNT embryos; fgfr2 was present in fertilized embryos but was present in some rGC
and cGC- NT embryos and in all cGC+ NT embryos; gata4 was not expressed in
fertilized embryos but was present in a few rGC and cGC+ NT embryos and in most
cGC- NT embryos. Our results suggest that the gene expression patterns in SCNT
embryos derived from granulosa donor cells are affected by characteristic changes
to the cells during in vitro culture.

PMID: 16087302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Aug 18;37(4):402-5.

[Conversion of human umbilical cord blood-derived cells into hepatocyte-like
cells in a culture system mimicking hepatic injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu J(1), Zhang FT, Wan HJ, Ye J, Long X, Fang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen 518036,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of the microenvironment induced by damaged mouse
hepatic cells on the conversion of human umbilical cord blood-derived cells into 
hepatocyte-like cells.
METHODS: A hepatic injury-like microenvironment was mimicked using carbon
tetrachloride damaged mouse hepatic cells, where mononuclear cells (MNC) from
human umbilical cord blood were cultured in a compartment separated by trans-well
membrane. Histochemical staining, reversed transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and gene sequencing were performed for the information on the
conversion of human umbilical cord blood MNC.
RESULTS: A number of PAS positive stained cells in MNC co-cultured with damaged
mouse hepatic cells were observed after 72 h. Cells expressing mature hepatocyte 
markers, human albumin (hALB) and human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) mRNA were detected by
RT-PCR, which was further confirmed with sequencing. Relevant control groups, MNC
co-cultured with normal mouse hepatic cells and MNC cultured alone remained
negative.
CONCLUSION: The culture system using damaged mouse hepatic cells as stimulator
could be a potential in vitro system for the conversion of human umbilical cord
blood-derived cells into hepatocyte-like cells.

PMID: 16086062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cell Biol Int. 2005 Sep;29(9):817-25.

Generation of embryoid bodies from mouse embryonic stem cells cultured on STO
feeder cells.

Zhou QJ(1), Shao JZ, Xiang LX, Hu RZ, Lu YL, Yao H, Dai LC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310012, PR
China.

Embryoid bodies, which are similar to post-implantation egg-cylinder stage
embryos, provide a model for the study of embryo development and stem cell
differentiation. We describe here a novel method for generating embryoid bodies
from murine embryonic stem (ES) cells cultured on the STO feeder layer. The ES
cells grew into compact aggregates in the first 3 days of coculture, then became 
simple embryoid bodies (EBs) possessing primitive endoderm on the outer layer.
They finally turned into cystic embryoid bodies after being transferred to Petri 
dishes for 1-3 days. Evaluation of the EBs in terms of morphology and
differentiating potential indicates that they were typical in structure and could
generate cells derived from the three germ layers. The results show that embryoid
bodies can form not only in suspension culture but also directly from ES cells
cultured on the STO feeder layer.

PMID: 16085433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Dec;289(6):G1108-14. Epub 2005 Aug 
4.

Decreased sucrase and lactase activity in iron deficiency is accompanied by
reduced gene expression and upregulation of the transcriptional repressor PDX-1.

West AR(1), Oates PS.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology, School of Biomedical and Chemical Sciences, The University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia.

Disaccharidases are important digestive enzymes whose activities can be reduced
by iron deficiency. We hypothesise that this is due to reduced gene expression,
either by impairment to enterocyte differentiation or by iron-sensitive
mechanisms that regulate mRNA levels in enterocytes. Iron-deficient Wistar rats
were generated by dietary means. The enzyme activities and kinetics of sucrase
and lactase were tested as well as the activity of intestinal alkaline
phosphatase (IAP)-II because it is unrelated to carbohydrate digestion. mRNA
levels of beta-actin, sucrase, lactase, and the associated transcription factors 
pancreatic duodenal homeobox (PDX)-1, caudal-related homeobox (CDX)-2,
GATA-binding protein (GATA)-4, and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 were
measured by real-time PCR. Spatial patterns of protein and gene expression were
assessed by immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization, respectively. It was
found that iron-deficient rats had significantly lower sucrase (19.5% lower) and 
lactase (56.8% lower) but not IAP-II activity than control rats. Kinetic
properties of both enzymes remained unchanged from controls, suggesting a
decrease in the quantity of enzyme present. Sucrase and lactase mRNA levels were 
reduced by 44.5% and 67.9%, respectively, by iron deficiency, suggesting that
enzyme activity is controlled primarily by gene expression. Iron deficiency did
not affect the pattern of protein and gene expression along the crypt to villus
axis. Expression of PDX-1, a repressor of sucrase and lactase promoters, was
4.5-fold higher in iron deficiency, whereas CDX-2, GATA-4, and HNF-1 levels were 
not significantly different. These data suggest that decreases in sucrase and
lactase activities result from a reduction in gene expression, following from
increased levels of the transcriptional repressor PDX-1.

PMID: 16081762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Development. 2005 Sep;132(17):4005-14. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

Gata4 regulates the formation of multiple organs.

Holtzinger A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2006 Jan;133(1):181.

We have developed a loss-of-function model for Gata4 in zebrafish, in order to
examine broadly its requirement for organogenesis. We show that the function of
Gata4 in zebrafish heart development is well conserved with that in mouse, and
that, in addition, Gata4 is required for development of the intestine, liver,
pancreas and swim bladder. Therefore, a single transcription factor regulates the
formation of many organs. Gata6 is a closely related transcription factor with an
overlapping expression pattern. We show that zebrafish depleted of Gata6 show
defects in liver bud growth similar to mouse Gata6 mutants and zebrafish Gata4
morphants, and that zebrafish embryos depleted of both Gata4 and Gata6 display an
earlier block in liver development, and thus completely lack liver buds.
Therefore, Gata4 and Gata6 have distinct non-redundant functions in cardiac
morphogenesis, but are redundant for an early step of liver development. In
addition, both Gata4 and Gata6 are essential and non-redundant for liver growth
following initial budding.

PMID: 16079152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;13(10):1131-6.

Duplications and copy number variants of 8p23.1 are cytogenetically
indistinguishable but distinct at the molecular level.

Barber JC(1), Maloney V, Hollox EJ, Stuke-Sontheimer A, du Bois G, Daumiller E,
Klein-Vogler U, Dufke A, Armour JA, Liehr T.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Hospital NHS Trust, Salisbury, 
Wiltshire, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

It has been proposed that duplications of 8p23.1 are either euchromatic variants 
of the 8p23.1 defensin domain with no phenotypic consequences or true
duplications associated with developmental delay and heart defects. Here, we
provide evidence for both alternatives in two new families. A duplication of most
of band 8p23.1 (circa 5 Mb) was found in a girl of 8 years with pulmonary
stenosis and mild language delay. BAC fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
and multiplex amplifiable probe hybridisation (MAPH) showed that the two copies
of the duplicated segment were sited, in an alternating fashion, between three
copies of a circa 300-450 kb segment from 8p23.1 distal to REPD. Copy number of
the variable 8p23.1 defensin domain was consistent with duplication but within
the normal range. Duplication of the GATA-binding protein 4 gene (GATA4) in this 
patient and others with and without heart defects, suggests it is a
dosage-sensitive gene with variable penetrance. A cytogenetically similar
duplication of 8p23.1 was found at prenatal diagnosis in a fetus, father and
grandmother. There was no duplication using BAC FISH but MAPH showed 11 copies of
the 360 kb variable defensin domain which is within the expanded range found in
previous euchromatic variant carriers. Semiquantitative FISH (SQ-FISH) was
consistent with a simultaneous expansion of the adjacent olfactory receptor
repeats. These results distinguish duplications of 8p23.1 with clinically
significant consequences from benign copy number variants, which have not yet
been associated with qualitative or quantitative traits.

PMID: 16077733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Circulation. 2005 Jul 26;112(4):592-7.

Recent advances in cardiac development with therapeutic implications for adult
cardiovascular disease.

Epstein JA(1), Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Center, Penn Cardiovascular Institute,
University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, USA.
epsteinj@mail.med.upenn.edu

PMID: 16043659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Jun;47(5):295-306.

Molecular analysis of cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Segev H(1), Kenyagin-Karsenti D, Fishman B, Gerecht-Nir S, Ziskind A, Amit M,
Coleman R, Itskovitz-Eldor J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.

During early embryogenesis, the cardiovascular system is the first system to be
established and is initiated by a process involving the hypoblastic cells of the 
primitive endoderm. Human embryonic stem (hES) cells provide a model to
investigate the early developmental stages of this system. When removed from
their feeder layer, hESC create embryoid bodies (EB) which, when plated, develop 
areas of beating cells in 21.5% of the EB. These spontaneously contracting cells 
were demonstrated using histology, immunostaining and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), to possess morphological and
molecular characteristics consistent with cardiomyocytic phenotypes. In addition,
the expression pattern of specific cardiomyocytic genes in human EB (hEB) was
demonstrated and analyzed for the first time. GATA-4 is the first gene to be
expressed in 6-day-old EB. Alpha cardiac actin and atrial natriuretic factor are 
expressed in older hEB at 10 and 20 days, respectively. Light chain ventricular
myosin (MLC-2V) was expressed only in EB with beating areas and its expression
increased with time. Alpha heavy chain myosin (alpha-MHC) expression declined in 
the pulsating hEB with time, in contrast to events in EB derived from mice. We
conclude that human embryonic stem cells can provide a useful tool for research
on embryogenesis in general and cardiovascular development in particular.

PMID: 16026538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(15):6649-59.

Regulation of calcineurin through transcriptional induction of the calcineurin A 
beta promoter in vitro and in vivo.

Oka T(1), Dai YS, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Molecular
Cardiovascular Biology, 3333 Burnet Ave., MLC7020, Cincinnati OH 45229-3039, USA.

The calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) signaling pathway has 
been shown to be of critical importance in regulating the growth response of
cardiac myocytes. We have previously demonstrated that calcineurin A(beta)
(CnA(beta)) mRNA and protein are increased in response to growth stimulation,
although the precise regulatory mechanism underlying CnA(beta) upregulation is
not clear. Here, we isolated the mouse CnA(beta) promoter and characterized its
responsiveness to growth stimuli in vitro and in vivo. A 2.3-kb promoter fragment
was strongly activated by phenylephrine and endothelin-1 stimulation and by
cotransfection with constitutively active CnA, NFATc4, and GATA4. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, sequence regions were identified within the 2.3-kb promoter 
that associated with NFAT and GATA4, as well as with acetylated histone H3,
following agonist stimulation. Consistent with the chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiments, deletion of the distal half of the CnA(beta) promoter severely
reduced NFAT, GATA4, and hypertrophic agonist-mediated activation. To investigate
in vivo activity, we generated beta-galactosidase (LacZ) containing transgenic
mice under the control of the CnA(beta) 2.3-kb promoter. CnA(beta)-LacZ mice
showed expression in the heart that was cyclosporine sensitive, as well as
expression in the central nervous system and skeletal muscle from early embryonic
stages through adulthood. CnA(beta)-LacZ mice were subjected to cardiac pressure 
overload stimulation and crossbreeding with mice containing cardiac-specific
transgenes for activated calcineurin and NFATc4, which revealed inducible
expression in the heart. These results indicate that the CnA(beta) 2.3-kb
promoter is specifically activated by hypertrophic stimuli through a positive
feedback mechanism involving NFAT and GATA4 transcription factors, suggesting
transcriptional induction of CnA(beta) expression as an additional means of
regulating calcineurin activity in the heart.

PMCID: PMC1190362
PMID: 16024800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cancer Res. 2005 Jul 15;65(14):6089-96.

Synergistic induction of DOC-2/DAB2 gene expression in transitional cell
carcinoma in the presence of GATA6 and histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Zhou J(1), Hernandez G, Tu SW, Scholes J, Chen H, Tseng CP, Hsieh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9110, USA.

The down-regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene, which encodes a unique phosphoprotein
modulating signal pathways elicited by exogenous stimuli, is often associated
with several cancer types; however, the underlying mechanism is still unknown.
Dramatically different expression levels of DOC-2/DAB2 mRNA and protein are
observed among several human transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) cell lines,
suggesting that transcriptional regulation may play a role in these cells. In
this study, we have shown that the histone acetylation status associated with the
5' upstream regulatory sequence of DOC-2/DAB2 gene is one of the key determinants
for its gene expression. In addition, GATA6 but not other GATA family members,
such as GATA2 and GATA4, can specifically induce DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity,
although GATA transcription factors share a very similar DNA-binding sequence. We
also show that increased histone acetylation and the presence of GATA6 have a
synergistic effect on DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity, which results in the
elevation of DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression. Thus, we conclude that
transcriptional regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene in human TCC is determined by
histone acetylation and a specific transcription factor (i.e., GATA6), which
underlie the reduced DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression in TCC cells.

PMID: 16024609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cardiovasc Res. 2005 Dec 1;68(3):394-404. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

Host-derived circulating cells do not significantly contribute to cardiac
regeneration in heterotopic rat heart transplants.

Ausoni S(1), Zaglia T, Dedja A, Di Lisi R, Seveso M, Ancona E, Thiene G, Cozzi E,
Schiaffino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Viale G. Colombo 3,
35121 Padua, Italy. ausoni@civ.bio.unipd.it

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2005 Dec 1;68(3):344-6.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the contribution of
host-derived circulating cells to cardiac repair after tissue damage using the
model of heterotopic heart transplantation between transgenic recipient rats
expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) and wild-type donors.
METHODS: Unlabeled donor rat hearts, some of which underwent prolonged cold
ischemia pretreatment, were transplanted into the abdominal cavity of GFP+
transgenic recipient rats and were analyzed 15 and 90 days after surgery. An
additional experimental group underwent heart transplantation following
administration of granulocyte-colony stimulatory factor (G-CSF) to mobilize bone 
marrow cells.
RESULTS: Most transplants contained GFP+ mature cardiomyocytes. However,
systematic counting in the transplants showed that the proportion of GFP+
cardiomyocytes was only 0.0005% to 0.008% of all cardiomyocytes. These relative
proportions did not change after G-CSF treatment, despite evidence for sustained 
marrow cell mobilization. Confocal image analysis showed that the majority of
GFP+ cardiomyocytes contained a high number of nuclei, suggesting that these
cells may derive from fusion events. Very rarely, small GFP+ undifferentiated
cells, expressing GATA-4, were also identified. Occasionally, GFP+ endothelial
cells, but not smooth muscle cells, were detected in blood vessels of some
transplants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that cardiomyocytes expressing a host
transgenic marker are detectable in heterotopic heart transplants; however, they 
do not significantly contribute to repopulation of the damaged myocardium.

PMID: 16023094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Circ Res. 2005 Aug 5;97(3):227-35. Epub 2005 Jul 7.

Interdependent serotonin transporter and receptor pathways regulate S100A4/Mts1, 
a gene associated with pulmonary vascular disease.

Lawrie A(1), Spiekerkoetter E, Martinez EC, Ambartsumian N, Sheward WJ, MacLean
MR, Harmar AJ, Schmidt AM, Lukanidin E, Rabinovitch M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CCSR Rm
2245B, 269 Campus Dr, Stanford, CA 93405-5162, USA.

Heightened expression of the S100 calcium-binding protein, S100A4/Mts1, is
observed in pulmonary vascular disease. Loss of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine
[5-HT]) receptors or of the serotonin transporter (SERT) attenuates pulmonary
hypertension in animals, and polymorphisms causing gain of SERT function are
linked to clinical pulmonary vascular disease. Because 5-HT induces release of
S100beta, we investigated the codependence of 5-HT receptors and SERT in
regulating S100A4/Mts1 in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (hPA-SMC).
5-HT elevated S100A4/Mts1 mRNA levels and increased S100A4/Mts1 protein in
hPA-SMC lysates and culture media. S100A4/Mts1 in the culture media stimulated
proliferation and migration of hPA-SMC in a manner dependent on the receptor for 
advanced glycation end products. Treatment with SB224289 (selective antagonist of
5-HT1B), fluoxetine (SERT inhibitor), SERT RNA-interference, and iproniazid
(monoamine oxidase-A inhibitor), blocked 5-HT-induced S100A4/Mts1. 5-HT signaling
mediated phosphorylation (p) of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(pERK1/2), but pERK1/2 nuclear translocation depended on SERT, monoamine oxidase 
activity, and reactive oxygen species. Nuclear translocation of pERK1/2 was
required for pGATA-4-mediated transcription of S100A4/Mts1. These data provide
evidence for a mechanistic link between the 5-HT pathway and S100A4/Mts1 in
pulmonary hypertension and explain how the 5-HT1B receptor and SERT are
codependent in regulating S100A4/Mts1.

PMID: 16002749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cells. 2005 Jun 30;19(3):402-7.

Transfection of mesenchymal stem cells with the FGF-2 gene improves their
survival under hypoxic conditions.

Song H(1), Kwon K, Lim S, Kang SM, Ko YG, Xu Z, Chung JH, Kim BS, Lee H, Joung B,
Park S, Choi D, Jang Y, Chung NS, Yoo KJ, Hwang KC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science,
Cardiology Division, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have shown potential for cardiac repair
following myocardial injury, but this approach is limited by their poor viability
after transplantation. To reduce cell loss after transplantation, we introduced
the fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) gene ex vivo before transplantation. The
isolated MSCs produced colonies with a fibroblast-like morphology in 2 weeks;
over 95% expressed CD71, and 28% expressed the cardiomyocyte-specific
transcription factor, Nkx2.5, as well as a-skeletal actin, Nkx2.5, and GATA4. In 
hypoxic culture, the FGF-2-transfected MSCs (FGF-2-MSCs) secreted increased
levels of FGF-2 and displayed a threefold increase in viability, as well as
increased expression of the anti-apoptotic gene, Bcl2, and reduced DNA laddering.
They had functional adrenergic receptors, like cardiomyocytes, and exposure to
norepinephrine led to phosphorylation of ERK1/2. Viable cells persisted 4 weeks
after implantation of 5.0 yen 105 FGF-2-MSCs into infarcted myocardia. Expression
of cardiac troponin T (CTn T) and a voltage-gated Ca2+ channel (CaV2.1)
increased, and new blood vessels formed. These data suggest that genetic
modification of MSCs before transplantation could be useful for treating
myocardial infarction and end-stage cardiac failure.

PMID: 15995358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3405-17. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Gata4 expression in lateral mesoderm is downstream of BMP4 and is activated
directly by Forkhead and GATA transcription factors through a distal enhancer
element.

Rojas A(1), De Val S, Heidt AB, Xu SM, Bristow J, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0130, USA.

The GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors plays key roles in the
specification and differentiation of multiple cell types during development.
GATA4 is an early regulator of gene expression during the development of endoderm
and mesoderm, and genetic studies in mice have demonstrated that GATA4 is
required for embryonic development. Despite the importance of GATA4 in tissue
specification and differentiation, the mechanisms by which Gata4 expression is
activated and the transcription factor pathways upstream of GATA4 remain largely 
undefined. To identify transcriptional regulators of Gata4 in the mouse, we
screened conserved noncoding sequences from the mouse Gata4 gene for enhancer
activity in transgenic embryos. Here, we define the regulation of a distal
enhancer element from Gata4 that is sufficient to direct expression throughout
the lateral mesoderm, beginning at 7.5 days of mouse embryonic development. The
activity of this enhancer is initially broad but eventually becomes restricted to
the mesenchyme surrounding the liver. We demonstrate that the function of this
enhancer in transgenic embryos is dependent upon highly conserved Forkhead and
GATA transcription factor binding sites, which are bound by FOXF1 and GATA4,
respectively. Furthermore, the activity of the Gata4 lateral mesoderm enhancer is
attenuated by the BMP antagonist Noggin, and the enhancer is not activated in
Bmp4-null embryos. Thus, these studies establish that Gata4 is a direct
transcriptional target of Forkhead and GATA transcription factors in the lateral 
mesoderm, and demonstrate that Gata4 lateral mesoderm enhancer activation
requires BMP4, supporting a model in which GATA4 serves as a downstream effector 
of BMP signaling in the lateral mesoderm.

PMID: 15987774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Stem Cells. 2005 Sep;23(8):1035-43. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Downregulation of NANOG induces differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to 
extraembryonic lineages.

Hyslop L(1), Stojkovic M, Armstrong L, Walter T, Stojkovic P, Przyborski S,
Herbert M, Murdoch A, Strachan T, Lako M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Genetics, University of
Newcastle International Centre for Life, Newcastle NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.

The homeobox transcription factor Nanog has been proposed to play a crucial role 
in the maintenance of the undifferentiated state of murine embryonic stem cells. 
A human counterpart, NANOG, has been identified, but its function and
localization have not hitherto been described. We have used a combination of RNA 
interference and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to study NANOG 
in human embryonic stem and embryonic carcinoma cells. Transfection of
NANOG-specific small interfering RNAs reduced levels of NANOG transcript and
protein and induced activation of the extraembryonic endoderm-associated genes
GATA4, GATA6, LAMININ B1, and AFP as well as upregulation of
trophectoderm-associated genes CDX2, GATA2, hCG-alpha, and hCG-beta.
Immunostaining of preimplantation human embryos showed that NANOG was expressed
in the inner cell mass of expanded blastocysts but not in earlier-stage embryos, 
consistent with a role in the maintenance of pluripotency. Taken together, our
findings suggest that NANOG acts as a gatekeeper of pluripotency in human
embryonic stem and carcinoma cells by preventing their differentiation to
extraembryonic endoderm and trophectoderm lineages.

PMID: 15983365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Matrix Biol. 2005 Aug;24(5):333-40.

GATA-4 binds to an upstream element of the human alpha2(I) collagen gene (COL1A2)
and inhibits transcription in fibroblasts.

Wang L(1), Tanaka S, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Organogenesis, Research Division of the Hospital
for Special Surgery, Department Physiology and Biophysics at Weill Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Chromatin analyses have identified two DNase I hypersensitive sites (HS1 and HS2)
at comparable distances (-130 bp and -2.3 kb) from the transcription start site
of the human and mouse alpha2I collagen gene. Whereas the DNA region encompassing
HS1 has been extensively characterized using protein binding and functional
assays, nothing is yet known about the contribution of the HS2 sequence to
alpha2I collagen gene transcription. Here we report that the HS2 sequence of the 
human alpha2I collagen (COL1A2) gene is a binding site for a transcriptional
repressor in fibroblasts. DNase I footprinting identified a single site of
nuclease protection around HS2, which corresponds to a sequence potentially
capable of forming a 13 bp long hairpin structure with a 4 bp interruption in the
middle. Gel mobility shift assays revealed that two GATA consensus sequences
embedded within the hairpin are specifically bound by GATA-4 in fibroblasts. They
also showed that formation of the HS2 protein complex requires the integrity of
the whole hairpin sequence. Transient transfections of luciferase reporter gene
constructs in fibroblasts correlated the HS2 element with transcriptional
repression of the -2.3 kb promoter sequence. This last observation was further
corroborated by showing that forced overexpression of GATA-4 in cultured
fibroblasts leads to decreased transcription from the co-transfected -2.3 kb
promoter/reporter construct, as well as reduced expression of the endogenous
collagen gene. Finally, a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay documented GATA-4
ability to bind to the HS2 element in vivo. These results are therefore the first
to implicate GATA-4 in regulating constitutive COL1A2 gene expression in
fibroblasts.

PMID: 15982862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Curr Med Res Opin. 2005 May;21(5):795-803.

Stimulation of P19CL6 with multiple reagents induces pulsating particles in vivo.

Ohtsu Y(1), Johkura K, Ito K, Akashima T, Asanuma K, Ogiwara N, Oka T, Komuro I, 
Sasaki K, Amano J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Nagano, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Injection of stem cells into ischaemic areas of the heart is expected 
to be an effective method for myocardial regeneration. The embryogenic carcinoma 
(EC) cell line P19CL6 is known to differentiate into cardiomyocytes when cultured
with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and is expected to be a promising source for
regenerative therapy in cardiac disease. To establish a high-yield method of
cardiomyocyte differentiation, P19CL6 cells were double-stimulated with
5-azacytidine. Double stimulation-induced cardiomyocytes were also transplanted
into ectopic sites in mice and their function evaluated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To induce differentiation under adherent conditions, P19CL6 
cells were incubated in growth medium with 10 microM 5-azacytidine for 24 h.
After 5-azacytidine treatment, P19CL6 cells were incubated with 1% DMSO for nine 
days until they began to pulsate. Prior to transplantation, cells were treated
again with 5-azacytidine. Differentiated cells were injected into the greater
omentum, para-aorta region of the retroperitoneum and peri-femoral artery of
adult BALB/c nude mice. Nine days after transplantation, irregularly pulsating
tissues at a rate slower than the host heart were observed in the transplanted
sites. Light microscopy showed formation of cardiac muscle tissues originating
from P19CL6 cells. Differentiated cardiomyocytes were positive for cardiac
troponin I, cadherin and alpha-smooth muscle actin, and the expressions of
Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4 mRNAs were up-regulated. Electron microscopy demonstrated
components specific to cardiomyocytes, such as Z-bands, desmosomes, fasciae
adherens, myofibrils and mitochondria, which confirmed successful heterotopic
cardiac muscle differentiation from P19CL6 cells.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated high-yield cardiac muscle differentiation of 
P19CL6 by 5-azacytidine and DMSO double stimulation and successful formation of
cardiac muscle-like tissue by ectopic transplantation of cardiomyocytes derived
from P19CL6 into the retroperitoneal area as well as into the peripheral vessel
area.

PMID: 15969879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Aug;5(6):756-62.

Irx3 is differentially up-regulated in female gonads during sex determination.

Jorgensen JS(1), Gao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, 2001 South
Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, IL 61802, USA. jsj2@uiuc.edu

Irx3 is a member of the Iroquois homeobox gene family that encodes a protein
known for its essential role in spinal cord development. Transcript screening of 
male and female gonads during the critical period of sex determination (E12-13.5)
revealed a sexually dimorphic expression pattern for Irx3 with female gonads
exhibiting a sixfold increase in expression over time. Whole mount in situ
hybridization confirmed the sexually dimorphic nature of Irx3 expression and
immunohistochemical analysis of gonads at E13.5 determined that IRX3 and GATA4
proteins co-localized to somatic cells of XX gonads. The Irx3 signal persisted in
germ cell-depleted XX gonads resulting from Busulfan treatment suggesting that
its expression was independent of germ cell regulation. Quantitative real-time
PCR analysis over an extended time course determined that Irx3 message was low
initially and then increased in XX gonads until E13.5, remained elevated until
birth, diminished shortly after birth, and remained low in the adult ovary. In
contrast, Irx3 message was 50% lower in male compared to female gonads at the
initial time point, and continued to decrease over time. Further analysis of
adult ovaries suggested that IRX3 expression is not present in any subpopulations
of cells of the differentiated ovary. Together, these results suggest that the
Irx3 signal is restricted to the somatic cell component of XX gonads and is
present at a discreet period of ovarian development that ends abruptly at birth. 
This timing coincides with the transition of female primordial germ cells from
mitotic proliferation to meiotic division, and the organization of germ cell
cysts prior to primordial follicle development at birth.

PMID: 15963769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Circulation. 2005 Jun 14;111(23):3095-104. Epub 2005 Jun 6.

Calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells pathway-dependent cardiac
remodeling in mice deficient in guanylyl cyclase A, a receptor for atrial and
brain natriuretic peptides.

Tokudome T(1), Horio T, Kishimoto I, Soeki T, Mori K, Kawano Y, Kohno M, Garbers 
DL, Nakao K, Kangawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Research Institute, National Cardiovascular
Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although disruption of guanylyl cyclase (GC) A, a natriuretic peptide
receptor, induces cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, the molecular mechanism
underlying these effects are not well understood. In this study, we examined the 
role of calcineurin, a calcium-dependent phosphatase, in cardiac remodeling in
GCA-knockout (GCA-KO) mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: At 14 weeks of age, calcineurin activity, nuclear
translocation of nuclear factor of activated T cells c3 (NFATc3), and modulatory 
calcineurin-interacting protein 1 (MCIP1) gene expressions were increased in the 
hearts of GCA-KO mice compared with wild-type (WT) mice. Blockade of calcineurin 
activation by FK506 (6 mg/kg body weight administered subcutaneously once a day
from 10 to 14 weeks of age) significantly decreased the heart-to-body weight
ratio, cardiomyocyte size, and collagen volume fraction in GCA-KO mice, whereas
FK506 did not affect these parameters in WT mice. Overexpression of atrial and
brain natriuretic peptides, collagen, and fibronectin mRNAs in GCA-KO mice was
also attenuated by FK506. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that
GATA4 DNA-binding activity was increased in GCA-KO mice, and this increase was
inhibited by calcineurin blockade. In neonatal cultured cardiac myocytes,
inhibition of GCA by HS142-1 (100 microg/mL) increased basal and phenylephrine
(10(-6) mol/L)-stimulated calcineurin activity, nuclear translocation of NFATc3, 
and MCIP1 mRNA expression. In contrast, activation of GCA by atrial natriuretic
peptide (10(-6) mol/L) inhibited phenylephrine (10(-6) mol/L)-stimulated nuclear 
translocation of NFATc3.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that activation of cardiac GCA by locally
secreted natriuretic peptides protects the heart from excessive cardiac
remodeling by inhibiting the calcineurin-NFAT pathway.

PMID: 15939815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32531-8. Epub 2005 May 31.

Conditional mutagenesis of the murine serum response factor gene blocks
cardiogenesis and the transcription of downstream gene targets.

Niu Z(1), Yu W, Zhang SX, Barron M, Belaguli NS, Schneider MD, Parmacek M,
Nordheim A, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Division of Cardiovascular Sciences,
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, 77030, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF) homozygous-null embryos from our backcross of
SRF(LacZ/)(+) "knock-in" mice failed to gastrulate and form mesoderm, similar to 
the findings of an earlier study (Arsenian, S., Weinhold, B., Oelgeschlager, M., 
Ruther, U., and Nordheim, A. (1998) EMBO J. 17, 6289-6299). Our use of embryonic 
stem cells provided a model system that could be used to investigate the
specification of multiple embryonic lineages, including cardiac myocytes. We
observed the absence of myogenic alpha-actins, SM22alpha, and myocardin
expression and the failure to form beating cardiac myocytes in aggregated SRF
null embryonic stem cells, whereas the appearance of transcription factors Nkx2-5
and GATA4 were unaffected. To study the role of SRF during heart organogenesis,
we then performed cardiac-specific ablation of SRF by crossing the transgenic
alpha-myosin heavy chain Cre recombinase line with SRF LoxP-engineered mice.
Cardiac-specific ablation of SRF resulted in embryonic lethality due to cardiac
insufficiency during chamber maturation. Conditional ablation of SRF also reduced
cell survival concomitant with increased apoptosis and reduced cellularity.
Significant reductions in SRF (> or =95%), atrial naturetic factor (> or =80%),
and cardiac (> or =60%), skeletal (> or =90%), and smooth muscle (> or =75%)
alpha-actin transcripts were also observed in the cardiac-conditional knock-out
heart. This was consistent with the idea that SRF directs de novo cardiac and
smooth muscle gene activities. Finally, quantitation of the knock-in LacZ
reporter gene transcripts in the hearts of cardiac-conditional knock-out embryos 
revealed an approximately 30% reduction in gene activity, indicating SRF gene
autoregulation during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 15929941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Sep;19(9):2358-70. Epub 2005 May 31.

GATA factors and the nuclear receptors, steroidogenic factor 1/liver receptor
homolog 1, are key mutual partners in the regulation of the human
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 promoter.

Martin LJ(1), Taniguchi H, Robert NM, Simard J, Tremblay JJ, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction, Room T1-49, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval
Research Centre, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1V 4G2.

The human HSD3B2 gene encodes the 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta5-delta4 isomerase type 2 (3beta-HSD2) enzyme that is required
for steroid hormone biosynthesis. Mutations in the hHSD3B2 gene are responsible
for a form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and male pseudohermaphroditism
whereas overexpression of hHSD3B2 has been recently associated with polycystic
ovarian syndrome. Despite the importance of the hHSD3B2 gene, the molecular
mechanisms that regulate its expression remain poorly understood. Transcription
factors belonging to the GATA family are emerging as novel regulators of
steroidogenesis. Indeed, GATA-4 and GATA-6 are abundantly expressed in
steroidogenic cells of the gonads and adrenals. We now report that the human
HSD3B2 promoter (hHSD3B2), which contains four consensus GATA elements,
constitutes an important target for GATA factors. GATA-4 and GATA-6 by themselves
are sufficient to activate transcription (up to 15-fold) from a -1073 bp hHSD3B2 
promoter fragment and blockade of endogenous GATA expression and/or activity
blunts hHSD3B2 promoter activity in steroidogenic cells. Deletion studies showed 
that the proximal GATA element located at -196 bp is sufficient to confer GATA
responsiveness of the hHSD3B2 promoter and is required for full hHSD3B2 promoter 
activity in steroidogenic cells. Moreover, we report that GATA-4 and GATA-6 can
physically interact with the nuclear receptors, steroidogenic factor 1 and liver 
receptor homolog 1, to synergistically activate hHSD3B2 promoter activity in both
homologous and heterologous cells. Aberrant expression of transcription factors
essential for hHSD3B2 expression might also be involved in some
pathologies/syndromes associated with deregulated hHSD3B2 expression.

PMID: 15928316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2005 May;43(5):390-2.

[Molecular genetics of atrioventricular septal defects].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie LJ, Huang GY.

PMID: 15924761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Stem Cells. 2005 Jun-Jul;23(6):817-27.

In vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells: enrichment of endodermal 
cells in the embryoid body.

Choi D(1), Lee HJ, Jee S, Jin S, Koo SK, Paik SS, Jung SC, Hwang SY, Lee KS, Oh
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stem Cell Therapy Center, Soonchunhyang University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the potential to differentiate into all three germ
layers, providing new perspectives not only for embryonic development but also
for the application in cell replacement therapies. Even though the formation of
an embryoid body (EB) in a suspension culture has been the most popular method to
differentiate ES cells into a wide range of cells, not much is known about the
characteristics of EB cells. To this end, we investigated the process of EB
formation in the suspension culture of ES cells at weekly intervals for up to 6
weeks. We observed that the central apoptotic area is most active in the first
week of EB formation and that the cell adhesion molecules, except beta-catenin,
are highly expressed throughout the examination period. The sequential expression
of endodermal genes in EBs during the 6-week culture correlated closely with that
of normal embryo development. The outer surface of EBs stained positive for
alpha-fetoprotein and GATA-4. When isolated from the 2-week-old EB by trypsin
treatment, these endodermal lineage cells matured in vitro into hepatocytes upon 
stimulation with various hepatotrophic factors. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that endodermal cells can be retrieved from EBs and matured into
specific cell types, opening new therapeutic usage of these in vitro
differentiated cells in the cell replacement therapy of various diseases.

PMID: 15917477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Jul;39(1):133-47.

Novel cell lines derived from adult human ventricular cardiomyocytes.

Davidson MM(1), Nesti C, Palenzuela L, Walker WF, Hernandez E, Protas L, Hirano
M, Isaac ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. mmd2@columbia.edu

Background. - We have established proliferating human cardiomyocyte cell lines
derived from non-proliferating primary cultures of adult ventricular heart
tissue, using a novel method that may be applicable to many post-mitotic primary 
cultures. Methods and results. - Primary cells from human ventricular tissue,
were fused with SV40 transformed, uridine auxotroph human fibroblasts, devoid of 
mitochondrial DNA. This was followed by selection in uridine-free medium to
eliminate unfused fibroblasts. The fused cells were subcloned and screened for
cell type-specific markers. Four clones (AC1, AC10, AC12, AC16) that express
markers characteristic of cardiomyocytes were studied. Clones were homogeneous
morphologically, and expressed transcription factors (GATA4, MYCD, NFATc4),
contractile proteins such as alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chain, alpha-cardiac
actin, troponin I, desmoplakin, alpha actinin, the muscle-specific intermediate
filament protein, desmin, the cardiomyocyte-specific peptide hormones, BNP, the
L-type calcium channel alpha1C subunit and gap junction proteins, connexin-43 and
connexin-40. Furthermore, dye-coupling studies confirmed the presence of
functional gap junctions. EM ultra structural analysis revealed the presence of
myofibrils in the subsarcolemmal region, indicating a precontractile
developmental stage. When grown in mitogen-depleted medium, the AC cells stopped 
proliferating and formed a multinucleated syncytium. When the SV40 oncogene was
silenced using the RNAi technique, AC16 cells switched from a proliferating to a 
more differentiated quiescent state, with the formation of multinucleated
syncyntium. Concurrently, the cells expressed BMP2, an important signaling
molecule for induction of cardiac-specific markers, that was not expressed by the
proliferating cells. The presence of the combination of transcription factors in 
addition to muscle-specific markers is a good indication for the presence of a
cardiac transcription program in these cells. CONCLUSIONS. - Based on the
expression of myogenic markers and a fully functional respiratory chain, the AC
cells have retained the nuclear DNA and the mitochondrial DNA of the primary
cardiomyocytes. They can be frozen and thawed repeatedly and can differentiate
when grown in mitogen-free medium. These cell lines are potentially useful in
vitro models to study developmental regulation of cardiomyocytes in normal and
pathological states.

PMID: 15913645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Apr;14(2):153-61.

Role of hepatocyte-like cells in the differentiation of cardiomyocytes from mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Pal R(1), Khanna A.

Author information: 
(1)Embryonic Stem Cell Laboratory, Reliance Life Sciences, Ltd., Sir. H.N.
Hospital & Research Center, Prathna Samaj, Girgaum, Mumbai-400004, India.

Cell replacement therapy, while being a promising approach, is challenged by the 
limited supply of appropriate cells and incomplete understanding of the cardiac
differentiation process. In this manuscript, we show the generation of
spontaneously beating cardiomyocytes without using dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), the 
most well-known cardiotrophic factor. Here, we employ basic fibroblast growth
factor (FGF), a commonly used growth factor for embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation, to initiate and maintain in vitro cardiac differentiation. Upon 
differentiation, beating or pulsating cardiac cells grown on tissue culture
plates that interspersed with oval-shaped cells appeared after 1 week in culture.
The number of beating colonies increased with time, and cells remained
contractile for at least 45 days. Within 12 days of differentiation, these cells 
expressed markers characteristic of cardiomyocytes and hepatocytes such as GATA4,
Nkx2.5, beta-myosin heavy chain, myosin light chain 2V, cardiac troponin T,
sodium calcium exchanger and HNF-4alpha, alpha-fetoprotein, albumin,
transthyretin, and CK-18, respectively. Thus, molecular and cellular
characterization of these oval-shaped cells identified them as hepatocyte-like
cells. Furthermore, we have identified a candidate set of signaling molecules
like bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and 
demonstrated their interactive role in in vitro cardiogenesis. To our knowledge, 
this is the first report elucidating the intrinsic signaling pathway of
hepatocyte-like cells in the differentiation of cardiomyocytes from mouse ES
cells without employing co-culture techniques. Hence, the study provides a
significant insight into the mechanism of in vitro derivation of cardiomyocytes, 
mediated through interactive signaling with adjoining endodermal derivatives.

PMID: 15910241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Clin Invest. 2005 Jun;115(6):1522-31. Epub 2005 May 12.

Morphogenesis of the right ventricle requires myocardial expression of Gata4.

Zeisberg EM(1), Ma Q, Juraszek AL, Moses K, Schwartz RJ, Izumo S, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Mutations in developmental regulatory genes have been found to be responsible for
some cases of congenital heart defects. One such regulatory gene is Gata4, a zinc
finger transcription factor. In order to circumvent the early embryonic lethality
of Gata4-null embryos and to investigate the role of myocardial Gata4 expression 
in cardiac development, we used Cre/loxP technology to conditionally delete Gata4
in the myocardium of mice at an early and a late time point in cardiac
morphogenesis. Early deletion of Gata4 by Nkx2-5Cre resulted in hearts with
striking myocardial thinning, absence of mesenchymal cells within the endocardial
cushions, and selective hypoplasia of the RV. RV hypoplasia was associated with
downregulation of Hand2, a transcription factor previously shown to regulate
formation of the RV. Cardiomyocyte proliferation was reduced, with a greater
degree of reduction in the RV than in the LV. Late deletion of Gata4 by Cre
recombinase driven by the alpha myosin heavy chain promoter did not selectively
affect RV development or generation of endocardial cushion mesenchyme but did
result in marked myocardial thinning with decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation, 
as well as double-outlet RV. Our results demonstrate a general role of myocardial
Gata4 in regulating cardiomyocyte proliferation and a specific, stage-dependent
role in regulating the morphogenesis of the RV and the atrioventricular canal.

PMCID: PMC1090473
PMID: 15902305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2005 Sep 1;143(2):184-92.

cDNA microarray reveals signaling pathways involved in hormones expression of
human pituitary.

Ma YY(1), Qi XF, Song SJ, Zhao ZY, Zhu ZD, Qi J, Zhang X, Xiao HS, Teng Y, Han
ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese National Human Genome Center at Shanghai, 351 Guo Shou-Jing Road,
Shanghai 201203, China.

Pituitary, a master gland of neuroendocrine system, secretes hormones that
orchestrate many physiological processes, under the regulation of multiple
signaling pathways. To investigate the genes involved in hormones expression of
human pituitary, homemade cDNA microarray containing 14,800 human genes/ESTs were
used to profile the gene expression in both fetal and adult pituitaries. Seven
hundred and twelve known genes changed over 2-fold between the both tissues. Of
which, 23 genes were changed with hormones expression in aging were confirmed by 
RT-PCR, not only the known regulators such as Pit1, GATA4, ESRRA, GABA-A, and
EMK, but also LOC55884, DUSP3, PNN, and RCL, which had not been reported to be
involved in the hormones expression. Correspondingly, the mRNAs of GH, PRL, POMC,
TSH-beta, FSH-beta, and LH-beta, was increased as much as 6- to 20-fold in adult 
pituitary than those in fetal pituitary, by real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay. 
In addition, the mRNAs of signaling pathways, such as cAMP-PKA-CREB, PI3K-Akt,
and PKA-ERK were further investigated. Of them, it was only cAMP-PKA-CREB
pathway, but not PI3K-Akt and PKA-ERK have the same expressing pattern as
hormones. It suggested that cDNA microarray is highly advantages to profile the
differential expressed genes that were involved in hormones expression of human
pituitary, but it might ignore some responding proteins regulated
posttranscriptionally.

PMID: 15894316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Circulation. 2005 May 17;111(19):2438-45. Epub 2005 May 9.

Regeneration of infarcted myocardium by intramyocardial implantation of ex vivo
transforming growth factor-beta-preprogrammed bone marrow stem cells.

Li TS(1), Hayashi M, Ito H, Furutani A, Murata T, Matsuzaki M, Hamano K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Medical Bioregulation,
Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2005 May 17;111(19):2416-7.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that bone marrow-derived stem cells
differentiate into the phenotype of cardiomyocytes in vivo and in vitro. We tried
to regenerate infarcted myocardium by implanting ex vivo transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta-preprogrammed CD117 (c-kit)-positive (CD117+) stem cells
intramyocardially.
METHODS AND RESULTS: CD117+ cells were isolated from the bone marrow mononuclear 
cells of GFP-transgenic or normal C57/BL6 mice. The myogenic differentiation of
CD117+ cells was achieved by cultivation with TGF-beta. Using an acute myocardial
infarction model, we also tried to regenerate infarcted myocardium by implanting 
untreated (newly isolated) or preprogrammed (24 hours of cultivation with 5 ng/mL
TGF-beta1) CD117+ cells intramyocardially. TGF-beta increased the cellular
expression of myosin, troponins, connexin-43, GATA-4, and NKx-2.5, which
suggested that it induced the myogenic differentiation of CD117+ cells. Compared 
with the effects of PBS injection only, the microvessel density in the infarcted 
myocardium was increased significantly 3 months after the implantation of either 
TGF-beta-preprogrammed or untreated CD117+ cells. Moreover, many of the
TGF-beta-preprogrammed CD117+ cells were stained positively for myosin, whereas
few of the untreated CD117+ cells were. Histological analysis revealed newly
regenerated myocardium in the left ventricular anterior wall after the
implantation of TGF-beta-preprogrammed cells but not untreated cells.
Furthermore, the left ventricular percent fraction shortening was significantly
higher after the implantation of TGF-beta-preprogrammed cells than after the
implantation of untreated CD117+ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: TGF-beta conducted the myogenic differentiation of CD117+ stem cells
by upregulating GATA-4 and NKx-2.5 expression. Therefore, the intramyocardial
implantation of TGF-beta-preprogrammed CD117+ cells effectively assisted the
myocardial regeneration and induced therapeutic angiogenesis, contributing to
functional cardiac regeneration.

PMID: 15883211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Circ Res. 2005 May 27;96(10):1095-102. Epub 2005 May 5.

Endotoxin-induced myocardial dysfunction: effects of macrophage migration
inhibitory factor neutralization.

Chagnon F(1), Metz CN, Bucala R, Lesur O.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Physiopathologie Respiratoire, Centre de Recherche
Clinique, Universite de Sherbrooke, PQ, Canada.

The pathophysiology of sepsis-induced myocardial dysfunction still remains
controversial. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has recently been
identified as a cardiac-derived myocardial depressant factor in septic shock.
Putative mechanisms by which MIF affects cardiac function are unknown. In an
investigation of possible mechanisms of action, a rat model of endotoxin toxicity
was designed using intraperitoneal (I/P) injection of lipopolysaccharides (LPS)
with or without coinfusion of neutralizing anti-MIF or isotypic-matched
antibodies. Echocardiographic evaluation revealed that MIF neutralization
reversed endotoxin-induced myocardial dysfunction at 24 hours after injection.
RNase protection assay (RPA) and Western blot established that MIF neutralization
prevented LPS-induced mRNA expression and production of heart-derived
inflammatory paracrine and autocrine cytokines such as IL-1s and IL-6. Moreover, 
MIF immunoneutralization increased heart Bcl-2/Bax protein ratio and suppressed
endotoxin-induced release of mitochondrial cytochrome-c, as demonstrated by
Western blotting. Inhibition of mitochondrial loss of cytochrome-c decreased in
heart caspase-3 activity at 6 and 24 hours after injection. MIF neutralization
also restored the LPS-induced deficient nuclear translocation of phospho-Akt and 
consequently the expression of the heart survival nuclear factor GATA-4. The
restoration of the translocation/expression of survival factors by MIF inhibition
resulted in lowered endotoxin-induced DNA fragmentation at 24 hours, a hallmark
of downstream cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Our data indicate that early inactivation 
of MIF significantly reverses the imbalance of proapoptotic to prosurvival
pathways and reduces acute inflammation of the heart thereby improving myocardial
dysfunction induced by endotoxin.

PMID: 15879312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Med Genet. 2005 May;42(5):e32.

GATA4 zinc finger mutations as a molecular rationale for septation defects of the
human heart.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Hanover, Germany.

PMCID: PMC1736044
PMID: 15863664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2005 May 15;142(1-2):222-6. Epub 2005 Feb 5.

Determination of the expression pattern of the dual promoter of zebrafish fushi
tarazu factor-1a following microinjections into zebrafish one cell stage embryos.

von Hofsten J(1), Modig C, Larsson A, Karlsson J, Olsson PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The zebrafish fushi tarazu factor-1a (ff1a) is a transcription factor belonging
to the NR5A subgroup of nuclear receptors. The NR5A receptors bind DNA as
monomers and are considered to be orphans due to their ability to promote
transcription of downstream genes without ligands. In zebrafish, four ff1
homologues (Ff1a, Ff1b, Ff1c, and Ff1d) have been identified so far. The gene
coding for Ff1a is driven by two separate promoters, and give rise to four splice
variants. Ff1a is expressed in the somites and pronephric ducts during
somitogenesis and in the brain, liver, and mandibular arch during later embryonic
stages. In adults the gene is highly expressed in gonads, liver, and intestine,
but can be detected in most tissues. The broad variety of embryonic expression
domains indicates several important developmental features. One of the mammalian 
fushi tarazu factor-1 genes, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), is essential for the 
development of gonads and adrenals. SF-1 is together with Sox9, WT1, and GATA4 a 
positive transcriptional regulator of human anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) and
thereby linked to the male sex-determining pathway. The zebrafish ff1a dual
promoter contains several GATA binding sites and E-boxes, a site for DR4, XFD2,
MyoD, Snail, HNF3, S8, and an HMG-box recognition site for Sox9. In a first
attempt to dissect the ff1a promoter in vivo we have produced first generation
transgenes in order to determine the correlation between the expression of the
endogenous ff1a gene and the microinjected ff1a dual promoter coupled to the
pEGFP reporter vector. Our results show that the microinjected constructs are
expressed in the correct tissues.

PMID: 15862566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2463-74. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Tbx20 dose-dependently regulates transcription factor networks required for mouse
heart and motoneuron development.

Takeuchi JK(1), Mileikovskaia M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Heidt AB, Mori AD, Arruda
EP, Gertsenstein M, Georges R, Davidson L, Mo R, Hui CC, Henkelman RM, Nemer M,
Black BL, Nagy A, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8,
Canada.

To elucidate the function of the T-box transcription factor Tbx20 in mammalian
development, we generated a graded loss-of-function series by transgenic RNA
interference in entirely embryonic stem cell-derived mouse embryos. Complete
Tbx20 knockdown resulted in defects in heart formation, including hypoplasia of
the outflow tract and right ventricle, which derive from the anterior heart field
(AHF), and decreased expression of Nkx2-5 and Mef2c, transcription factors
required for AHF formation. A mild knockdown led to persistent truncus arteriosus
(unseptated outflow tract) and hypoplastic right ventricle, entities similar to
human congenital heart defects, and demonstrated a critical requirement for Tbx20
in valve formation. Finally, an intermediate knockdown revealed a role for Tbx20 
in motoneuron development, specifically in the regulation of the transcription
factors Isl2 and Hb9, which are important for terminal differentiation of
motoneurons. Tbx20 could activate promoters/enhancers of several genes in
cultured cells, including the Mef2c AHF enhancer and the Nkx2-5 cardiac enhancer.
The Mef2c AHF enhancer relies on Isl1- and Gata-binding sites. We identified a
similar Isl1 binding site in the Nkx2-5 AHF enhancer, which in transgenic mouse
embryos was essential for activity in a large part of the heart, including the
outflow tract. Tbx20 synergized with Isl1 and Gata4 to activate both the Mef2c
and Nkx2-5 enhancers, thus providing a unifying mechanism for gene activation by 
Tbx20 in the AHF. We conclude that Tbx20 is positioned at a critical node in
transcription factor networks required for heart and motoneuron development where
it dose-dependently regulates gene expression.

PMID: 15843409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Gen Physiol Biophys. 2004 Dec;23(4):417-22.

Retinoic acid increased expression of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger in the heart and
brain.

Hudecova S(1), Stefanik P, Macejova D, Brtko J, Krizanova O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Vlárska 5, 833 34 Bratislava 37, Slovakia.

The Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) is an important calcium transport system, which
regulates intracellular calcium homeostasis. In particular, NCX is highly
expressed in the plasma membrane of excitable neuronal and cardiac cells. We
report here that binding of retinoic acid enhances expression of the NCX1 in the 
rat cardiac atria, brain stem and hypothalamus, but not in cerebellum.
Differences in the regulation of the NCX1 by retinoic acid might suggest that
GATA4-retinoic acid inducible transcription factor is activated in the
hypothalamus and brain stem, but not in the cerebellum. Our results support the
idea that inducible transcription factors play an important role in the
fine-tuning of local tissue calcium homeostasis.

PMID: 15815076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 May 15;135(1):47-52.

Phenotypes with GATA4 or NKX2.5 mutations in familial atrial septal defect.

Hirayama-Yamada K(1), Kamisago M, Akimoto K, Aotsuka H, Nakamura Y, Tomita H,
Furutani M, Imamura S, Takao A, Nakazawa M, Matsuoka R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, The Heart Institute of Japan, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Recently, GATA4 and NKX2.5 were reported as the disease genes of atrial septal
defect (ASD) but the relationship between the locations of their mutations and
phenotypes is not clear. We analyzed GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in 16 familial
ASD cases, including four probands with atrioventricular conduction disturbance
(AV block) and two with pulmonary stenosis (PS), by PCR and direct sequencing,
and examined their phenotypes clinically. Five mutations, including two GATA4 and
three NKX2.5 mutations, were identified in 31.3% of the probands with ASD, and
three of them were novel. The two GATA4 mutations in the probands without AV
block were S52F and E359Xfs (c.1075delG) that was reported previously, and three 
NKX2.5 mutations in the probands with AV block were A88Xfs (c.262delG), R190C,
and T178M. Additionally, we observed some remarkable phenotypes, i.e.,
dextrocardia with E359Xfs (c.1075delG) and cribriform type ASD with R190C, both
of which are expected to be clues for further investigations. Furthermore,
progressive, most severe AV block was closely related with a missense mutation in
a homeodomain or with a nonsense/frame-shift mutation of NKX2.5 for which
classification has not been clearly proposed. This pinpoints essential sites of
NKX2.5 in the development of the conduction system.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15810002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21022-8. Epub 2005 Mar 26.

Hedgehog signaling induces cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a critical signaling factor for a variety of
developmental pathways during embryogenesis, including the specification of
left-right asymmetry in the heart. Mice that lack Hedgehog signaling show a delay
in the induction of cardiomyogenesis, as indicated by a delayed expression of
Nkx2-5. To further examine a role for Shh in cardiomyogenesis, clonal populations
of P19 cells that stably express Shh, termed P19(Shh) cells, were isolated. In
monolayer P19(Shh) cultures the Shh pathway was functional as shown by the
up-regulation of Ptc1 and Gli1 expression, but no cardiac muscle markers were
activated. However, Shh expression induced cardiomyogenesis following cellular
aggregation, resulting in the expression of factors expressed in cardiac muscle
including GATA-4, MEF2C, and Nkx2-5. Furthermore, aggregated P19 cell lines
expressing Gli2 or Meox1 also up-regulated the expression of cardiac muscle
factors, leading to cardiomyogenesis. Meox1 up-regulated the expression of Gli1
and Gli2 and, thus, can modify the Shh signaling pathway. Finally, Shh, Gli2, and
Meox1 all up-regulated BMP-4 expression, implying that activation of the Hedgehog
pathway can regulate bone morphogenetic protein signals. Taken together, we
propose a model in which Shh, functioning via Gli1/2, can specify mesodermal
cells into the cardiac muscle lineage.

PMID: 15793308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 May 25;1723(1-3):19-32. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Adult-type hypolactasia and regulation of lactase expression.

Troelsen JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, The Panum Institute,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
troelsen@imbg.ku.dk

A common genetically determined polymorphism in the human population leads to two
distinct phenotypes in adults, lactase persistence and adult-type hypolactasia
(lactase non-persistence). All healthy newborn children express high levels of
lactase and are able to digest large quantities of lactose, the main carbohydrate
in milk. Individuals with adult-type hypolactasia lose their lactase expression
before adulthood and consequently often become lactose intolerant with associated
digestive problems (e.g. diarrhoea). In contrast, lactase persistent individuals 
have a lifelong lactase expression and are able to digest lactose as adults.
Lactase persistence can be regarded as the mutant phenotype since other mammals
down-regulate their lactase expression after weaning (the postweaning decline).
This phenomenon does not occur in lactase persistent individuals. The regulation 
of lactase expression is mainly transcriptional and it is well established that
adult-type hypolactasia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, whereas
persistence is dominant. The recent findings of single nucleotide polymorphisms
associated with lactase persistence have made it possible to study the potential 
mechanisms underlying adult-type hypolactasia. This work has led to the
identification of gene-regulatory sequences located far from the lactase gene
(LCT). The present review describes the recent advances in the understanding of
the regulation of lactase expression and the possible mechanisms behind
adult-type hypolactasia.

PMID: 15777735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2673-87.

Phosphorylation-dependent degradation of p300 by doxorubicin-activated p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase in cardiac cells.

Poizat C(1), Puri PL, Bai Y, Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar St., CSC 245, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
poizat@usc.edu

p300 and CBP are general transcriptional coactivators implicated in different
cellular processes, including regulation of the cell cycle, differentiation,
tumorigenesis, and apoptosis. Posttranslational modifications such as
phosphorylation are predicted to select a specific function of p300/CBP in these 
processes; however, the identification of the kinases that regulate p300/CBP
activity in response to individual stimuli and the physiological significance of 
p300 phosphorylation have not been elucidated. Here we demonstrate that the
cardiotoxic anticancer agent doxorubicin (adriamycin) induces the phosphorylation
of p300 in primary neonatal cardiomyocytes. Hyperphosphorylation precedes the
degradation of p300 and parallels apoptosis in response to doxorubicin.
Doxorubicin-activated p38 kinases alpha and beta associate with p300 and are
implicated in the phosphorylation-mediated degradation of p300, as
pharmacological blockade of p38 prevents p300 degradation. p38 phosphorylates
p300 in vitro at both the N and C termini of the protein, and enforced activation
of p38 by the constitutively active form of its upstream kinase (MKK6EE) triggers
p300 degradation. These data support the conclusion that p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase regulates p300 protein stability and function in cardiomyocytes
undergoing apoptosis in response to doxorubicin.

PMCID: PMC1061628
PMID: 15767673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2622-31.

GATA6 is essential for embryonic development of the liver but dispensable for
early heart formation.

Zhao R(1), Watt AJ, Li J, Luebke-Wheeler J, Morrisey EE, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Several lines of evidence suggest that GATA6 has an integral role in controlling 
development of the mammalian liver. Unfortunately, this proposal has been
impossible to address directly because mouse embryos lacking GATA6 die during
gastrulation. Here we show that the early embryonic deficiency associated with
GATA6-knockout mice can be overcome by providing GATA6-null embryos with a
wild-type extraembryonic endoderm with the use of tetraploid embryo
complementation. Analysis of rescued Gata6-/- embryos revealed that, although
hepatic specification occurs normally, the specified cells fail to differentiate 
and the liver bud does not expand. Although GATA6 is expressed in multiple
tissues that impact development of the liver, including the heart, septum
transversum mesenchyme, and vasculature, all are relatively unaffected by loss of
GATA6, which is consistent with a cell-autonomous requirement for GATA6 during
hepatogenesis. We also demonstrate that a closely related GATA factor, GATA4, is 
expressed transiently in the prehepatic endoderm during hepatic specification and
then lost during expansion of the hepatic primordium. Our data support the
proposal that GATA4 and GATA6 are functionally redundant during hepatic
specification but that GATA6 alone is available for liver bud growth and
commitment of the endoderm to a hepatic cell fate.

PMCID: PMC1061656
PMID: 15767668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19682-8. Epub 2005 Mar 13.

Acetylation of GATA-4 is involved in the differentiation of embryonic stem cells 
into cardiac myocytes.

Kawamura T(1), Ono K, Morimoto T, Wada H, Hirai M, Hidaka K, Morisaki T, Heike T,
Nakahata T, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, Japan.

Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into cardiac myocytes requires
activation of a cardiac-specific gene program. Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs) govern gene expression patterns by being
recruited to target genes through association with specific transcription
factors. One of the HATs, p300, serves as a coactivator of cardiac-specific
transcription factors such as GATA-4. The HAT activity of p300 is required for
acetylation and DNA binding of GATA-4 and its full transcriptional activity as
well as for promotion of a transcriptionally active chromatin configuration.
However, the roles of HATs and HDACs in post-translational modification of GATA-4
during the differentiation of ES cells into cardiac myocytes remain unknown. In
an ES cell model of developing embryoid bodies, an acetylated form of GATA-4 and 
its DNA binding increased concomitantly with the expression of p300 during the
differentiation of ES cells into cardiac myocytes. Treatment of ES cells with
trichostatin A (TSA), a specific HDAC inhibitor, induced acetylation of
histone-3/4 near GATA sites within the atrial natriuretic factor promoter. In
addition, TSA augmented the increase in an acetylated form of GATA-4 and its DNA 
binding during the ES cell differentiation. Finally, TSA facilitated the
expression of green fluorescence protein under the control of the
cardiac-specific Nkx-2.5 promoter and of endogenous cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain during the differentiation. These findings demonstrate that acetylation of 
GATA-4 as well as of histones is involved in the differentiation of ES cells into
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 15764815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Dev Dyn. 2005 May;233(1):20-8.

Endothelin-1 and Neuregulin-1 convert embryonic cardiomyocytes into cells of the 
conduction system in the mouse.

Patel R(1), Kos L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL
33199, USA.

The cells that form the cardiac conduction system (CCS) are recruited from
embryonic cardiomyocytes. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) and Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) have been 
associated with this transition in the avian and murine systems, respectively. We
established murine embryonic cardiomyocyte cultures induced or not with ET-1
and/or NRG-1 to compare the expression of cardiomyocyte and CCS-specific genes.
Semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis showed 
that cardiomyogenesis and CCS-specific markers, such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, Irx4,
Connexin 40, Connexin 45, HF-1b, and MinK, were up-regulated in the presence of
either growth factor. Additionally, immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that
ET-1 or NRG-1 increased the number of cells expressing the Purkinje
fiber-specific marker Connexin 40 in induced cultures but did not selectively
increase their proliferation rate. Interestingly, additive effects were not
observed in ET-1 and NRG-1 combination treatments. Among other possibilities,
this observation suggests that these factors may interact to promote the
differentiation of the murine CCS.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15759273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Transplantation. 2005 Mar 15;79(5):528-35.

Human amniotic mesenchymal cells have some characteristics of cardiomyocytes.

Zhao P(1), Ise H, Hongo M, Ota M, Konishi I, Nikaido T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ Regeneration, Institute of Organ Transplants,
Reconstructive Medicine and Tissue Engineering, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cellular cardiomyoplasty (CCM) is a major method for the treatment of
heart failure because adult cardiomyocytes do not regenerate after ischemic
injury, which results in heart failure. There is a great deal of interest in
finding suitable new cell sources for use in CCM. Here, we report that human
amniotic mesenchymal cells (hAMC), which are multipotent cells derived from fetal
mesoderm, may be a suitable cell source for CCM.
METHODS: Freshly isolated hAMC were examined to detect the expression of
cardiac-specific genes by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and
immunocytochemistry. hAMC were cocultivated with neonatal rat heart explants and 
transplanted into myocardial infarcts in the rat heart.
RESULTS: hAMC expressed cardiac-specific transcription factor GATA4,
cardiac-specific genes, such as myosin light chain (MLC)-2a, MLC-2v, cTnI, and
cTnT, and the alpha-subunits of the cardiac-specific L-type calcium channel
(alpha1c) and the transient outward potassium channel (Kv4.3). After stimulation 
with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) or activin A, hAMC expressed Nkx2.5, a
specific transcription factor for the cardiomyocyte and cardiac-specific marker
atrial natriuretic peptide. In addition, the cardiac-specific gene alpha-myosin
heavy chain was detected after treatment with activin A. Coculture experiments
confirmed that hAMC were able to both integrate into cardiac tissues and
differentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells. After transplantation into the
myocardial infarcts in rat hearts, hAMC survived in the scar tissue for at least 
2 months and differentiated into cardiomyocyte-like cells.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study suggest that hAMC possess some
characteristics of cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 15753841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;65(5):1619-26.

Gene expression profiles in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia reflect the
effects of Hedgehog signaling on pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Prasad NB(1), Biankin AV, Fukushima N, Maitra A, Dhara S, Elkahloun AG, Hruban
RH, Goggins M, Leach SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Invasive pancreatic cancer is thought to develop through a series of noninvasive 
duct lesions known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). We used cDNA 
microarrays interrogating 15,000 transcripts to identify 49 genes that were
differentially expressed in microdissected early PanIN lesions (PanIN-1B/2)
compared with microdissected normal duct epithelium. In this analysis, a cluster 
of extrapancreatic foregut markers, including pepsinogen C, MUC6, KLF4, and TFF1,
was found to be up-regulated in PanIN. Up-regulation of these genes was further
validated using combinations of real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry in a total of 150 early PanIN lesions
from 81 patients. Identification of these gastrointestinal transcripts in human
PanIN prompted assessment of other foregut markers by both semiquantitative and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, revealing similar up-regulation of Sox-2,
Gastrin, HoxA5, GATA4/5/6, Villin and Forkhead 6 (Foxl1). In contrast to frequent
expression of multiple gastric epithelial markers, the intestinal markers
intestinal fatty acid binding protein, CDX1 and CDX2 were rarely expressed either
in PanIN lesions or in invasive pancreatic cancer. Hedgehog pathway activation
induced by transfection of immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells 
with Gli1 resulted in up-regulation of the majority of foregut markers seen in
early PanIN lesions. These data show frequent up-regulation of foregut markers in
early PanIN lesions and suggest that PanIN development may involve
Hedgehog-mediated conversion to a gastric epithelial differentiation program.

PMID: 15753353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18403-10. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Regulation of sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase gene expression by members of the
GATA family of transcription factors.

Oskouian B(1), Mendel J, Shocron E, Lee MA Jr, Fyrst H, Saba JD.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California 94609-1673
and California Institute of Technology, Division of Biology, Pasadena, California
91125, USA.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate is a bioactive sphingolipid that regulates proliferation,
differentiation, migration, and apoptosis. Sphingosine-1-phosphate is
irreversibly degraded by the highly conserved enzyme sphingosine-1-phosphate
lyase. Recent studies have suggested that sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase
expression affects animal development and cell fate decisions. Despite its
crucial role, mechanisms affecting expression of sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase
remain poorly understood. In this study, regulation of sphingosine-1-phosphate
lyase gene expression was investigated in Caenorhabditis elegans, where lyase
expression is spatially restricted to cells of the developing and adult gut and
is essential for normal development. Deletion analysis and generation of
transgenic worms combined with fluorescence microscopy identified a
350-nucleotide sequence upstream of the ATG start site necessary for maximal
lyase expression in adult worms. Site-specific mutagenesis of a GATA
transcription factor-binding motif in the promoter led to loss of reporter
expression. Knockdown of the gut-specific GATA transcription factor ELT-2 by RNA 
interference similarly led to loss of reporter expression. ELT-2 interacted with 
the GATA factor-binding motif in vitro and was also capable of driving expression
of a Caenorhabditis elegans lyase promoter-beta-galactosidase reporter in a
heterologous yeast system. These studies demonstrate that ELT-2 regulates
sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase expression in vivo. Additionally, we demonstrate
that the human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase gene is regulated by a GATA
transcription factor. Overexpression of GATA-4 led to both an increase in
activity of a reporter gene as well as an increase in endogenous
sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase protein.

PMID: 15734735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16484-98. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Differences in gene expression between wild type and Hoxa1 knockout embryonic
stem cells after retinoic acid treatment or leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
removal.

Martinez-Ceballos E(1), Chambon P, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes encode a family of transcription factors that regulate
embryonic patterning and organogenesis. In embryos, alterations of the normal
pattern of Hox gene expression result in homeotic transformations and
malformations. Disruption of the Hoxa1 gene, the most 3' member of the Hoxa
cluster and a retinoic acid (RA) direct target gene, results in abnormal
ossification of the skull, hindbrain, and inner ear deficiencies, and neonatal
death. We have generated Hoxa1(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells (named Hoxa1-15)
from Hoxa1(-/-) mutant blastocysts to study the Hoxa1 signaling pathway. We have 
characterized in detail these Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells by performing microarray
analyses, and by this technique we have identified a number of putative Hoxa-1
target genes, including genes involved in bone development (e.g. Col1a1,
Postn/Osf2, and the bone sialoprotein gene or BSP), genes that are expressed in
the developing brain (e.g. Nnat, Wnt3a, BDNF, RhoB, and Gbx2), and genes involved
in various cellular processes (e.g. M-RAS, Sox17, Cdkn2b, LamA1, Col4a1, Foxa2,
Foxq1, Klf5, and Igf2). Cell proliferation assays and Northern blot analyses of a
number of ES cell markers (e.g. Rex1, Oct3/4, Fgf4, and Bmp4) suggest that the
Hoxa1 protein plays a role in the inhibition of cell proliferation by RA in ES
cells. Additionally, Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells express high levels of various
endodermal markers, including Gata4 and Dab2, and express much less Fgf5 after
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. Finally, we propose a model in which
the Hoxa1 protein mediates repression of endodermal differentiation while
promoting expression of ectodermal and mesodermal characteristics.

PMID: 15722554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Mol Histol. 2005 Feb;36(1-2):15-24.

Epithelial lineages of the small intestine have unique patterns of GATA
expression.

Dusing MR(1), Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, College of
Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The ability of the GATA family of factors to interact with numerous other
factors, co-factors, and repressors suggests that they may play key roles in
tissues and cells where they are expressed. Adult mouse small intestine has been 
shown to express GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6, where they have been implicated in
the activation of a number of intestinal genes. Determination of which GATA
factor(s) are involved in a specific function in tissues expressing multiple
family members has proven difficult. The immunohistochemical analysis presented
here demonstrate that within the mouse small intestine GATA-4/-5/-6 are found to 
be uniquely distributed among the various differentiated lineages of the
intestinal epithelium. Among differentiated cells GATA-4 is found only in the
villous enterocytes. GATA-5 is absent from enterocytes, but was found in the
remaining lineages: goblet, Paneth and enteroendocrine. Additionally, high levels
of GATA-6 are found in only one of these differentiated cell types, the
enteroendocrine lineage. The observed distribution suggests that the GATA factors
may have distinct roles in lineage allocation, lineage maintenance, and/or
terminal differentiation events in small intestine.

PMID: 15703995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Feb;25(2):190-4.

[Experimental study of differentiation of mouse bone marrow stromal stem cells
into progenitor cardiomyocyte in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Cai ZJ, Chen RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, General Hospital of Ji'nan Command,
Jinan 250031, China. zhywhzh@163.net

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possibility of inducing mouse bone marrow stromal
stem cells (MSCs) into progenitor cardiomyocytes in vitro.
METHODS: The MSCs were isolated by adhesion culture in vitro and flow cytometery 
was employed to identify the phenotypes of the cell passages. 5-azacytidine was
used to induce the stem cells to differentiate into cardiomyotes in the
experimental group, which were then detected by RT-PCR, semi-quantitative RT-PCR,
Western-blot analysis, electron microscopy and immunofluorescence technique.
RESULTS: The isolated subcultured MSCs displayed a fusiform cell-like morphology.
The MSCs were uniformly positive for CD29 and CD44 but negative for CD34 and
CD45, and after induction, they expressed cardiomyocyte-specific transcription
factors (NKx2-5/Csx and GATA4) and fetal ventricular cardiomyocyte-specific gene 
beta-myosin heavy chain, but not adult ventricular cardiomyocyte-specific gene
alpha-myosin heavy chain as detected by RT-PCR. Western blotting identified the
expressions of alpha-sarcomeric actin and desmin in the induced MSCs, with
myofilament formation observed under electron microscope. Compared with the
control group, the expression level of DNA methyltransferase mRNA was
significantly lowered in the experimental group as observed by semi-quantitative 
RT-PCR (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: MSCs are capable of differentiating into progenitor cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 15699003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Med Genet. 2005 Feb;42(2):e16.

Spectrum of atrial septal defects associated with mutations of NKX2.5 and GATA4
transcription factors.

Sarkozy A(1), Conti E, Neri C, D'Agostino R, Digilio MC, Esposito G, Toscano A,
Marino B, Pizzuti A, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)CSS Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, and CSS- Mendel Institute,
Rome, Italy.

PMCID: PMC1735979
PMID: 15689439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Pathol. 2005 Feb;205(3):397-407.

Stem cell activation sustains hereditary hypertrophy in hamster cardiomyopathy.

Fiaccavento R(1), Carotenuto F, Minieri M, Fantini C, Forte G, Carbone A,
Carosella L, Bei R, Masuelli L, Palumbo C, Modesti A, Prat M, Di Nardo P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Cardiologia Molecolare e Cellulare, Università di Roma Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Recent studies have documented the presence of stem cells within the myocardium
and their role in the repair of ischaemic injury. Nevertheless, the pathogenic
role of stem cells in non-ischaemic myocardial diseases, as well as the factors
potentially responsible for their activation, is still under debate. The present 
study demonstrates the presence of an increased number of c-kit positive,
MDR-positive, and Sca-1-positive stem cells within the myocardium of hereditary
delta-SG null hamsters, a spontaneously occurring model of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. When hamsters are 80 days old, ie at the 'hypertrophic' stage of 
the disease, but without haemodynamic overload, these cells associate with a
multitude of cells co-expressing c-kit, cMet, GATA4, or MEF-2, and proliferating 
myocytes co-expressing myosin heavy chain, telomerase, ki67 and cyclin B.
Furthermore, at the same animal age, the number of myocardial cells co-expressing
c-kit and Flk-1, and the number of capillary vessels, is also amplified. In order
to identify factors potentially responsible for stem cell activation, the
myocardial expression of HGF and cMet and HGF plasma levels were evaluated,
demonstrating their increase in 80-day-old delta-SG null hamsters. To demonstrate
the possible ability of HGF to induce stem cell differentiation,
bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells were challenged with HGF at the same
plasma concentration observed in vivo. HGF induced cMet phosphorylation, and
caused loss of stem cell features and overexpression of MEF-2, TEF1, and MHC. Our
results demonstrate that stem cell activation occurs within the cardiomyopathic
myocardium, very likely to maintain an efficient cardiac architecture. In this
context, elevated levels of HGF might play a role in induction of stem cell
commitment to the cardiomyocyte lineage and in cardioprotection through its
anti-apoptotic action. Consistently, when cytokine levels declined to
physiological concentrations, as in 150-day-old cardiomyopathic animals,
myocardial apoptosis prevailed, prejudicing cardiac function.

PMID: 15682436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):13195-202. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Cdx binding determines the timing of enhancer activation in postnatal duodenum.

Maier EA(1), Dusing MR, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

In mammalian intestine, adenosine deaminase (ADA) is expressed at high levels
only along the villi of the duodenal epithelium. A duodenum-specific enhancer
identified in the second intron of the human ADA gene controls this pattern of
expression. This enhancer faithfully recapitulates this expression pattern in
transgenic mice, when included in CAT reporter gene constructions. Multiple
binding sites for PDX-1 and GATA factors were previously identified within the
approximately 300-bp region that encompasses the enhancer. Mutation analyses
demonstrated that binding of PDX-1 and of GATA-4 was absolutely essential for
enhancer function. In the present study, we have identified additional enhancer
binding sites for Cdx factors, for YY1, and for NFI family members. Detailed EMSA
studies were used to confirm binding at these sites. This brings the number of
confirmed binding sites within the enhancer to thirteen, with five different
factors or family of factors contributing to the putative enhanceosome complex.
Mutation analysis was utilized to examine the specific roles of the newly
identified sites. Two sites were identified that bound both Cdx1 and Cdx2.
Mutations were identified in these two sites that completely and specifically
eliminated Cdx binding. In transgenic mice, these enhancer mutations dramatically
changed the developmental timing of enhancer activation (delaying it by 2-3
weeks) without affecting other aspects of enhancer function. In the chromatin
context of certain transgenic insertion sites, mutation of the two YY1 sites to
specifically ablate binding caused a delay in enhancer activation similar to that
observed with the Cdx mutations. No overt changes were observed from mutation of 
the NFI site.

PMID: 15677472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Development. 2005 Mar;132(5):987-97. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Myocardin is sufficient and necessary for cardiac gene expression in Xenopus.

Small EM(1), Warkman AS, Wang DZ, Sutherland LB, Olson EN, Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona Health Sciences 
Center, 1501 N. Campbell Avenue, PO Box 245044, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Myocardin is a cardiac- and smooth muscle-specific cofactor for the ubiquitous
transcription factor serum response factor (SRF). Using gain-of-function
approaches in the Xenopus embryo, we show that myocardin is sufficient to
activate transcription of a wide range of cardiac and smooth muscle
differentiation markers in non-muscle cell types. We also demonstrate that, for
the myosin light chain 2 gene (MLC2), myocardin cooperates with the zinc-finger
transcription factor Gata4 to activate expression. Inhibition of myocardin
activity in Xenopus embryos using morpholino knockdown methods results in
inhibition of cardiac development and the absence of expression of cardiac
differentiation markers and severe disruption of cardiac morphological processes.
We conclude that myocardin is an essential component of the regulatory pathway
for myocardial differentiation.

PMID: 15673566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):919-23.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in human adrenocortical tumors.

Kiiveri S(1), Liu J, Heikkilä P, Arola J, Lehtonen E, Voutilainen R, Heikinheimo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are expressed during normal
adrenocortical development in mice and humans, and in vitro studies have linked
them to adrenal steroidogenesis. GATA-4 is highly expressed in the adrenocortical
tumors of gonadectomized mice, whereas GATA-6 is down-regulated in the tumor
area. Based on these findings we studied GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression in 39 human
adrenocortical tumors using RT-PCR, Northern analysis and immunohistochemistry.
6/18 adenomas and 4/11 carcinomas were positive for GATA-4 mRNA. GATA-6 mRNA was 
expressed in 19/19 adenomas and 9/10 carcinomas, and GATA-6 immunoreactivity was 
remarkably lower in adrenocortical carcinomas than in adenomas (p < 0.05). Some
of the steroidogenically active human adrenocortical cells (NCI-H295R) were
weakly positive for GATA-4, whereas steroidogenically inactive cells (ACT-1) were
totally GATA-4 negative. In contrast, both cell lines expressed GATA-6. GATA
expression patterns similar to the animal models can thus be observed in human
adrenocortical tumors, but the pathophysiological significance of these findings 
remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 15666845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Development. 2005 Feb;132(4):763-74. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

GATA4, 5 and 6 mediate TGFbeta maintenance of endodermal gene expression in
Xenopus embryos.

Afouda BA(1), Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

The individual contributions of the three vertebrate GATA factors to endoderm
formation have been unclear. Here we detail the early expression of GATA4, 5 and 
6 in presumptive endoderm in Xenopus embryos and their induction of endodermal
markers in presumptive ectoderm. Induction of HNF3beta by all three GATA factors 
was abolished when protein synthesis was inhibited, showing that these inductions
are indirect. In contrast, whereas induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4 
and 5 was substantially reduced when protein synthesis was inhibited, induction
by GATA6 was minimally affected, suggesting that GATA6 is a direct activator of
these early endodermal genes. GATA4 induced GATA6 expression in the same assay
and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs), designed to knock down
translation of GATA6, blocked induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4,
suggesting that GATA4 induces these genes via GATA6 in this assay. All three GATA
factors were induced by activin, although GATA4 and 6 required lower
concentrations. GATA MOs inhibited Sox17alpha and HNF1beta induction by activin
at low and high concentrations in the order: GATA6>GATA4>GATA5. Together with the
timing of their expression and the effects of GATA MOs in vivo, these
observations identify GATA6 as the predominant GATA factor in the maintenance of 
endodermal gene expression by TGFbeta signaling in gastrulating embryos. In
addition, examination of gene expression and morphology in later embryos,
revealed GATA5 and 6 as the most critical for the development of the gut and the 
liver.

PMID: 15659482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):95-106. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Using the zebrafish model to study GATA transcription factors.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), McReynolds LJ, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Chanin Room 501, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The zebrafish is an established animal model system that profits from the
availability of strong experimental approaches in both genetics and embryology.
As a vertebrate, zebrafish can be used to model many aspects of human development
and disease. GATA transcription factors play important roles in the development
of many organ systems, including those for hematopoietic, cardiovascular,
reproductive, and gut-endoderm derived tissues. The six vertebrate GATA factors
are highly conserved in zebrafish at the level of sequence, expression pattern,
and function. The identification of mutants, establishment of transgenic GFP
reporter fish, and the ease of performing loss- and gain-of-function experiments 
have all contributed new insight into our understanding of the regulation and
function of GATA factors. We review recent advances toward this goal using the
zebrafish system with a focus on hematopoiesis and cardiogenesis, and suggest how
comparative genetics using the zebrafish genes might reveal core conserved
properties, as well as changes in gene function that reflect different
morphogenetic programs utilized by various vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 15659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):83-94. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

The roles of GATA-4, -5 and -6 in vertebrate heart development.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Loose M, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS.

The transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 are expressed very early in heart
tissue. Essential GATA sites have been detected in several cardiac genes and the 
cardiac GATA factors interact with a wide variety of cofactors which
synergistically increase gene expression. These multi-protein transcriptional
complexes confer promoter-specificity on the GATA factors and also on the more
broadly expressed cofactors. Here we summarise the data on these interactions and
represent the conclusions as a GATA factor-based genetic regulatory network for
the heart. Of the three cardiac GATAs, GATA-4 is by far the most extensively
studied, however, loss-of-function data question its presumed dominance during
heart development as opposed to hypertrophy.

PMID: 15659343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):71-81. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Regulation of GATA gene expression during vertebrate development.

Burch JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. john.burch@fccc.edu

GATA factors regulate critical events in hematopoietic lineages (GATA-1/2/3), the
heart and gut (GATA-4/5/6) and various other tissues. Transgenic approaches have 
revealed that GATA genes are regulated in a modular fashion by sets of enhancers 
that govern distinct temporal and/or spatial facets of the overall expression
patterns. Efforts are underway to resolve how these GATA gene enhancers are
themselves regulated in order to elucidate the genetic and molecular hierarchies 
that govern GATA expression in particular developmental contexts. These enhancers
also afford a raft of tools that can be used to selectively perturb and probe
various developmental events in transgenic animals.

PMID: 15659342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10716-20. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

CSX/Nkx2.5 modulates differentiation of skeletal myoblasts and promotes
differentiation into neuronal cells in vitro.

Riazi AM(1), Lee H, Hsu C, Van Arsdell G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery Research Rm. 7017, McMaster Bldg., The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, M5G 1X8 Ontario,
Canada. ali.riazi@sickkids.ca

CSX/Nkx2.5 transcription factor plays a pivotal role in cardiac development;
however, its role in development and differentiation of other organs has not been
investigated. In this study, we used C2C12 myoblasts and human fetal primary
myoblasts to investigate the function of Nkx2.5 in skeletal myogenesis. The
expression levels of Nkx2.5 decreased as C2C12 myoblasts elongated and fused to
form myotubes. The expression of human NKX2.5 in C2C12 myoblasts inhibited
myocyte differentiation and myotube formation, and up-regulated Gata4 and Tbx5
expression. The expression of NKX2.5 in terminally differentiated C2C12 myotubes 
resulted in a change in morphology and breakdown into smaller myotubes.
Furthermore, overexpression of NKX2.5 in C2C12 cells and primary cultures of
human fetal myoblasts led to differentiation of myoblasts into neuron-like cells 
and expression of neuronal markers. This study sheds light on the previously
unknown non-cardiac functions of Nkx2.5 transcription factor.

PMID: 15653675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Mar;70(3):271-7.

Expression of Sox8, Sf1, Gata4, Wt1, Dax1, and Fog2 in the mouse ovarian
follicle: implications for the regulation of Amh expression.

Salmon NA(1), Handyside AH, Joyce IM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
bgy8nas@leeds.ac.uk

Anti-Mullerian hormone (Amh) is expressed in the granulosa cells of growing and
preovulatory follicles in the mouse ovary where it acts to decrease
responsiveness to follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and plays a role in
inhibiting primordial follicle recruitment. Recently, co-culture of isolated
oocytes and granulosa cells has demonstrated that Amh expression is up-regulated 
in the presence of oocytes and, at preantral stages, this effect is dependent
upon close contact. In Sertoli cells, Amh expression is regulated by several
transcription factors including SOX9, SF1, GATA4, WT1, and DAX1, which, with the 
exception of SOX9, are also expressed in granulosa cells where GATA4 is known to 
up-regulate Amh expression antagonised by FOG2. Here, we demonstrate that Sox8,
which is closely related to Sox9 and encodes the protein SOX8 which can
transactivate Amh, is expressed in the postnatal mouse ovarian follicle but is
not co-expressed with Amh in the granulosa cells of preantral follicles. Sox8
expression was found only in the oocytes of preantral follicles and in the
oocytes, cumulus cells, and mural granulosa cells of preovulatory follicles.
Also, increased expression of Amh in granulosa cells co-cultured with oocytes was
not associated with increased mRNA levels of the transcription factors Sf1,
Gata4, Wt1, Dax1, or Fog2. These findings reveal Sox8 expression in the ovarian
follicle and show that oocyte regulation of Amh expression is not due to oocyte
regulation of Sf1, Gata4, Wt1, Dax1, or Fog2 expression in granulosa cells.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15625693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5909-16. Epub 2004 Dec 6.

Alternative usages of multiple promoters of the acetyl-CoA carboxylase beta gene 
are related to differential transcriptional regulation in human and rodent
tissues.

Oh SY(1), Lee MY, Kim JM, Yoon S, Shin S, Park YN, Ahn YH, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Project for
Medical Science, Institute of Genetic Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, 134 Shinchondong Seodaemungu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase beta (ACCbeta) is a critical enzyme in the regulation of
fatty acid oxidation and is dominantly expressed in the skeletal muscle, heart,
and liver. It has been established that two promoters, P-I and P-II, control the 
transcription of the ACCbeta gene. However, the precise mechanism involved in
controlling tissue-specific gene expression of ACCbeta is largely unknown yet. In
this study we revealed that promoter P-I, active in the skeletal muscle and heart
but not in the liver, could be activated by myogenic regulatory factors and
retinoid X receptors in a synergistic manner. Moreover, P-I was also activated
markedly by the cardiac-specific transcription factors, Csx/Nkx2.5 and GATA4.
These results suggest that the proper stimulation of P-I by these tissue-specific
transcription factors is important for the expression of ACCbeta according to the
tissue types. In addition, CpG sites around human exon 1a transcribed by P-I are 
half-methylated in muscle but completely methylated in the liver, where P-I is
absolutely inactive. In humans, the skeletal muscle uses P-II as well as P-I,
whereas only P-I is active in rat skeletal muscle. The proximal myogenic
regulatory factor-binding sites in human P-II, which are not conserved in rat
P-II, might contribute to this difference in P-II usage between human and rat
skeletal muscle. Hepatoma-derived cell lines primarily use another novel promoter
located about 3 kilobases upstream of P-I, designated as P-O. This study is the
first to explain the mechanisms underlying the differential regulation of ACCbeta
gene expression between tissues in living organisms.

PMID: 15590647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):7917-24.

Hypermethylation of the GATA genes in lung cancer.

Guo M(1), Akiyama Y, House MG, Hooker CM, Heath E, Gabrielson E, Yang SC, Han Y, 
Baylin SB, Herman JG, Brock MV.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

PURPOSE: In lung cancer, DNA hypermethylation is known to be a common event.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression and methylation status of GATA-4, GATA-5,
and GATA-6 were analyzed with cell lines and primary human lung cancers.
Methylation profiles of primary lung cancers were analyzed and correlated with
clinical as well as histopathological data.
RESULTS: Complete methylation was detected by methylation-specific PCR for both
GATA-4 and GATA-5 in four cell lines (H358, DMS-53, A549, and H1299), all of
which had no expression by reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Demethylation with
5-aza-2'deoxycytidine restored expression in each case. GATA-6 was ubiquitously
expressed in all of the six cell lines. GATA-4 bisulfite sequencing revealed
complete methylation of the GATA-4 promoter in H358 cells, correlating well with 
its lack of expression at the mRNA level. Only a few CpG sites showed methylation
by bisulfite sequencing within the GATA-4 promoter in a cell line that expressed 
the gene. In 63 cases of primary lung cancers, GATA-4 and GATA-5 promoter
methylation was detected in (42 of 63) 67% and (26 of 63) 41%, respectively.
GATA-6 remained unmethylated both in cell lines and primary tumors. Six autopsy
specimens of normal lung tissue showed no aberrant promoter hypermethylation for 
the GATA genes. Correlation of concomitant GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation with
clinicopathological parameters only found a statistically significant increase in
methylation frequency with increasing patient age (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These epigenetic changes in the GATA genes in lung cancer are
tumor-specific, relate to the loss of GATA gene expression, and occur
increasingly in the elderly.

PMID: 15585625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4553-67. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Interleukin-18 is a pro-hypertrophic cytokine that acts through a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1-Akt-GATA4
signaling pathway in cardiomyocytes.

Chandrasekar B(1), Mummidi S, Claycomb WC, Mestril R, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229, USA. chanraseka@uthscsa.edu

In patients with congestive heart failure, high serum levels of the
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-18 were reported. A positive
correlation was described between serum IL-18 levels and the disease severity.
IL-18 has also been shown to induce atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene
expression in adult cardiomyocytes. Because re-expression of the fetal gene ANF
is mostly associated with hypertrophy, a hallmark of heart failure, we
hypothesized that IL-18 induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Treatment of the
cardiomyocyte cell line HL-1 with IL-18 induced hypertrophy as characterized by
increases in protein synthesis, phosphorylated p70 S6 kinase, and ribosomal S6
protein levels as well as cell surface area. Furthermore, IL-18 induced ANF gene 
transcription in a time-dependent manner as evidenced by increased ANF secretion 
and ANF promoter-driven reporter gene activity. Investigation into possible
signal transduction pathways mediating IL-18 effects revealed that IL-18
activates phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), an effect that was blocked by
wortmannin and LY-294002. IL-18 induced Akt phosphorylation and stimulated its
activity, effects that were abolished by Akt inhibitor or knockdown. IL-18
stimulated GATA4 DNA binding activity and increased transcription of a reporter
gene driven by multimerized GATA4-binding DNA elements. Pharmacological
inhibition or knockdown studies revealed that IL-18 induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy and ANF gene transcription via PI3K, PDK1, Akt, and GATA4. Most
importantly, IL-18 induced ANF gene transcription and hypertrophy of neonatal rat
ventricular myocytes via PI3K-, Akt-, and GATA4-dependent signaling. Together
these data provide the first evidence that IL-18 induces cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy via PI3K-dependent signaling, defines a mechanism of IL-18-mediated
ANF gene transcription, and further supports a role for IL-18 in inflammatory
heart diseases including heart failure.

PMID: 15574430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2004 Dec;37(6):1195-203.

GATA-4 regulation of myocardial survival in the preconditioned heart.

Suzuki YJ(1), Nagase H, Day RM, Das DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, NW403
Medical-Dental Building, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
ys82@georgetown.edu

Recent studies identified that GATA-4 is a stress responsive transcription factor
and can exert cell survival signaling in cardiac myocytes. The present study was 
designed to examine whether GATA-4 is modulated by ischemic preconditioning (PC),
and ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). PC of isolated rat hearts was elicited by
perfusing with Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate buffer with four cyclic episodes of 5 
min ischemia and 10 min reperfusion. Some hearts were then subjected to 30 min
ischemia followed by 2 h reperfusion. PC increased the DNA binding activity of
GATA-4 compared to control, while I/R downregulated GATA-4 expression. Activation
was associated with post-translational modifications of GATA-4 via acetylation.
As nitric oxide (NO) may be involved in PC and I/R, we examined whether NO could 
modulate GATA-4 in HL-1 cardiac muscle cells. An NO donor, sodium nitroprusside
(SNP), downregulated GATA activity and GATA-4 mRNA expression. We cloned the
5'-flanking region of human GATA-4 gene and found that the luciferase activity
controlled by this region was also suppressed by NO. A protein kinase G (PKG)
inhibitor KT5823 inhibited SNP-induced downregulation of GATA-4, while YC-1
(guanylyl cyclase activator) and dibutyryl cGMP (PKG activator) downregulated
GATA-4. Thus, GATA-4 is modulated by PC, I/R and NO, and might regulate cardiac
myocyte survival and apoptosis.

PMID: 15572049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):161-5.

Expression of Spgatae, the Strongylocentrotus purpuratus ortholog of vertebrate
GATA4/5/6 factors.

Lee PY(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California
Blvd, Mail Code 156-29, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Spgatae is the sea urchin ortholog of the vertebrate gata4/5/6 genes, as
confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. The accumulation of Spgatae transcripts
during embryonic development and the spatial pattern of expression are reported
here. Expression was first detected in the 15 h blastula. The number of Spgatae
RNA molecules increases steadily during blastula stages, with expression peaking 
during gastrulation. After gastrulation is complete, the level of expression
decreases until the end of embryogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization
showed that Spgatae transcripts were first detected in a ring of prospective
mesoderm cells in the vegetal plate. Spgatae expression then expands to include
the entire vegetal plate at the mesenchyme blastula stage. During gastrulation
Spgatae is expressed at the blastopore, and at prism stage strongly in the
hindgut and midgut but not foregut, and also in mesoderm cells at the tip of the 
archenteron. Towards the end of embryogenesis, expression in the hindgut
decreases. The terminal pattern of expression is in midgut plus coelomic pouches.

PMID: 15567710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10492-503.

Sox7 plays crucial roles in parietal endoderm differentiation in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells through regulating Gata-4 and Gata-6 expression.

Futaki S(1), Hayashi Y, Emoto T, Weber CN, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, Japanese Science and Technology Agency,
Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Yazako Nagakute-cho, Aichi-gun, Aichi
480-1195, Japan.

During early rodent development, the parietal endoderm appears from an inner cell
mass and produces large amounts of basement membrane components, such as
laminin-1 and collagen IV. To elucidate the regulatory network for gene
expression during these procedures, we constructed a series of short interfering 
RNA expression vectors targeted to various transcription factors, transfected
them into F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, and evaluated the effects of the gene
silencing on the induction of parietal endoderm differentiation and basement
membrane component production by treating F9 cells with all trans-retinoic acid
and dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Among the transcription factors tested, silencing of
Sox7 or combined silencing of Gata-4 and Gata-6 resulted in suppression of cell
shape changes and laminin-1 production, which are the hallmarks of parietal
endoderm differentiation. In cells silenced for Sox7, induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6 by retinoic acid and cyclic AMP treatment was inhibited, while induction
of Sox7 was not affected in cells silenced for Gata-4 and Gata-6, indicating that
Sox7 is an upstream regulatory factor for these Gata factors. Nevertheless,
silencing of Sox7 did not totally cancel the action of retinoic acid, since
upregulation of coup-tf2, keratin 19, and retinoic acid receptor beta2 was not
abolished in Sox7-silenced F9 cells. Although overexpression of Sox7 alone was
insufficient to induce parietal endoderm differentiation, overexpression of
Gata-4 or Gata-6 in Sox7-silenced F9 cells restored the differentiation into
parietal endoderm. Sox7 is therefore required for the induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6, and the interplay among these transcription factors plays a crucial role 
in parietal endoderm differentiation.

PMCID: PMC529033
PMID: 15542856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10151-60.

Jumonji represses atrial natriuretic factor gene expression by inhibiting
transcriptional activities of cardiac transcription factors.

Kim TG(1), Chen J, Sadoshima J, Lee Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300 University
Ave., Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Mice with a homozygous knockout of the jumonji (jmj) gene showed abnormal heart
development and defective regulation of cardiac-specific genes, including the
atrial natriuretic factor (ANF). ANF is one of the earliest markers of cardiac
differentiation and a hallmark for cardiac hypertrophy. Here, we show that JMJ
represses ANF gene expression by inhibiting transcriptional activities of Nkx2.5 
and GATA4. JMJ represses the Nkx2.5- or GATA4-dependent activation of the
reporter genes containing the ANF promoter-enhancer or containing the Nkx2.5 or
GATA4-binding consensus sequence. JMJ physically associates with Nkx2.5 and GATA4
in vitro and in vivo as determined by glutathione S-transferase pull-down and
immunoprecipitation assays. Using mutational analyses, we mapped the
protein-protein interaction domains in JMJ, Nkx2.5, and GATA4. We identified two 
DNA-binding sites of JMJ in the ANF enhancer by gel mobility shift assays.
However, these JMJ-binding sites do not seem to mediate ANF repression by JMJ.
Mutational analysis of JMJ indicates that the protein-protein interaction domain 
of JMJ mediates the repression of ANF gene expression. Therefore, JMJ may play
important roles in the down-regulation of ANF gene expression and in heart
development.

PMCID: PMC529025
PMID: 15542826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 17;325(3):952-60.

The murine Muc2 mucin gene is transcriptionally regulated by the zinc-finger
GATA-4 transcription factor in intestinal cells.

van der Sluis M(1), Melis MH, Jonckheere N, Ducourouble MP, Büller HA, Renes I,
Einerhand AW, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Paediatrics, Department of Gastroenterology and Nutrition,
Erasmus MC and Sophia Children Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

MUC2, the major mucin in the intestine, is expressed early during development and
shows an altered expression pattern in intestinal bowel diseases. However, the
mechanisms responsible for MUC2 expression in the intestine during these events
are largely unknown. Having found putative GATA binding sites in the murine Muc2 
promoter and that GATA-4 is expressed in Muc2-expressing goblet cells of the
mouse small intestine, we undertook to study its regulation by this transcription
factor. A panel of deletion mutants made in pGL3 vector and covering 2.2kb of the
promoter were used to transfect the murine CMT-93 colorectal cancer cell line.
The role of GATA-4 on Muc2 gene regulation was investigated by RT-PCR and
co-transfections in the presence of expression vectors encoding either wild-type 
or mutated GATA-4 or by mutating the GATA-4 site identified within Muc2 promoter.
Four GATA-4 cis-elements were identified in the promoter by EMSA and Muc2
promoter was efficiently activated when GATA-4 was overexpressed in the cells
with a loss of transactivation when those sites were either mutated or a mutated 
form of GATA-4 was used. Altogether, these results identify Muc2, a goblet cell
marker, as a new target gene of GATA-4 and point out an important role for this
factor in Muc2 expression in the intestine.

PMID: 15541382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Mar;19(3):759-70. Epub 2004 Nov 11.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factor Gata-4 is expressed in the
developing endocrine pancreas and activates glucagon gene expression.

Ritz-Laser B(1), Mamin A, Brun T, Avril I, Schwitzgebel VM, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit, University Hospital Geneva, 24, rue Micheli-du-Crest, CH-1211
Geneva 14, Switzerland.

Gene inactivation studies have shown that members of the Gata family of
transcription factors are critical for endoderm development throughout evolution.
We show here that Gata-4 and/or Gata-6 are not only expressed in the adult
exocrine pancreas but also in glucagonoma and insulinoma cell lines, whereas
Gata-5 is restricted to the exocrine pancreas. During pancreas development,
Gata-4 is expressed already at embryonic d 10.5 and colocalizes with early
glucagon+ cells at embryonic d 12.5. Gata-4 was able to transactivate the
glucagon gene both in heterologous BHK-21 (nonislet Syrian baby hamster kidney)
and in glucagon-producing InR1G9 cells. Using gel-mobility shift assays, we
identified a complex formed with nuclear extracts from InR1G9 cells on the G5
control element (-140 to -169) of the glucagon gene promoter as Gata-4. Mutation 
of the GATA binding site on G5 abrogated the transcriptional activation mediated 
by Gata-4 and reduced basal glucagon gene promoter activity in glucagon-producing
cells by 55%. Furthermore, Gata-4 acted more than additively with Forkhead box A 
(hepatic nuclear factor-3) to trans-activate the glucagon gene promoter. We
conclude that, besides its role in endoderm differentiation, Gata-4 might be
implicated in the regulation of glucagon gene expression in the fetal pancreas
and that Gata activity itself may be modulated by interactions with different
cofactors.

PMID: 15539431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Dec 1;64(3):402-11.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine Connexin40 promoter by cardiac factors
Nkx2-5, GATA4 and Tbx5.

Linhares VL(1), Almeida NA, Menezes DC, Elliott DA, Lai D, Beyer EC, Campos de
Carvalho AC, Costa MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Cardiologia Celular e Molecular-Instituto de Biofísica Carlos
Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 20941-900,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: Connexin40 (Cx40) is a gap junction protein expressed specifically in 
developing and mature atrial myocytes and cells of the conduction system. In this
report, we identify cis-acting elements within the mouse Cx40 promoter and
unravel part of the complex pathways involved in the cardiac expression of this
gene.
METHODS: To identify the factors involved in the cardiac expression of Cx40, we
used transient transfections in mammalian cells coupled with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Within the promoter region, we identified the minimal elements required 
for transcriptional activity within 150 base pairs (bp) upstream of the
transcriptional start site. Several putative regulatory sites for transcription
factors were predicted within this region by computer analysis, and we
demonstrated that the nuclear factors Sp1, Nkx2-5, GATA4 and Tbx5 could interact 
specifically with elements present in the minimal promoter region of the Cx40.
Furthermore, co-transfection experiments showed the ability of Nkx2-5 and GATA4
to transactivate the minimal Cx40 promoter while Tbx5 repressed
Nkx2-5/GATA4-mediated activation. Mutagenesis of the Nkx2-5 core site in the Cx40
promoter led to significantly decreased activity in rat smooth muscle cell line
A7r5. Consistent with this, mouse embryos lacking Nkx2-5 showed a marked decrease
in Cx40 expression.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we cloned the promoter region of the Cx40 and
demonstrated that the core promoter was modulated by cardiac transcriptional
factors Nkx2-5, Tbx5 and GATA4 acting together with ubiquitous Sp1.

PMCID: PMC3252638
PMID: 15537493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Circulation. 2004 Nov 16;110(20):3213-20. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

Mobilization of CD34/CXCR4+, CD34/CD117+, c-met+ stem cells, and mononuclear
cells expressing early cardiac, muscle, and endothelial markers into peripheral
blood in patients with acute myocardial infarction.

Wojakowski W(1), Tendera M, Michalowska A, Majka M, Kucia M, Maslankiewicz K,
Wyderka R, Ochala A, Ratajczak MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Third Division of Cardiology, Silesian School of Medicine, 45-47 Ziolowa St,
40-635 Katowice, Poland. wojwoj@mp.pl

Comment in
    Circulation. 2005 May 24;111(20):e307-8; author reply e307-8.
    Circulation. 2005 May 24;111(20):e307; author reply e307-8.
    Circulation. 2004 Nov 16;110(20):3158-60.

BACKGROUND: Adult stem cells can contribute to myocardial regeneration after
ischemic injury. Bone marrow and skeletal muscles contain a population of CXCR4+ 
cells expressing genes specific for muscle progenitor cells that can be mobilized
into the peripheral blood. The aims of the study were (1) to confirm the presence
of early tissue-committed cells expressing cardiac, muscle, and endothelial
markers in populations of mononuclear cells in peripheral blood and (2) to assess
the dynamics and magnitude of the mobilization of CD34+, CD117+, CXCR4+, c-met+, 
CD34/CD117+, and CD34/CXCR4+ stem cells into peripheral blood in relation to
inflammatory and hematopoietic cytokines in patients with ST-segment-elevation
acute myocardial infarction (STEMI).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty-six patients with STEMI (<12 hours), 39 with stable
angina, and 20 healthy control subjects were enrolled. Real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used for detection of
tissue-specific markers. The number of the cells was assessed by use of a flow
cytometer on admission, after 24 hours, and after 7 days. RT-PCR revealed
increased expression of mRNA (up to 3.5-fold increase) for specific cardiac
(GATA4, MEF2C, Nkx2.5/Csx), muscle (Myf5, Myogenin, MyoD), and endothelial
(VE-cadherin, von Willebrand factor) markers in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells. The number of CD34/CXCR4+ and CD34/CD117+ and c-met+ stem cells in
peripheral blood was significantly higher in STEMI patients than in stable angina
and healthy subjects, peaking on admission, without further significant increase 
after 24 hours and 7 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates in the setting of STEMI a marked mobilization
of mononuclear cells expressing specific cardiac, muscle, and endothelial markers
as well as CD34/CXCR4+ and CD34/CD117+ and c-met+ stem cells and shows that
stromal cell-derived factor-1 is an important factor influencing the
mobilization.

PMID: 15533859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Nature. 2004 Nov 4;432(7013):107-12.

Baf60c is essential for function of BAF chromatin remodelling complexes in heart 
development.

Lickert H(1), Takeuchi JK, Von Both I, Walls JR, McAuliffe F, Adamson SL,
Henkelman RM, Wrana JL, Rossant J, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

Comment in
    Nature. 2004 Nov 4;432(7013):29.

Tissue-specific transcription factors regulate several important aspects of
embryonic development. They must function in the context of DNA assembled into
the higher-order structure of chromatin. Enzymatic complexes such as the
Swi/Snf-like BAF complexes remodel chromatin to allow the transcriptional
machinery access to gene regulatory elements. Here we show that Smarcd3, encoding
Baf60c, a subunit of the BAF complexes, is expressed specifically in the heart
and somites in the early mouse embryo. Smarcd3 silencing by RNA interference in
mouse embryos derived from embryonic stem cells causes defects in heart
morphogenesis that reflect impaired expansion of the anterior/secondary heart
field, and also results in abnormal cardiac and skeletal muscle differentiation. 
An intermediate reduction in Smarcd3 expression leads to defects in outflow tract
remodelling reminiscent of human congenital heart defects. Baf60c overexpressed
in cell culture can mediate interactions between cardiac transcription factors
and the BAF complex ATPase Brg1, thereby potentiating the activation of target
genes. These results reveal tissue-specific and dose-dependent roles for Baf60c
in recruiting BAF chromatin remodelling complexes to heart-specific enhancers,
providing a novel mechanism to ensure transcriptional regulation during
organogenesis.

PMID: 15525990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. FASEB J. 2005 Jan;19(1):155-7. Epub 2004 Oct 26.

Turning on stem cell cardiogenesis with extremely low frequency magnetic fields.

Ventura C(1), Maioli M, Asara Y, Santoni D, Mesirca P, Remondini D, Bersani F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Stem Cell Engineering, National Institute 
of Biostructures and Biosystems, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
cvent@libero.it

Modulation of stem cell differentiation is an important assignment for cellular
engineering. Embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate into cardiomyocytes, but
the efficiency is typically low. Here, we show that exposure of mouse ES cells to
extremely low frequency magnetic fields triggered the expression of GATA-4 and
Nkx-2.5, acting as cardiac lineage-promoting genes in different animal species,
including humans. Magnetic fields also enhanced prodynorphin gene expression, and
the synthesis and secretion of dynorphin B, an endorphin playing a major role in 
cardiogenesis. These effects occurred at the transcriptional level and ultimately
ensued into a remarkable increase in the yield of ES-derived cardiomyocytes.
These results demonstrate the potential use of magnetic fields for modifying the 
gene program of cardiac differentiation in ES cells without the aid of gene
transfer technologies and may pave the way for novel approaches in tissue
engineering and cell therapy.

PMID: 15507470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 31;279(53):55017-23. Epub 2004 Oct 25.

The N termini of Friend of GATA (FOG) proteins define a novel transcriptional
repression motif and a superfamily of transcriptional repressors.

Lin AC(1), Roche AE, Wilk J, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Members of the Friend of GATA (FOG) family of transcriptional co-factors are
required for the development of both the cardiovascular and hematopoietic
systems. FOG proteins physically interact with members of the GATA family of
transcriptional activators and modulate their activity. We have previously shown 
that FOG-2 can bind to the N-terminal zinc finger of GATA4 and, via this
interaction, repress GATA4-mediated transcriptional activation of various cardiac
promoters. In this report we further characterize the domain of FOG-2 necessary
for repression of GATA4 transcriptional activity. We show that FOG-2-mediated
repression is not blocked by the histone deacetylase inhibitor tricostatin A,
suggesting that FOG-2 repression of GATA4 occurs via a histone deacetylase
independent mechanism. N-terminal deletion mutants of FOG-2 revealed that the
first 12 amino acids of FOG-2 are necessary for FOG-2-mediated repression. Fusion
of these 12 amino acids to the DNA binding domain of GAL4 demonstrated that this 
region is sufficient to mediate transcriptional repression even when recruited to
a heterologous promoter. Single amino acid substitutions within this N-terminal
domain of FOG-2 defined the critical amino acid sequence as RRKQxxPxxI.
Interestingly, a search of the NCBI protein data base identified several other
partially characterized zinc finger transcriptional repressors from various
vertebrate species that contained this motif at their N terminus. Taken together,
these observations define a novel transcriptional repression motif and a
superfamily of zinc finger transcriptional repressors.

PMID: 15507435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Nov 30;227(1-2):31-40.

Expression of the GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcription factors in the fetal rat gonad 
and in the ovary during postnatal development and pregnancy.

Lavoie HA(1), McCoy GL, Blake CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, School of Medicine, 
University of South Carolina Columbia, SC 29208, USA. hlavoie@med.sc.edu

Immunohistochemical studies were undertaken to determine the distribution of
GATA-4 and GATA-6 in rat fetal gonad and the postnatal ovary during development
and pregnancy. In the undifferentiated gonad, GATA-4 was expressed in the somatic
cells of both sexes. After differentiation of the ovary and testis, GATA-4
expression continued in both ovarian and testicular somatic cells; whereas,
GATA-6 was expressed in both somatic and germ cells. In the ovary of postnatal
rats, granulosa and thecal cells of healthy follicles expressed both GATA
factors. In the adult rat, GATA-4 expression was lower in corpora lutea as
compared to follicles; whereas, GATA-6 was strongly expressed in both structures.
GATA-4 expression was greater in functional corpora lutea than regressing corpora
lutea. GATA-6 was expressed in both functional and regressing corpora lutea. In
all postnatal ovaries, the expression of P450scc localized with tissue expressing
GATA-4 and/or GATA-6, but GATA expression also occurred in P450scc negative
cells.

PMID: 15501582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Oct 29;226(1-2):51-7.

Transcription factor GATA-6 is expressed in the endocrine and GATA-4 in the
exocrine pancreas.

Ketola I(1), Otonkoski T, Pulkkinen MA, Niemi H, Palgi J, Jacobsen CM, Wilson DB,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, PO Box 63, Room B525b, 00014 University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 are zinc finger transcription factors that regulate gene
expression, differentiation, and cell proliferation in various tissues. These
factors have been implicated in the development of endodermal derivatives,
including epithelial cells in the yolk sac, lung, and stomach. In the present
study, we have characterized the expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 during
development of another endodermal derivative, the mouse pancreas, using a
combination of in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Neither GATA-4 nor
GATA-6 antigen was detected in E10.5 pancreatic epithelial buds expressing Pdx-1.
By E15.5, GATA-4 mRNA and protein were evident in developing pancreatic acini,
but not in ductal or endocrine cells of the pancreas; GATA-6 mRNA and protein
were present in both endocrine and exocrine cell precursors. In the newborn and
adult pancreas, GATA-4 protein was seen in acinar cells, while GATA-6 antigen was
found mainly in islet beta-cells. The amphicrine pancreatic AR42J-B13 cell line
was used to study the expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 during the differentiation 
of these cells towards an endocrine phenotype. Endocrine differentiation was
associated with marked increase in GATA-6 but not GATA-4 mRNA levels. We conclude
that GATA-4 is a marker of exocrine pancreatic differentiation, whereas GATA-6 is
a marker of endocrine pancreatic development.

PMID: 15489005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Dec 15;93(6):1255-66.

Cooperative activation of atrial naturetic peptide promoter by dHAND and MEF2C.

Zang MX(1), Li Y, Xue LX, Jia HT, Jing H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition & Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Laboratory of
Development Molecular Biology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 
China.

An intricate array of cell-specific multiprotein complexes participate in
programs of cell-specific gene expression through combinatorial interaction with 
different transcription factors and cofactors. The dHAND basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor, which is essential for heart development and extra
embryonic structures, is thought to regulate cardiomyocyte-specific gene
expression through combinatorial interactions with other cardiac-restricted
transcription factors such as GATA4 and NKX2.5. Here, we determine that dHAND
also interacts with the myocyte enhancer binding factor-2c (MEF2C) protein, which
belongs to MADS-box transcription factors and is essential for heart development.
dHAND and MEF2C synergistically activated expression of the atrial naturetic
peptide gene (ANP) in transfected HeLa cells. GST-pulldown and
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrate that full-length MEF2C protein is able to
interact with dHAND in vitro and in vivo, just like MEF2A and bHLH transcription 
factors MyoD in skeletal muscle cells. In addition, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSAs) demonstrate that MEF2C and dHAND do not influence each
other's DNA binding activity. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
in H9c2 cells we show that dHAND interact with MEF2C to form protein complex and 
bind A/T sequence in promoter of ANP. Taken together with previous observations, 
these results suggest the existence of large multiprotein transcriptional complex
with core DNA binding proteins that physically interact with other
transcriptional factors to form favorable conformation to potentiate
transcription.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15486975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54937-43. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

Hairy-related transcription factors inhibit GATA-dependent cardiac gene
expression through a signal-responsive mechanism.

Kathiriya IS(1), King IN, Murakami M, Nakagawa M, Astle JM, Gardner KA, Gerard
RD, Olson EN, Srivastava D, Nakagawa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Combinatorial actions of transcription factors in multiprotein complexes dictate 
gene expression profiles in cardiac development and disease. The Hairy-related
transcription factor (HRT) family of basic helix-loop-helix proteins is composed 
of transcriptional repressors highly expressed in the cardiovascular system.
However, it has remained unclear whether HRT proteins modulate gene expression
driven by cardiac transcriptional activators. Here, we have shown that HRT
proteins inhibit cardiac gene transcription by interfering with GATA
transcription factors that are implicated in cardiac development and hypertrophy.
HRT proteins inhibited GATA-dependent transcriptional activation of cardiac gene 
promoters such as the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) promoter.
Adenovirus-mediated expression of Hrt2 suppressed mRNA expression of ANF and
other cardiac-specific genes in cultured cardiomyocytes. Among various signaling 
molecules implicated in cardiomyocyte growth, constitutively active Akt1/protein 
kinase B alpha relieved Hrt2-mediated inhibition of GATA-dependent transcription.
HRT proteins physically interacted with GATA proteins, and the basic domain of
HRT was critical for physical association as well as transcriptional inhibition. 
These results suggest that HRT proteins may regulate specific sets of cardiac
genes by modulating the function of GATA proteins and other cardiac
transcriptional activators in a signal-dependent manner.

PMID: 15485867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Dev Biol. 2004 Nov 1;275(1):235-44.

GATA4 is a dosage-sensitive regulator of cardiac morphogenesis.

Pu WT(1), Ishiwata T, Juraszek AL, Ma Q, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
wpu@enders.tch.harvard.edu

Normal heart development is orchestrated by a set of highly conserved
transcription factors that includes GATA4, Nkx2-5, and Tbx5. Heterozygous
mutation of each of these genes causes congenital heart disease in humans. In
mouse models, haploinsufficiency for Nkx2-5 or Tbx5 resulted in an increased
incidence of structural heart disease, confirming that normal heart development
is sensitive to small changes in expression levels of Nkx2-5 and Tbx5. However,
mice haploinsufficient for GATA4 have not been reported to have cardiac
abnormalities. We generated two new GATA4 alleles, GATA4(H) and GATA4(flox).
GATA4(flox/flox) embryos expressed 50% less GATA4 protein in the heart and
survived normally. In contrast, GATA4(H/H) embryos expressed 70% less GATA4
protein in the heart and died between days 13.5 and 16.5 of gestation. These
embryos had common atrioventricular canal (CAVC), double outlet right ventricle
(DORV), hypoplastic ventricular myocardium, and normal coronary vasculature.
Myocardial hypoplasia was associated with diminished cardiomyocyte proliferation.
Hemodynamic measurements demonstrated that these embryos had normal systolic
function, severe diastolic dysfunction, and atrioventricular regurgitation.
Surprisingly, expression levels of the putative GATA4 target genes ANF, BNP,
MEF2C, Nkx2-5, cyclin D2, and BMP4 were unchanged in mutant hearts, suggesting
that GATA4 is not a dose-limiting regulator of the expression of these genes
during later stages of embryonic cardiac development. These data demonstrate that
multiple aspects of embryonic cardiac morphogenesis and function are exquisitely 
sensitive to small changes in GATA4 expression levels.

PMID: 15464586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Hepatol. 2004 Oct;41(4):545-50.

Basic fibroblast growth factor promotes the trans-differentiation of mouse bone
marrow cells into hepatic lineage cells via multiple liver-enriched transcription
factors.

Saji Y(1), Tamura S, Yoshida Y, Kiso S, Iizuka AS, Matsumoto H, Kawasaki T,
Kamada Y, Matsuzawa Y, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 B5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2004 Oct;41(4):673-6.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Evidence that bone marrow cells have trans-differentiating
potential to hepatocytes has been described in recent reports. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying this phenomenon is unclear. To address this issue,
we investigated the parameters involved in the trans-differentiation of bone
marrow cells into a hepatic lineage.
METHODS: Mouse BM cells were cultured in a collagen gel without or with growth
factors including basic fibroblast growth factor. The expression of
hepatocyte-specific markers, cholangiocyte-specific marker and liver-enriched
transcription factors was identified by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Basic fibroblast growth factor was found to be the most effective for
inducing albumin in cultured BM cells. Furthermore, on stimulation of basic
fibroblast growth factor, BM cells were found to express other
hepatocyte-specific markers and a cholangiocyte-specific marker. This conversion 
was found to be associated with the induction of transcription factors including 
hepatocyte nuclear factors and GATA family proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: We established an in vitro culture system in which mouse bone marrow
cells could trans-differentiate to hepatic lineage cells in response to growth
factors, without cell fusion. In particular, basic fibroblast growth factor has
the ability to induce the trans-differentiation into hepatic lineage cells from
BM cells.

PMID: 15464234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Apr;203(1):15-26.

Differential expression of claudin-2 along the human intestine: Implication of
GATA-4 in the maintenance of claudin-2 in differentiating cells.

Escaffit F(1), Boudreau F, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Claudins, and particularly claudin-2, are important regulatory components of
tight junction permeability. A better understanding of the involvement of
claudin-2 in intestinal barrier functions requires the characterization of its
distribution and regulation in the intestine. Interestingly, the claudin-2 gene
promoter harbors a number of similarities to that of sucrase-isomaltase, a marker
of enterocyte differentiation. We thus investigated the expression of claudin-2
in relation to the transcription factors CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in the
human intestine. The characterization of claudin-2 and the expression of the
above transcription factors were performed by immunofluorescence, Western blot,
and RT-PCR in the developing human intestinal epithelium. The functional role of 
CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 on claudin-2 regulation was also examined by ectopic
expression studies in intestinal cell models. Claudin-2 was detected in both
crypt and villus cells of the small intestine but restricted to undifferentiated 
crypt cells in the colon. CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were expressed along the entire
intestine whereas GATA-4 was undetectable in the colon. Accordingly, in the
colonic Caco-2 cell model, claudin-2 was found to be present only in
undifferentiated cells. Like in the colonic epithelium, GATA-4 was found to be
also lacking in Caco-2 cells while CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were present at
significant levels. Cotransfection experiments showed that the claudin-2 promoter
was activated by CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in a cooperative manner.
Furthermore, forced GATA-4 expression in Caco-2 cells enhances maintenance of
claudin-2 expression during differentiation. These observations suggest that
optimal claudin-2 expression in the gut relies on the presence of GATA-4,
suggesting a role for this factor in intestinal regionalization.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;23(9):572-85.

Subcellular and molecular mechanisms regulating anti-Müllerian hormone gene
expression in mammalian and nonmammalian species.

Lasala C(1), Carré-Eusèbe D, Picard JY, Rey R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas (CEDIE-CONICET), Hospital de Niños 
R. Gutiérrez, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is best known for its role as an inhibitor of the
development of female internal genitalia primordia during fetal life. In the
testis, AMH is highly expressed by Sertoli cells of the testis from early fetal
life to puberty, when it is downregulated by the action of testosterone, acting
through the androgen receptor, and meiotic spermatocytes, probably acting through
TNFalpha. Basal expression of AMH is induced by SOX9; GATA4, SF1, and WT1 enhance
SOX9-activated expression. When the hypothalamic-pituitary axis is active and the
negative effect of androgens and germ cells is absent, for example, in the fetal 
and neonatal periods or in disorders like androgen insensitivity, FSH upregulates
AMH expression through a nonclassical cAMP-PKA pathway involving transcription
factors AP2 and NFkappaB. The maintenance and hormonal regulation of AMH
expression in late fetal and postnatal life requires distal AMH promoter
sequences. In the ovary, granulosa cells express AMH from late fetal life at low 
levels; DAX1 and FOG2 seem to be responsible for negatively modulating AMH
expression. Particular features are observed in AMH expression in nonmammalian
species. In birds, AMH is expressed both in the male and female fetal gonads,
and, like in reptiles, its expression is not preceded by that of SOX9.

PMID: 15383177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Neurochem. 2004 Oct;91(1):88-98.

Multiple promoters drive tissue-specific expression of the human M muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor gene.

Krejci A(1), Bruce AW, Dolezal V, Tucek S, Buckley NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Prague, Czech Republic.

Despite the wealth of information on the functional and pharmacological
properties of the M2 muscarinic receptor, we know relatively little of structure 
and regulation of the M2 receptor gene. Here, we describe the organisation of the
human M2 gene and its promoters. Four exons are present in the 5' untranslated
region of the human M2 mRNA distributed over 146 kb on chromosome 7 which produce
eight different splice variants in the IMR-32 neuroblastoma cell line. The
unexpectedly large size of this gene indicates that transcription initiates much 
further upstream of the coding region than earlier studies had indicated. We
present evidence that there are three distinct human M2 promoters. Analysis of
endogenous transcripts revealed that promoter 2 is preferentially used in
neuroblastoma cells, whereas promoter 1 in cardiac cells. All promoters are
highly conserved across human, mouse, rat and pig. They contain multiple start
sites and none possess a TATA-box. In addition, we describe another M2 promoter
that is specific for rat. We show that GATA-4 transcription factor binds to two
sites within the regulatory regions of the M2 gene using reporter gene assays,
electromobility shift assays and mutational analysis.

PMID: 15379890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. IUBMB Life. 2004 May;56(5):277-80.

Dietary alpha-tocopherol affects differential gene expression in rat testes.

Rota C(1), Barella L, Minihane AM, Stöcklin E, Rimbach G.

Author information: 
(1)Hugh Sinclar Human Nutrition Unit, School of Food Biosciences, University of
Reading, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AP, UK.

Gene-chip technology was employed to study the effect of dietary vitamin E (VE)
on gene expression in rat testes. Male albino rats were fed with either a diet
deficient in VE or a standard diet containing VE. Differential gene expression
was monitored at five individual time-points over a period of 14 months with all 
animals individually profiled. Low VE intake resulted in the consistent
up-regulation of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase and GATA binding protein 4, both 
involved in testosterone synthesis. Cyclin D3, important in cell cycle
progression and Wilms tumor 1, related to cancer development, were also
up-regulated in the vitamin E deficient animals. This study demonstrates that low
dietary VE intake has long-term effects on gene expression in the testes. Our
data provides insights into the possible molecular mechanisms underlying the
beneficial effects of vitamin E on the male reproductive organ.

PMID: 15370891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2004 Oct;280(2):1036-45.

Transcriptional regulation of cardiac conduction system development: 2004 FASEB
cardiac conduction system minimeeting, Washington, DC.

Harris BS(1), Jay PY, Rackley MS, Izumo S, O'brien TX, Gourdie RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. harrisbs@musc.edu

The development of the complex network of specialized cells that form the
atrioventricular conduction system (AVCS) during cardiac morphogenesis occurs by 
progressive recruitment within a multipotent cardiomyogenic lineage.
Understanding the molecular control of this developmental process has been the
focus of recent research. Transcription factors representative of multiple
subfamilies have been identified and include members of zinc-finger subfamilies
(GATA4, GATA6 HF-1b), skeletal muscle transcription factors (MyoD), T-box genes
(Tbx5), and also homeodomain transcription factors (Msx2 and Nkx2.5). Mutations
in some of these transcription factors cause congenital heart disease and are
associated with cardiac abnormalities, including deficits within the AVCS. Mouse 
models that closely phenocopy known human heart disease provide powerful tools
for the study of molecular effectors of AVCS development. Indeed, investigations 
of the Nkx2.5 haploinsufficient mouse have shown that peripheral Purkinje fibers 
are significantly underrepresented. This piece of data corroborates our previous 
work showing in chick, mouse, and humans that Nkx2.5 is elevated in the
differentiating AVCS relative to adjacent working ventricular myocardial tissues.
Using the chick embryo as a model, we show that this elevation of Nkx2.5 is
transient in the network of conduction cells comprising the peripheral Purkinje
fiber system. Functional studies using defective adenoviral constructs, which
disrupt the normal variation in level of this gene, result in perturbations of
Purkinje fiber phenotype. Thus, the precise spatiotemporal regulation of Nkx2.5
levels during development may be required for the progressive emergence of gene
expression patterns specific to differentiated Purkinje fiber cells.

copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(19):8519-28.

Target gene-specific modulation of myocardin activity by GATA transcription
factors.

Oh J(1), Wang Z, Wang DZ, Lien CL, Xing W, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Myocardin is a transcriptional coactivator that regulates cardiac and smooth
muscle gene expression by associating with serum response factor. We show that
GATA transcription factors can either stimulate or suppress the transcriptional
activity of myocardin, depending on the target gene. Modulation of myocardin
activity by GATA4 is mediated by the physical interaction of myocardin with the
DNA binding domain of GATA4 but does not require binding of GATA4 to DNA.
Paradoxically, the transcription activation domain of GATA4 is dispensable for
the stimulatory effect of GATA4 on myocardin activity but is required for
repression of myocardin activity. The ability of GATA transcription factors to
modulate myocardin activity provides a potential mechanism for fine tuning the
expression of serum response factor target genes in a gene-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC516760
PMID: 15367672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(1):40-51.

Biochemical analyses of eight NKX2.5 homeodomain missense mutations causing
atrioventricular block and cardiac anomalies.

Kasahara H(1), Benson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. hkasahar@phys.med.ufl.edu

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(1):1-2.

OBJECTIVE: There has been considerable interest in understanding determinants of 
the diverse cardiac phenotypes associated with heterozygous NKX2.5 mutations. We 
hypothesized that analysis of functional properties of NKX2.5 mutant proteins
would result in the ability to classify mutations according to function in a
scheme that would help to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations. We analyzed
missense mutations in the conserved homeodomain.
METHODS: We studied in vitro biochemical characteristics, including nuclear
localization, DNA binding, transcriptional activation and protein-protein
interaction with transcriptional partners (GATA4, TBX5 and NKX2.5 itself), of
eight homeodomain missense mutations. Associated phenotypes include
atrioventricular (AV) block (98% penetrance), atrial septal defect (83%
penetrance), and additional varied heart malformations.
RESULTS: Mutations were present at varied homeodomain locations in the putative
nuclear localizing signal (1), helix 2 (1), a turn between helix 2 and 3 (1) and 
helix 3 (5); a spectrum of biochemical phenotypes was observed. All mutants
localized to the nuclei but some exhibited anomalous nuclear distribution. While 
all mutants exhibited markedly decreased DNA binding and reduced transcriptional 
activation, interaction with transcriptional partners was varied.
CONCLUSION: Each mutant protein had a unique spectrum of observed properties, but
our data show that while dominant negative properties could be demonstrated in
vitro, the best correlation with clinical phenotypes resulted from the markedly
reduced DNA binding shared by all eight homeodomain mutations. This suggests that
the principle determinant of the two most common phenotypes associated with
homeodomain missense mutations is the total dose of NKX2.5 capable of binding to 
DNA.

PMID: 15364612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49091-8. Epub 2004 Aug 27.

SUMO-1 modification activated GATA4-dependent cardiogenic gene activity.

Wang J(1), Feng XH, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Division of Cardiovascular Sciences,
Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Sumoylation, an important posttranslational modification process, is involved in 
regulating bioactivities of diverse proteins. GATA4, a cardiac-enriched dual zinc
finger transcription factor, plays a critical role in regulating
cardiac-specified genes. Here, we demonstrated that GATA4 is sumoylated by small 
ubiquitin-like modifier-1 (SUMO-1), which resulted in enhanced GATA4
transcriptional activity. We further revealed that lysine 366 of GATA4
constituted a major sumyolation site. Conversion of lysine 366 to arginine 366
resulted in reduced GATA4 nuclear occupation, suggesting that SUMO modification
may also modulate GATA4 nuclear localization. In GATA4 sumoylation, PIAS1 served 
as an E3 ligase and positively modulated GATA4 transactivation via its RING
finger domain. In the presence of SUMO-1 and/or PIAS1, GATA4 triggered the
activation of cardiogenic genes in pluripotent 10T1/2 fibroblast. GATA4 was
identified as a SUMO-1-targeted transcription factor and together with PIAS1 was 
shown to be a potent regulator of cardiac gene activity.

PMID: 15337742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Development. 2004 Oct;131(19):4709-23. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

SMAD-mediated modulation of YY1 activity regulates the BMP response and
cardiac-specific expression of a GATA4/5/6-dependent chick Nkx2.5 enhancer.

Lee KH(1), Evans S, Ruan TY, Lassar AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, 240 Longwood Avenue Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Prior work has indicated that BMP signals act in concert with FGF8, WNT11 and WNT
antagonists to induce the formation of cardiac tissue in the vertebrate embryo.
In an effort to understand how these signaling pathways control the expression of
key cardiac regulators, we have characterized the cis-regulatory elements of the 
chick tinman homolog chick Nkx2.5. We find that at least three distinct cardiac
activating regions (CARs) of chick Nkx2.5 cooperate to regulate early expression 
in the cardiac crescent and later segmental expression in the developing heart.
In this report, we focus our attention on a 3' BMP-responsive enhancer, termed
CAR3, which directs robust cardiac transgene expression. By systematic
mutagenesis and gel shift analysis of this enhancer, we demonstrate that
GATA4/5/6, YY1 and SMAD1/4 are all necessary for BMP-mediated induction and
heart-specific expression of CAR3. Adjacent YY1 and SMAD-binding sites within
CAR3 constitute a minimal BMP response element, and interaction of SMAD1/4 with
the N terminus of YY1 is required for BMP-mediated induction of CAR3. Our data
suggest that BMP-mediated activation of this regulatory region reflects both the 
induction of GATA genes by BMP signals, as well as modulation of the
transcriptional activity of YY1 by direct interaction of this transcription
factor with BMP-activated SMADs.

PMID: 15329343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Oct;82(10):688-95. Epub 2004 Aug 20.

Calcineurin independent development of myocardial hypertrophy in transgenic rats 
overexpressing the mouse renin gene, TGR(mREN2)27.

Diedrichs H(1), Mei C, Frank KF, Boelck B, Schwinger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Muscle Research and Molecular Cardiology, Department of
Internal Medicine III, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9, 50924
Cologne, Germany. Holger.Diedrichs@uni-koeln.de

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Oct;82(10):635-7.

Myocardial hypertrophy is an independent risk factor for development of heart
failure. The intracellular calcium homeostasis is altered in myocardial
hypertrophy, and recent studies in animal models have confirmed an interaction
between the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent calcineurin signaling cascade and
development of cardiac hypertrophy. There is evidence for the involvement of
various pathways in development of hypertrophy. A transgenic rat model
overexpressing the mouse renin gene, TGR(mREN2)27 has been shown to progress
profound cardiac hypertrophy, possibly due to a monogenetic disorder. However,
the exact mode of action is not known. To study a possible involvement of
calcineurin and its downstream pathway in development of cardiac hypertrophy in
this transgenic rat model we measured the protein expression of marker proteins
of the calcineurin cascade (calcineurin, NFAT-3, GATA-4) and calcineurin
phosphatase activity and GATA-4 DNA binding in TGR ( n=10) compared to
age-matched Sprague-Dawley rats ( n=10). In our study there was no significant
difference in calcineurin activity between the transgenic hearts and the hearts
of Sprague-Dawley rats. Furthermore, we found neither an increase in protein
expression of calcineurin B nor a rise in nuclear translocated NFAT-3 DU.
Interestingly, the protein expression of GATA-4 and its DNA binding activity were
significantly higher in hypertrophied myocardium than in control hearts. In
transgenic rats overexpressing the mouse renin gene and thereby developing
pronounced cardiac hypertrophy [TGR(mREN2)27] we thus found no activation of
calcineurin or its downstream pathway. However, the expression of the
transcriptional factor GATA-4 and its DNA binding activity were significantly
increased in hearts of transgenic rats. Thus GATA-4 seems to be a marker of
hypertrophy independently of calcineurin activation, possibly activated by
various pathways.

PMID: 15322704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12573-8. Epub 2004 Aug 13.

GATA4 is essential for formation of the proepicardium and regulates
cardiogenesis.

Watt AJ(1), Battle MA, Li J, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53202.

The role of GATA4 during the earliest stages of cardiogenesis has not been
defined because Gata4 knockout embryos suffer an early developmental arrest
caused by deficiencies in extraembryonic visceral endoderm function. We have used
tetraploid embryo complementation to rescue these defects and generated clonal
embryonic day 9.5 Gata4(-/-) embryos directly from embryonic stem cells.
GATA4-null embryos display heart defects characterized by disrupted looping
morphogenesis, septation, and a hypoplastic ventricular myocardium. We find that 
myocardial gene expression is relatively normal in GATA4-null hearts including
expression of GATA6. Moreover, GATA4 expression in the endocardium is dispensable
for trabeculae formation. Remarkably, the proepicardium is absent in GATA4-null
embryos, blocking formation of the epicardium. Therefore, we propose that the
observed myocardial defects may be a secondary consequence of loss of the
proepicardium. These findings definitively demonstrate a requirement for GATA4
during early cardiac development and identify an essential factor for generation 
of the proepicardium.

PMCID: PMC515098
PMID: 15310850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 9;32(14):4155-65. Print 2004.

GATA-4 and MEF2C transcription factors control the tissue-specific expression of 
the alphaT-catenin gene CTNNA3.

Vanpoucke G(1), Goossens S, De Craene B, Gilbert B, van Roy F, Berx G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department for Molecular Biomedical
Research, VIB-Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent-Zwijnaarde, Belgium.

AlphaT-catenin is a recently identified member of the alpha-catenin family of
cell-cell adhesion molecules. Its expression is restricted mainly to
cardiomyocytes, although it is also expressed in skeletal muscle, testis and
brain. Like other alpha-catenins, alphaT-catenin provides an indispensable link
between a cadherin-based adhesion complex and the actin cytoskeleton, resulting
in strong cell-cell adhesion. We show here that the tissue-specificity of
alphaT-catenin expression is controlled by its promoter region. By in silico
analysis, we found that the alphaT-catenin promoter contains several binding
sites for cardiac and muscle-specific transcription factors. By co-transfection
studies in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells, we demonstrated that MEF2C and GATA-4
each have an activating effect on the alphaT-catenin promoter. Transfections with
wild-type and mutant promoter constructs in cardiac HL-1 cells indicated that one
GATA box is absolutely required for high alphaT-catenin promoter activity in
these cells. Furthermore, we showed that the GATA-4 transcription factor
specifically binds and activates the alphaT-catenin promoter in vivo in cardiac
HL-1 cells. In vivo promoter analysis in transgenic mice revealed that the
isolated alphaT-catenin promoter region could direct the tissue-specific
expression of a LacZ reporter gene in concordance with endogenous alphaT-catenin 
expression.

PMCID: PMC514362
PMID: 15302915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Endocrinology. 2004 Nov;145(11):4957-66. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

In vivo and in vitro inhibition of cyp19 gene expression by prostaglandin F2alpha
in murine luteal cells: implication of GATA-4.

Stocco C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Science, Yale University
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. 208063, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, 
USA. carlos.stocco@yale.edu

A major function of the corpus luteum (CL) is to secrete progesterone. In rats,
this gland also produces significant amounts of 17beta-estradiol. Progesterone
and 17beta-estradiol are important regulators of rat luteal cell function.
Estrogen biosynthesis is catalyzed by P450aromatase (P450arom), which is encoded 
by the cyp19 gene. In the rat CL, P450arom is expressed throughout pregnancy
until the day before parturition, when it rapidly decreases. The mechanisms that 
control P450arom expression in luteal cells, particularly, the one or more
factors that cause its rapid fall before parturition, are not known. Inasmuch as 
prostaglandin (PG) F(2alpha) plays a key role in the regulation of luteal
function at the end of pregnancy, the purpose of this investigation was to
determine whether PGF(2alpha) affect the expression of P450arom in the CL before 
parturition. PGF(2alpha) decreased luteal P450arom mRNA and protein levels in
vivo and in vitro. A decrease in P450arom mRNA was also observed in mice CL just 
before parturition, but this change did not take place in PGF(2alpha) receptor
knockout mice. The time course of the decrease in P450arom mRNA by PGF(2alpha)
reflected the P450arom mRNA half-life determined by actinomycin D. Moreover,
nuclear run-on assay showed that PGF(2alpha) attenuates P450arom gene
transcription. Gel shift assays revealed that GATA-4 binds to the P450aromatase
promoter, and that such binding is increased by PGF(2alpha). It is concluded that
PGF(2alpha) decreases luteal P450arom mRNA levels at the end of pregnancy in
rodents by inhibiting cyp19 expression.

PMID: 15271885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2004 Apr;37(2):118-24.

[Cardiomyocyte-like differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
after exposure of 5-azacytidine in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao F(1), Niu LL, Meng L, Zhao LX, Zheng M, Yue W, Bai CX, Jia GL, Pei XT.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Transfusion medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

To investigate the potential of adult mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) derived from
human bone marrow to undergo cardiomyogenic differentiation after exposure of
5-azacytidine in vitro. A small bone marrow aspirate was taken from the iliac
crest of human volunteers, and hMSCs were isolated by 1.073 g/mL Percoll and
cultured in the right cell culturing medium as previously described. The
phonotypes of hMSCs were identified by flow cytometry. The stem cells were
cultured in cell culture medium (as control) and medium mixed with 5-azacytidine 
(5-aza, 3, 5, 10 micromol/L) (n=5, respectively) for cellular differentiation. We
examined respectively with immunohischemistry at 21 days of inducement on desmin,
cardiac-specific cardiac troponin I (cTnI), GATA4 & connexin43. The
ultrastructures of induced cells were examined by transmission electron
microscope. The results indicated that the hMSCs showed a fibroblast-like
morphology with vortex distribution in their peak propagation, and express high
level of CD44 but negative for CD34 and CD45. 20%-30% cells grown after 5, 10
microl/L 5-aza treatment connected with adjoining cells and coalesced into
myotube structures after 14 days. After 21 days of culturing,
immunohistochemistry revealed expression of desmin, GATA4, cTnI and connexin43 in
5, 10 micromol/L showed positive, but no cardiac specific protein were found in
neither 3 micromol/L nor in control group. The ratio of cTnI positive stained
cells in 10 micromol/L group were higher than that in 5 micromol/L group
(65.3+/-4.7% vs 48.2+/-5.4%, p<0.05). Electron microscopy revealed myofilaments
were formed. The results indicated that purified hMSCs from adult bone marrow can
be differentiated into cardiac-like muscle cells with 5-aza inducement in vitro
and the differentiation is in line with the 5-aza concentration.

PMID: 15259984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Oct;18(10):2553-69. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

Adrenocortical tumorigenesis in transgenic mice expressing the inhibin
alpha-subunit promoter/simian virus 40 T-antigen transgene: relationship between 
ectopic expression of luteinizing hormone receptor and transcription factor
GATA-4.

Rahman NA(1), Kiiveri S, Rivero-Müller A, Levallet J, Vierre S, Kero J, Wilson
DB, Heikinheimo M, Huhtaniemi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland.

We have analyzed the ontogeny and putative mechanisms of transregulation of LH
receptor (LHR) and transcription factor GATA-4, coexpressed during the
adrenocortical tumorigenesis of prepubertally gonadectomized transgenic (TG) mice
expressing the inhibin alpha-subunit promoter/simian virus 40 T-antigen
(inhalpha/Tag) transgene. The onset of adrenal LHR mRNA and protein expression
coincided with that of GATA-4 at the age of 4 months and preceded the appearance 
of discernible adrenal tumors at about 6 months. In situ hybridization and
double-immunohistochemistry demonstrated colocalization of the LHR and GATA-4
messages and proteins in the adrenal cortex. A GATA-4 expression plasmid
cotransfected with a murine LHR promoter-driven luciferase reporter plasmid,
containing a consensus GATA-binding site, induced a dose-dependent significant
transactivation of the LHR promoter in nonsteroidogenic human embryonic kidney
293, steroidogenic murine mLTC-1 Leydig cells and in murine adrenal Y-1 cells.
The Calpha1 cells derived from an Inhalpha/Tag adrenal tumor did not show this
response, apparently due to their high endogenous GATA-4 expression. However, an 
additional link between GATA-4 and LHR in Calpha1 cells was provided upon the
LH/human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation of LHR promoter activity; mutations
or deletion of the consensus GATA-4 binding site of the LHR promoter abolished
this transactivation. EMSAs further proved GATA-4 binding to the putative
consensus GATA recognition site. Our results demonstrate direct interrelationship
between LHR and GATA-4 expression during adrenocortical tumorigenesis of the
inhalpha/Tag mice. There is apparently a positive and reciprocal feed-forward
amplification link between LHR and GATA-4 expression. This mechanism gradually
and in synergy with Tag expression leads to formation of the LH-dependent
adrenocortical tumors.

PMID: 15256532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Development. 2004 Aug;131(16):3931-42. Epub 2004 Jul 14.

Mef2c is a direct transcriptional target of ISL1 and GATA factors in the anterior
heart field during mouse embryonic development.

Dodou E(1), Verzi MP, Anderson JP, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0130, USA.

The vertebrate heart forms initially as a linear tube derived from a primary
heart field in the lateral mesoderm. Recent studies in mouse and chick have
demonstrated that the outflow tract and right ventricle originate from a separate
source of mesoderm that is anterior to the primary heart field. The discovery of 
this anterior, or secondary, heart field has led to a greater understanding of
the morphogenetic events involved in heart formation; however, many of the
underlying molecular events controlling these processes remain to be determined. 
The MADS domain transcription factor MEF2C is required for proper formation of
the cardiac outflow tract and right ventricle, suggesting a key role in anterior 
heart field development. Therefore, as a first step toward identifying the
transcriptional pathways upstream of MEF2C, we introduced a lacZ reporter gene
into a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) encompassing the murine Mef2c locus 
and used this recombinant to generate transgenic mice. This BAC transgene was
sufficient to recapitulate endogenous Mef2c expression, and comparative sequence 
analyses revealed multiple regions of significant conservation in the noncoding
regions of the BAC. We show that one of these conserved noncoding regions
represents a transcriptional enhancer that is sufficient to direct expression of 
lacZ exclusively to the anterior heart field throughout embryonic development.
This conserved enhancer contains two consensus GATA binding sites that are
efficiently bound by the zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 and are
completely required for enhancer function in vivo. This enhancer also contains
two perfect consensus sites for the LIM-homeodomain protein ISL1. We show that
these elements are specifically bound by ISL1 and are essential for enhancer
function in transgenic embryos. Thus, these findings establish Mef2c as the first
direct transcriptional target of ISL1 in the anterior heart field and support a
model in which GATA factors and ISL1 serve as the earliest transcriptional
regulators controlling outflow tract and right ventricle development.

PMID: 15253934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Aug 1;63(2):196-207.

GATA transcription factors in the developing and adult heart.

Pikkarainen S(1), Tokola H, Kerkelä R, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, Biocenter
Oulu, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, FIN-90014 Oulu, Finland.

During the past decade, emerging evidence has accumulated of different nuclear
transcription factors in regulation of cardiac development and growth as well as 
in cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. GATA-4, -5 and -6 are zinc finger
transcription factors that are expressed in the developing heart and GATA-4 and
-6 continue expression in the adult cardiac myocytes. GATA-4 and -6 regulate
expression of several cardiac-specific genes, and during murine embryonic
development, GATA-4 is essential for proper cardiac morphogenesis. In support of 
this, mutations of gene for GATA-4 or for its cofactors have been associated with
human congenital heart disease. Pressure overload of the heart in vivo as well as
hypertrophic stimulation of cardiac myocytes in vitro provide adequate stimulus
for activation of GATA-4. Activity of GATA-4 transcription factor is subject to
regulation at the level of gene expression and through post-translational
modifications of GATA-4 protein. A number of genes induced during cardiac
hypertrophy possess functional GATA sites in their promoter region and
cardiac-specific overexpression of GATA-4 or -6 leads to cardiac hypertrophy. In 
addition, a pattern of interactions between GATA-4 and its numerous cofactors
have been identified, showing an increasing complexity in regulatory mechanisms. 
The present review discusses current evidence of the role and regulation of GATA 
transcription factors in the heart, with an emphasis in the GATA-4 and
development of cardiac hypertrophy.

Copyright 2004 European Society of Cardiology

PMID: 15249177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Med Genet. 2004 Jul;41(7):e97.

A novel GATA4 mutation completely segregated with atrial septal defect in a large
Japanese family.

Okubo A(1), Miyoshi O, Baba K, Takagi M, Tsukamoto K, Kinoshita A, Yoshiura K,
Kishino T, Ohta T, Niikawa N, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

PMCID: PMC1735839
PMID: 15235040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Vet Pathol. 2004 Jul;41(4):446-9.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is a marker of anaplasia in adrenocortical neoplasms 
of the domestic ferret (Mustela putorius furo).

Peterson RA 2nd(1), Kiupel M, Bielinska M, Kiiveri S, Heikinheimo M, Capen CC,
Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Box 8208, Washington University School of Medicine, 
660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Adrenocortical neoplasms are a common cause of morbidity in neutered ferrets.
Recently we showed that gonadectomized DBA/2J mice develop adrenocortical tumors 
that express transcription factor GATA-4. Therefore, we screened archival
specimens of adrenocortical neoplasms from neutered ferrets to determine whether 
GATA-4 could be used as a tumor marker in this species. Nuclear immunoreactivity 
for GATA-4 was evident in 19/22 (86%) of ferret adrenocortical carcinomas and was
prominent in areas exhibiting myxoid differentiation. Normal adrenocortical cells
lacked GATA-4 expression. Two other markers of adrenocortical tumors in
gonadectomized mice, inhibin-alpha and luteinizing hormone receptor, were
coexpressed with GATA-4 in some of the ferret tumors. No GATA-4 expression was
observed in three cases of nodular hyperplasia, but patches of anaplastic cells
expressing GATA-4 were evident in 7/14 (50%) of tumors classified as adenomas. We
conclude that GATA-4 can function as a marker of anaplasia in ferret
adrenocortical tumors.

PMID: 15232151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):37640-50. Epub 2004 Jun 25.

FOG-2 competes with GATA-4 for transcriptional coactivator p300 and represses
hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes.

Hirai M(1), Ono K, Morimoto T, Kawamura T, Wada H, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A multizinc finger protein, FOG-2, associates with a cardiac transcription
factor, GATA-4, and represses GATA-4-dependent transcription. GATA-4 is required 
not only for normal heart development but is also involved in hypertrophic
responses in cardiac myocytes; however, the effects of FOG-2 on these responses
are unknown. The interaction of GATA-4 with a transcriptional coactivator p300 is
required for its full transcriptional activity and the activation of the
embryonic program during myocardial cell hypertrophy. We show here that exogenous
FOG-2 represses phenylephrine-induced hypertrophic responses such as myofibrillar
organization, increases in cell size, and hypertrophy-associated gene
transcription. Using immunoprecipitation Western blotting, we demonstrate that
FOG-2 physically interacted with p300 and reduced the binding of GATA-4 to p300. 
In addition, in COS7 cells, in which the function of endogenous p300 is
disrupted, FOG-2 is unable to repress the GATA-4-dependent transcriptional
activities; however, FOG-2 markedly repressed the p300-mediated increase in the
DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of GATA-4 in these cells. Similarly,
FOG-2 inhibited a phenylephrine-induced increase in the p300/GATA-4 interaction, 
the GATA-4/DNA-binding, and transcriptional activities of GATA-4-dependent
promoters in cardiac myocytes as well. These findings demonstrate that FOG-2
represses hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes and that p300 is involved in
these repressive effects.

PMID: 15220332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Oct;18(10):2451-62. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 (SUMO-1) modification of the synergy control
motif of Ad4 binding protein/steroidogenic factor 1 (Ad4BP/SF-1) regulates
synergistic transcription between Ad4BP/SF-1 and Sox9.

Komatsu T(1), Mizusaki H, Mukai T, Ogawa H, Baba D, Shirakawa M, Hatakeyama S,
Nakayama KI, Yamamoto H, Kikuchi A, Morohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki 444-8787, Japan.

An orphan nuclear receptor, Ad4 binding protein/steroidogenic factor 1
(Ad4BP/SF-1), is essential for the development and function of steroidogenic
tissues. To examine the transcriptional regulation of Ad4BP/SF-1, two-hybrid
screening was performed, and the sumoylation [conjugation of a small
ubiqutin-like modifier (SUMO-1)] components Ubc9, protein inhibitor of activated 
STAT 1 (PIAS1), and protein inhibitor of activated STAT 3 (PIAS3) were isolated. 
Cultured cell and in vitro studies revealed that Ad4BP/SF-1 is sumoylated at K119
and K194. Because K194 lies within the synergy control (SC) motif defined to
repress synergistic transcription from promoters containing multiple binding
sites, correlation between the functions of the SC motif and sumoylation was
investigated. The K194R mutant of Ad4BP/SF-1, which cannot be sumoylated, showed 
enhanced synergistic transcription from a promoter containing multiple Ad4/SF-1
sites, suggesting that sumoylation is necessary for repression of transcriptional
synergy through the SC motif. It has been established that the Müllerian
inhibiting substance gene is transcribed predominantly under the control of
Ad4BP/SF-1 and, moreover, its transcription is regulated synergistically with
Sox9, Gata4, and Wt1. Interestingly, it was found that all of these factors are
sumoylated, and these sumoylation sites occur within SC motifs. Based on the
observation that SC motif mutants of Ad4BP/SF-1 and Sox9 resulted in the
enhancement of their synergistic transcription, it was concluded that the SC
motif regulates synergistic transcription even between distinct types of
transcription factors. Considering that both mutants cannot be sumoylated, it is 
likely that sumoylation is implicated in this regulation. Because it was revealed
with an in vitro sumoylated Ad4BP/SF-1 that DNA binding activity and interaction 
with Sox9 were unaffected, sumoylation may regulate transcription through
affecting selective and cooperative interaction among factors constituting
transcriptional complexes.

PMID: 15192080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Ann Genet. 2004 Apr-Jun;47(2):191-7.

Unbalanced translocation 8;Y (45,X,dic(Y;8)(q11.23;p23.1)): case report and
review of terminal 8p deletions.

Bosse K(1), Eggermann T, Van der Ven K, Raff R, Engels H, Schwanitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Bonn,
Germany.

A boy with a rare unbalanced de novo Y/autosome translocation is presented. Main 
clinical features in the boy comprised a psychomotor delay, talipes planus, a
dolichocephalus, low set and retroverted ears, supraorbital fullness of
subcutaneous tissue and a bulbous nasal tip. Chromosomal analysis on amniocytes
showed a single X chromosome and a derivative 8p (Karyotype: 45,X,der(8)GTG). The
following DAPI staining revealed the inactivated centromere of the chromosome Y
located on 8p and the absence of heterochromatic material Yq. Microsatellite
analysis on fetal blood DNA using markers between SRY on Yp and DYS 240 on Yq
proved presence of the spermatogenetic relevant factors. A terminal deletion of
8p was confirmed by FISH postnatally. Molecular genetic reassessment revealed the
monosomy 8p to be of maternal origin; the translocation can thus be proven to
have occurred in the zygote. The breakpoint in 8p was localised distal to GATA4, 
a gene which is involved in heart development; the finding that our patient did
not suffer from cardiac problems agrees with the disomic presence of GATA4. Only 
the application of FISH combined with microsatellite analysis allowed a precise
correlation between clinical phenotype and a subtle deletion of terminal 8p;
furthermore, a recurrence risk for the parents could be excluded.

PMID: 15183753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):G899-909. Epub 2004 Jun 
3.

Complex regulation of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter by GATA-4.

van Wering HM(1), Bosse T, Musters A, de Jong E, de Jong N, Hogen Esch CE,
Boudreau F, Swain GP, Dowling LN, Montgomery RK, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Free University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1081HV.

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH), a marker of intestinal differentiation, is
expressed in absorptive enterocytes on small intestinal villi in a tightly
regulated pattern along the proximal-distal axis. The LPH promoter contains
binding sites that mediate activation by members of the GATA-4, -5, and -6
subfamily, but little is known about their individual contribution to LPH
regulation in vivo. Here, we show that GATA-4 is the principal GATA factor from
adult mouse intestinal epithelial cells that binds to the mouse LPH promoter, and
its expression is highly correlated with that of LPH mRNA in jejunum and ileum.
GATA-4 cooperates with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha to synergistically 
activate the LPH promoter by a mechanism identical to that previously
characterized for GATA-5/HNF-1alpha, requiring physical association between
GATA-4 and HNF-1alpha and intact HNF-1 binding sites on the LPH promoter. GATA-4 
also activates the LPH promoter independently of HNF-1alpha, in contrast to
GATA-5, which is unable to activate the LPH promoter in the absence of
HNF-1alpha. GATA-4-specific activation requires intact GATA binding sites on the 
LPH promoter and was mapped by domain-swapping experiments to the zinc finger and
basic regions. However, the difference in the capacity between GATA-4 and GATA-5 
to activate the LPH promoter was not due to a difference in affinity for binding 
to GATA binding sites on the LPH promoter. These data indicate that GATA-4 is a
key regulator of LPH gene expression that may function through an evolutionarily 
conserved mechanism involving cooperativity with an HNF-1alpha and/or a
GATA-specific pathway independent of HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 15178553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5281-9.

Targeted inactivation of serum response factor in the developing heart results in
myocardial defects and embryonic lethality.

Parlakian A(1), Tuil D, Hamard G, Tavernier G, Hentzen D, Concordet JP, Paulin D,
Li Z, Daegelen D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Différenciation, Université Paris 7,
75005 Paris, France.

Serum response factor (SRF) is at the confluence of multiple signaling pathways
controlling the transcription of immediate-early response genes and
muscle-specific genes. There are active SRF target sequences in more than 50
genes expressed in the three muscle lineages including normal and diseased
hearts. However, the role of SRF in heart formation has not been addressed in
vivo thus far due to the early requirement of SRF for mesoderm formation. We have
generated a conditional mutant of SRF by using Cre-LoxP strategy that will be
extremely useful to study the role of SRF in embryonic and postnatal cardiac
functions, as well as in other tissues. This report shows that heart-specific
deletion of SRF in the embryo by using a new beta MHC-Cre transgenic mouse line
results in lethal cardiac defects between embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) and E13.5,
as evidenced by abnormally thin myocardium, dilated cardiac chambers, poor
trabeculation, and a disorganized interventricular septum. At E9.5, we found a
marked reduction in the expression of essential regulators of heart development, 
including Nkx2.5, GATA4, myocardin, and the SRF target gene c-fos prior to overt 
maldevelopment. We conclude that SRF is crucial for cardiac differentiation and
maturation, acting as a global regulator of multiple developmental genes.

PMCID: PMC419888
PMID: 15169892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. FASEB J. 2004 Jul;18(10):1096-8. Epub 2004 May 20.

Reoxygenation after severe hypoxia induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in vitro:
activation of CREB downstream of GSK3beta.

El Jamali A(1), Freund C, Rechner C, Scheidereit C, Dietz R, Bergmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

In vivo, left ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction involves
hypertrophy generally attributed to increased cardiac workload. We hypothesized
that hypoxia/reoxygenation directly induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and studied
several participating kinases and transcription factors in isolated
cardiomyocytes. Hypoxia for 6 h followed by 42 h reoxygenation induced
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy assessed by 3H leucine incorporation and
immunohistochemistry. Inhibition of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
serine/threonine kinase AKT, and ERK abolished reoxygenation-induced hypertrophy.
In addition, a beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2-AR) antagonist, as well as Gi
inhibitor pertussis toxin, blocked reoxygenation-induced hypertrophy. Hypoxia for
6 h increased transcription factors CREB, NF-kappaB, and GATA DNA binding
activities. However, only CREB DNA-binding was sustained during reoxygenation.
Inhibition of PI3-kinase, ERK, and PKA abrogated reoxygenation-induced CREB
DNA-binding without affecting CREB serine-133 phosphorylation. These same
pathways were found to regulate hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced GSK3beta kinase
activity and CREB serine-129 de-phosphorylation. GSK3beta mutants resistant to
phosphorylation blocked the stimulation of CRE-dependent transcription induced by
hypoxia/reoxygenation. Transfection of cardiomyocytes with a dominant-negative
mutant of CREB abrogated hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced hypertrophy. We suggest
that hypoxia/reoxygenation induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy through CREB
activation. Inactivation of GSK3beta by hypoxia/reoxygenation, possibly
integrating PI3-kinase and ERK pathways downstream of beta2-AR and ROS, is a
prerequisite for CRE-dependent transcription. Transient hypoxia may contribute to
cardiac hypertrophy in ischemic heart disease independent of cardiac workload.

PMID: 15155564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 1;172(11):7192-9.

A promoter haplotype of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motif-bearing FcgammaRIIb alters receptor expression and associates with
autoimmunity. II. Differential binding of GATA4 and Yin-Yang1 transcription
factors and correlated receptor expression and function.

Su K(1), Li X, Edberg JC, Wu J, Ferguson P, Kimberly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif-containing FcgammaRIIb
modulates immune function on multiple cell types including B cells,
monocytes/macrophages, and dendritic cells. The promoter for the human FCGR2B is 
polymorphic, and the less frequent 2B.4 promoter haplotype is associated with the
autoimmune phenotype of systemic lupus erythematosus. In the present study, we
demonstrate that the 2B.4 promoter haplotype of FCGR2B has increased binding
capacity for GATA4 and Yin-Yang1 (YY1) transcription factors in both B
lymphocytes and monocytes, and that overexpression of GATA4 or YY1 enhances the
FCGR2B promoter activity. The 2B.4 haplotype leads to elevated expression of the 
endogenous receptor in heterozygous donors by approximately 1.5-fold as assessed 
on EBV-transformed cells, primary B lymphocytes, and CD14(+) monocytes. This
increased expression accentuates the inhibitory effect of FcgammaRIIb on B cell
Ag receptor signaling, measured by Ca(2+) influx and cell viability in B cells.
Our results indicate that transcription factors GATA4 and YY1 are involved in the
regulation of FcgammaRIIb expression, and that the expression variants of
FcgammaRIIb lead to altered cell signaling, which may contribute to autoimmune
pathogenesis in humans.

PMID: 15153544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5848-55.

Integrase-specific enhancement and suppression of retroviral DNA integration by
compacted chromatin structure in vitro.

Taganov KD(1), Cuesta I, Daniel R, Cirillo LA, Katz RA, Zaret KS, Skalka AM.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Institute for Cancer Research, 333 Cottman Ave.,
Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497, USA.

Integration of viral DNA into the host chromosome is an obligatory step in
retroviral replication and is dependent on the activity of the viral enzyme
integrase. To examine the influence of chromatin structure on retroviral DNA
integration in vitro, we used a model target comprising a 13-nucleosome extended 
array that includes binding sites for specific transcription factors and can be
compacted into a higher-ordered structure. We found that the efficiency of in
vitro integration catalyzed by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integrase was decreased after compaction of this target with histone H1. In
contrast, integration by avian sarcoma virus (ASV) integrase was more efficient
after compaction by either histone H1 or a high salt concentration, suggesting
that the compacted structure enhances this reaction. Furthermore, although
site-specific binding of transcription factors HNF3 and GATA4 blocked ASV DNA
integration in extended nucleosome arrays, local opening of H1-compacted
chromatin by HNF3 had no detectable effect on integration, underscoring the
preference of ASV for compacted chromatin. Our results indicate that chromatin
structure affects integration site selection of the HIV-1 and ASV integrases in
opposite ways. These distinct properties of integrases may also affect target
site selection in vivo, resulting in an important bias against or in favor of
integration into actively transcribed host DNA.

PMCID: PMC415796
PMID: 15140982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004 Apr;259(1-2):163-8.

Intracellular signaling pathways for norepinephrine- and endothelin-1-mediated
regulation of myocardial cell apoptosis.

Iwai-Kanai E(1), Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Accumulating data support the idea that apoptosis in cardiac myocytes, in part,
contributes to the development of heart failure. Since a number of neurohormonal 
factors are activated in this state, these factors may be involved in the
positive and negative regulation of apoptosis in cardiac myocytes. Norepinephrine
is one such factor and induces apoptosis in cardiac myocytes via a
beta-adrenergic receptor pathway. beta-adrenergic agonist-induced apoptosis in
cardiac myocytes is dependent on the activation of the cAMP/protein kinase A
pathway. Interestingly, the activation of this pathway protects PC12 cells from
apoptosis, suggesting that cAMP/protein kinase A regulates apoptosis in a cell
type-specific manner. Another neurohormonal factor activated in heart failure is 
endothelin-1, which acts as a potent survival factor against myocardial cell
apoptosis. Intracellular signaling pathways for endothelin-1-mediated protection 
include activation of MEK-1 /ERK1/2 and PI3 kinase. In addition to these
protective pathways common among cell types, endothelin- activates the
calcium-activated phosphatase calcineurin, which is necessary for the nuclear
import of NFAT transcription factors. These factors interact with the
cardiac-restricted zinc finger protein GATA-4 and induce transcription and
expression of anti-apoptotic molecule bcl-2. Thus, myocardial cell apoptosis is
regulated by pathways unique to cardiac myocytes as well as by those common among
cell types. It should be further determined whether agents that specifically
block myocardial cell apoptosis will attenuate the progression of heart failure.

PMID: 15124920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. BMC Biotechnol. 2004 Apr 30;4:10.

Activation of the control reporter plasmids pRL-TK and pRL-SV40 by multiple GATA 
transcription factors can lead to aberrant normalization of transfection
efficiency.

Ho CK(1), Strauss JF 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 1355 Biomedical Research Building II/III, 421
Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. clement.ho@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: Members of the GATA transcription factor family have been used in
many transfection studies to investigate their roles in the regulation of gene
expression. To correct for variations in transfection efficiency, the Renilla
luciferase encoding plasmids pRL-TK and pRL-SV40 are commonly used as
normalization controls.
RESULTS: We report here that plasmids expressing GATA-4 or GATA-6 transcription
factor increased Renilla luciferase gene expression by 2 to 8 fold when
co-transfected with pRL-TK or pRL-SV40. This alteration of the control reporter
gene activity was shown to cause erroneous normalization of transfection
efficiency and thus misinterpretation of results in a transactivation assay. To
circumvent the problem, we generated two mutant control plasmids from which
putative GATA response elements were deleted. These deletions rendered pRL-SV40
unresponsive to GATA transcription factor stimulation and reduced the response of
pRL-TK. A database search also indicates that consensus GATA binding sequences
are present in other commercially available Renilla luciferase encoding plasmids;
therefore, the latter can potentially be transactivated by GATA transcription
factors.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these findings highlight the importance of the
selection of an appropriate control reporter plasmid for the normalization of
transfection efficiency.

PMCID: PMC416485
PMID: 15119957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 4;101(18):6975-80. Epub 2004 Apr 20.

Essential role of GATA-4 in cell survival and drug-induced cardiotoxicity.

Aries A(1), Paradis P, Lefebvre C, Schwartz RJ, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada H2W 1R7.

In recent years, significant progress has been made in understanding
cardiomyocyte differentiation. However, little is known about the regulation of
myocyte survival despite the fact that myocyte apoptosis is a leading cause of
heart failure. Here we report that transcription factor GATA-4 is a survival
factor for differentiated, postnatal cardiomyocytes and an upstream activator of 
the antiapoptotic gene Bcl-X. An early event in the cardiotoxic effect of the
antitumor drug doxorubicin is GATA-4 depletion, which in turn causes
cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Mouse heterozygotes for a null Gata4 allele have
enhanced susceptibility to doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Genetic or pharmacologic
enhancement of GATA-4 prevents cardiomyocyte apoptosis and drug-induced
cardiotoxicity. The results indicate that GATA-4 is an antiapoptotic factor
required for the adaptive stress response of the adult heart. Modulation of
survival/apoptosis genes by tissue-specific transcription factors may be a
general paradigm that can be exploited effectively for cell-specific regulation
of apoptosis in disease states.

PMCID: PMC406451
PMID: 15100413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2004 Apr;71(2):102-9.

Cardiac abnormalities induced by zinc deficiency are associated with alterations 
in the expression of genes regulated by the zinc-finger transcription factor
GATA-4.

Duffy JY(1), Overmann GJ, Keen CL, Clegg MS, Daston GP.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Cardiothoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229, USA. jodie.duffy@cchmc.org

Zinc (Zn) deficiency during pregnancy results in a wide variety of developmental 
abnormalities. The objective of this study was to determine if expression of
cardiac developmental genes regulated by Zn-finger transcription factors could be
modulated during dietary Zn deficiency. Rats were fed 0.5 (low Zn) or 90
(controls) microg Zn/g diet throughout pregnancy. Fetal development was examined 
and RNA isolated at gestation day (GD) 13 and 20. Cardiac abnormalities were
detected at GD 20 in 82% of fetuses from dams fed low Zn diets compared with only
2% in controls. Cardiac developmental gene expression regulated by the Zn-finger 
transcription factor, GATA-4, was measured by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In GD 13 and 20 hearts, two
genes critical for heart development, alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC) and
cardiac troponin I (cTnI), were down-regulated in Zn-deficient fetuses.
Expression of alpha-MHC was 66 and 40% lower at GD 13 and 20, respectively, in
fetuses from dams fed low Zn diets compared with fetuses from control dams
(p<0.05). Fetal cardiac TnI RNA levels were reduced 40 and 45% at GD 13 and 20 in
the Zn-deficient group compared with controls (p<0.05). Fetal cardiac transcript 
levels of GATA-4 and MHox, a gene regulated by a helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, whose expressions are not Zn-dependent, were unaffected by diet. These
data indicated that alterations in gene regulation might be an underlying
mechanism of cardiac abnormalities. Dysfunction of other Zn-dependent
transcription factors may be an integral part of the extensive teratogenesis
associated with Zn deficiency.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15098203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 May;19(3):205-10.

Molecular genetics of atrioventricular septal defects.

Maslen CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Heart Research Center, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, 97239, USA. maslenc@ohsu.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Atrioventricular septal defects (AVSDs) occur as a clinical
feature of several different syndromes, as autosomal dominant defects, and as
sporadically occurring malformations. Consequently, it is clear that there is
genetic heterogeneity, but until recently, little else was known about the genes 
involved in the pathogenesis of AVSD. Recent advances in understanding the
molecular genetic basis of AVSD are reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Atrioventricular septal defect is most often found associated
with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), but the responsible gene or genes on chromosome 
21 have not been identified. However, promising candidates exist, and the current
status of those efforts is presented. AVSD not associated with trisomy 21 usually
occurs as a sporadic trait with no indication of the genetic basis. The discovery
of cysteine rich with EGF domains (CRELD) 1 as the first recognized genetic risk 
factor for AVSD provides new insight into the genetic basis of sporadically
occurring AVSD and the potential for genetic overlap with syndromic AVSD.
Mutation of CRELD1 increases susceptibility to AVSD but is not alone sufficient
to cause the defect, indicating that AVSD is multigenic. Consequently, additional
genes must be identified to understand the genetic basis of AVSD.
SUMMARY: Because most nonsyndromic cases of AVSD are sporadic, opportunities for 
genetic analyses in humans are limited. An abundance of candidate genes have been
identified through animal models and biochemical studies, but determining which
actually contribute to the pathogenesis of AVSD will be difficult. Painstaking
investigation of these candidate genes in humans may ultimately be necessary to
identify the remaining genetic risk factors for AVSD.

PMID: 15096951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28564-73. Epub 2004 Apr 13.

SOX7 and GATA-4 are competitive activators of Fgf-3 transcription.

Murakami A(1), Shen H, Ishida S, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. amurakam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Fgf-3 is expressed in a dynamic and complex spatiotemporal pattern during mouse
development. Previous studies identified GATA-4 as a transcription factor that
binds the key regulatory element PS4A of the Fgf-3 promoter and stimulates
transcription. Here we show that members of the SOX family of transcription
factors also bind PS4A and differentially modulate transcription. At least five
SOX genes, Sox2, Sox6, Sox7, Sox13, and Sox17, were expressed in F9 cells, and of
these, Sox7 and Sox17 were dramatically induced in parallel with Fgf-3 following 
differentiation into parietal endoderm-like cells with retinoic acid and
dibutyryl cAMP. Complexes could be detected on PS4A with SOX2, SOX7, and SOX17 by
using nuclear extracts from differentiated F9 cells. However, only Sox7
expression markedly activated the Fgf-3 promoter in these cells. By contrast,
SOX2 was a poor activator of Fgf-3 transcription, and when Sox2 was coexpressed
with Gata4, it negatively modulated the strong activation mediated by GATA-4.
More detailed analyses showed that SOX7 competes with GATA-4 for PS4A occupancy
and to activate the Fgf-3 promoter. In situ hybridization analysis showed that
Sox7 is co-expressed with Fgf-3 and Gata4 in the parietal endoderm of E7.5 mouse 
embryos. In culture, GATA-4-deficient embryonal stem cells were shown to express 
Fgf-3 upon differentiation into embryoid bodies, although at lower levels than
were found in wild type embryonal stem cells. This Fgf-3 expression was virtually
abolished when Sox7 expression was suppressed by RNA interference. These results 
show that SOX7 is a potent activator of Fgf-3 transcription.

PMID: 15082719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 Mar;19(2):110-5.

Genetic basis of congenital heart disease.

Gelb BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York 10029, USA. bruce.gelb@mssm.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although the care of infants and children with congenital
heart defects has been revolutionized over the past 50 years, their underlying
causes have been obscure. Recent progress, accelerated through the Human Genome
Project, has resulted in the rapid identification of disease genes causing
congenital heart defects.
RECENT FINDINGS: In this review, progress in identifying new congenital heart
defect genes for specific lesions and in understanding their disease pathogenesis
in the past year are detailed. Specifically, genes relevant for atrial and
atrioventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus, bicuspid aortic valve,
and coarctation of the aorta as well as pulmonary valvar and branch stenosis are 
reviewed.
SUMMARY: The information in this review provides insights into the
state-of-the-art knowledge about the molecular genetic causes of congenital heart
defects. It suggests that DNA testing may become standard for many forms of
congenital heart defects, improving clinicians' ability to anticipate
complications for their patients and predict recurrence risk for families of
children with congenital heart defects.

PMID: 15075735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Feb 12;214(1-2):107-15.

In vivo and in vitro constant expression of GATA-4 in mouse postnatal Sertoli
cells.

Imai T(1), Kawai Y, Tadokoro Y, Yamamoto M, Nishimune Y, Yomogida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science for Laboratory Animal Experimentation, Research
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

In the mammalian postnatal testis, the biochemical and structural features of
Sertoli cells change, depending on developmental stage and spermatogenic cycle,
to support efficient spermatogenesis. Consequently, basic transcription factors
that determine fundamental properties should be strictly maintained in postnatal 
Sertoli cells. We have confirmed that GATA-4 expression is kept at a constant
level in mouse Sertoli cells during postnatal development, and is also maintained
at a constant level in primary cultures, independent of treatment with hormones
or the addition of germ cell fractions. In transient transfection assays with the
testicular cell line TM3, established from Leydig cells, GATA-4 induced several
Sertoli cell-specific genes. In the Sertoli cell line TM4, and in Sertoli cells
in primary culture, GATA-4 slightly up-regulated these genes. These results
suggest that GATA-4 plays an important role in the regulation of Sertoli cell
function, and is exactly regulated in these cells.

PMID: 15062549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Endocrinology. 2004 Jul;145(7):3122-34. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Concerted regulation of the porcine steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene
promoter activity by follicle-stimulating hormone and insulin-like growth factor 
I in granulosa cells involves GATA-4 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta.

LaVoie HA(1), Singh D, Hui YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, Building 1,
University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, 
USA. hlavoie@med.sc.edu.

We previously demonstrated that FSH alone or in combination with IGF-I activated 
the porcine steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene promoter in a concerted
manner in primary cultures of granulosa cells. Studies were undertaken to further
delineate cis- and trans-acting elements of the porcine promoter and mechanisms
mediating FSH stimulation and its augmentation by IGF-I. Mutation of several
putative regulatory elements localized hormone-stimulated activity to the highly 
conserved GATA site and identified novel nucleotides downstream as a functional
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)beta site. In granulosa cell nuclear
extracts, GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta formed a high-molecular-weight complex with an
oligonucleotide spanning -76 to -32 bp of the porcine promoter. The intensity of 
this high-molecular-weight complex was increased in granulosa cell nuclear
extracts by treatment with FSH alone and was enhanced with the combination of FSH
and IGF-I at 2-3 h of treatment. GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta proteins were uniformly
expressed with all treatments at time points associated with increased DNA
binding. Treatment (2 h) with FSH alone or FSH + IGF-I increased phosphorylation 
of GATA-4 on a protein kinase A consensus site. The 38-kDa isoform of C/EBPbeta
exhibited greater phosphorylation with FSH + IGF-I treatment. Porcine luteal cell
nuclear extracts also demonstrated GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta binding to the -76 to -32
bp region of the promoter providing evidence for their cooperation in vivo. These
data indicate that GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta are both required for FSH +/- IGF-I
stimulation of the porcine steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene promoter
in homologous granulosa cell cultures.

PMID: 15059951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 4;279(23):24852-60. Epub 2004 Mar 29.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases p38 and ERK 1/2 mediate the wall stress-induced
activation of GATA-4 binding in adult heart.

Tenhunen O(1), Sármán B, Kerkelä R, Szokodi I, Papp L, Tóth M, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu,
P. O. Box 5000, FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-4 has been implicated as a critical
regulator of inducible cardiac gene expression and as a potential mediator of the
hypertrophic program. However, the precise intracellular mechanisms that regulate
the DNA-binding activity of GATA-4 are not fully understood. The aim of the
present study was to examine the role of mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38
kinase, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase, and c-Jun N-terminal
protein kinase) in the left ventricular wall stress-induced activation of GATA-4 
DNA binding in adult heart. Isolated perfused rat hearts were subjected to
increased left ventricular wall stress by inflating a balloon in the ventricle.
Gel mobility shift assays were used to analyze the transacting factors that
interact with the GATA motifs of the B-type natriuretic peptide promoter. The
left ventricular wall stress rapidly activated GATA-4 DNA binding and
significantly increased the levels of phosphorylated p38 kinase, extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase, and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase. The wall
stress-induced increase in the DNA-binding activity of GATA-4 was abolished both 
in the presence of the p38 inhibitor SB239063 and MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126. In
contrast, the inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase by CEP11004 had no
effect on the baseline or stretch-induced GATA-4 DNA binding. Moreover, GATA-4
DNA binding was up-regulated by mechanical stretch in the isolated rat atria via 
p38 and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase. In conclusion, the present
study demonstrates that both p38 and extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinase are required for the stretch-induced GATA-4 binding in intact heart.

PMID: 15051723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biochem. 2004 Feb;135(2):165-9.

Regulatory elements directing gut expression of the GATA6 gene during mouse early
development.

Sun-Wada GH(1), Kamei Y, Wada Y, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, The Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Mihogaoka 8-1, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047.

The GATA6 transcription factor, as well as GATA4 and GATA5, is expressed in a
variety of mammalian tissues including the precardiac mesoderm and endoderm, and 
gut-related organs. Genetic studies have also implicated GATA factors as
important regulators of gut endoderm development. Previously, we identified the
promoter and a cardiac-specific enhancer of mouse GATA6 [Sun-Wada et al. (2000)
J. Biochem. 127, 703-709], however, little is known about the regulatory elements
that govern GATA6 expression in the primitive gut. Here, we identified a distal
enhancer of the GATA6 gene directing expression in the gut by creating transgenic
mice. A sequence of approximately 200 bp between -8.0 kb and -7.8 kb contains
element(s) that enhance transcription in the gut during embryonic development,
when linked to the hsp68 promoter/lacZ fusion gene. Our results also show that
GATA6 expression is controlled by multiple regulatory regions including
cardiac-specific and gut-specific enhancers.

PMID: 15047717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23574-9. Epub 2004 Mar 24.

Butyric and retinoic mixed ester of hyaluronan. A novel differentiating
glycoconjugate affording a high throughput of cardiogenesis in embryonic stem
cells.

Ventura C(1), Maioli M, Asara Y, Santoni D, Scarlata I, Cantoni S, Perbellini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Stem Cell Engineering, National Institute 
of Biostructures and Biosystems, University of Bologna, I-40138 Bologna, Italy.
cvent@libero.it

Embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate into specialized cells, including
cardiac myocytes, but the efficiency is typically low and the process is
incompletely understood. Achieving a high throughput of cardiogenesis from
pluripotent cells is therefore a major requirement for future approaches in
cardiac cell therapy. Here, we developed a novel ester of hyaluronan linked to
both butyric and retinoic acid (HBR), coaxing pluripotent ES cells into a
cardiogenic decision. In mouse ES cells, HBR remarkably increased the expression 
of GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5, acting as cardiac lineage-promoting genes in different
animal species, including humans. HBR also enhanced prodynorphin gene expression 
and the synthesis and secretion of dynorphin B, an endorphin playing a major role
in ES cell cardiogenesis. These effects occurred at the transcriptional level.
HBR also primed the expression of cardiac-specific transcripts and highly
enhanced the yield of spontaneously beating ES-derived cardiomyocytes. These
results demonstrate the potential for chemically modifying the gene program of
cardiac differentiation in ES cells without the aid of gene transfer technologies
and may pave the way for novel approaches in tissue engineering and myocardial
regeneration.

PMID: 15044487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Anim Genet. 2004 Apr;35(2):154-5.

Mapping of the GATA4, NEIL2, FDFT1 genes and CTSB-associated microsatellites to
the centromeric region of BTA8.

Plis-Finarov A(1), Hudson H, Roe B, Ron M, Seroussi E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, The Volcani 
Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

PMID: 15025586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):20626-35. Epub 2004 Mar 10.

Interaction between hex and GATA transcription factors in vascular endothelial
cells inhibits flk-1/KDR-mediated vascular endothelial growth factor signaling.

Minami T(1), Murakami T, Horiuchi K, Miura M, Noguchi T, Miyazaki J, Hamakubo T, 
Aird WC, Kodama T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan. minami@med.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Recent evidence supports a role for GATA transcription factors as important
signal intermediates in differentiated endothelial cells. The goal of this study 
was to identify proteins that interact with endothelial-derived GATA
transcription factors. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (Hex) as a GATA-binding partner in
endothelial cells. The physical association between Hex and GATA was confirmed
with immunoprecipitation in cultured cells. Hex overexpression resulted in
decreased flk-1/KDR expression, both at the level of the promoter and the
endogenous gene, and attenuated vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated tube 
formation in primary endothelial cell cultures. In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, Hex inhibited the binding of GATA-2 to the flk-1/KDR 5'-untranslated
region GATA motif. Finally, in RNase protection assays, transforming growth
factor beta1, which has been previously shown to decrease flk-1 expression by
interfering with GATA binding activity, was shown to increase Hex expression in
endothelial cells. Taken together, the present study provides evidence for a
novel association between Hex and GATA and suggests that transforming growth
factor beta-mediated repression of flk-1/KDR and vascular endothelial growth
factor signaling involves the inducible formation of inhibitory Hex-GATA
complexes.

PMID: 15016828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 15;267(2):490-504.

T-box binding sites are required for activity of a cardiac GATA-4 enhancer.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

GATA-4 is a key regulator of a poorly understood cardiac morphogenetic program.
We used genomic regions of the GATA-4 gene to target GFP expression to the
developing heart of living fish. In these fish, GFP-expressing cells in the
lateral plate mesoderm form two tubes that migrate ventrally to fuse into a
linear heart tube. In addition, we find that a 14.8-kb fragment upstream of the
transcription initiation site targets expression to both chambers and the valves 
of the heart. Truncation of 7 kb of the distal sequences eliminates expression in
the atrium and the atrioventricular valve while expression is retained in the
ventricle and the bulboventricular valve. Within this 7-kb distal regulatory
region, we delineated a 1300-bp region with a cluster of consensus binding sites 
for T-box transcription factors. Mutation of these sequences significantly
reduces reporter gene expression in the heart. This provides the first evidence
that T-box factors function by directly regulating GATA-4 expression. Thus,
GATA-4 regulatory elements control gene expression differentially along the
rostro-caudal axis, and T-box binding elements in the GATA-4 promoter contribute 
to heart-specific expression.

PMID: 15013808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Eur J Heart Fail. 2004 Jan;6(1):3-9.

Increased regulatory activity of the calcineurin/NFAT pathway in human heart
failure.

Diedrichs H(1), Chi M, Boelck B, Mehlhorn U, Schwinger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Research and Molecular Cardiology, University of Cologne,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9, 50924 Cologne, Germany.

Erratum in
    Eur J Heart Fail. 2004 Oct;6(6):823. Mehlhorm, Uwe [corrected to Mehlhorn, Uwe].

BACKGROUND: Cardiac hypertrophy may initiate progression to a compromised cardiac
function. While the clinical consequences of hypertrophy are well understood,
only little is known about the underlying molecular pathways. As reported from
animal experiments, the Ca(2+)-calmodulin activated phosphatase calcineurin and
its downstream transcriptional effector NFAT have been implicated as transducers 
of the hypertrophic response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To study whether the calcineurin pathway is activated in
human heart failure, we investigated samples of human left ventricular myocardium
from patients with dilated (idiopathic) cardiomyopathy (DCM, NYHA IV, n=8) in
comparison with non-failing controls (NF, n=8). We not only analyzed the pathway 
by measuring the calcineurin activity, but also by determination of the protein
expression of the calcineurin B subunit and additional key markers of the
calcineurin signaling cascade (NFAT-3, GATA-4). Calcineurin enzymatic activity
was increased by 80% in human dilated cardiomyopathy compared with non-failing
human hearts (135.424+/-11.69 and 83.484+/-1.81 nmol Pi/min per microl). This was
in line with increased protein expression of calcineurin B in DCM (71.18+9.11 vs.
46.41+/-11.23 densitometric units (DU)/microg protein). In order to verify the
activated calcineurin pathway as described in animal models, we compared the
protein expression of NFAT-3 in homogenates within nuclear extracts. In nuclear
extracts the protein level of NFAT-3 was increased in dilated cardiomyopathy
compared with non-failing myocardium (104.01+/-8.85 vs. 71.47+/-8.79 DU/microg
protein). In contrast, in homogenates the expression of NFAT-3 was higher in the 
non-failing tissue indicating subcellular redistribution (19.56+/-3.36 vs.
25.84+/-3.16 DU/microg protein). The protein expression of GATA-4 was increased
in DCM (43.14+/-2.89 vs. 29.87+/-2.17 DU/microg protein).
CONCLUSIONS: In human heart failure (DCM) the calcineurin signaling pathway is
activated not only by an increased activity of calcineurin and expression of
GATA-4, but also by the shift from dephosphorylated NFAT-3 to the nucleus
indicating subcellular redistribution and regulatory activation.

PMID: 15012912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Jan 2;84(1):38-42.

[Migration and differentiation of exogenous rat mesenchymal stem cells engrafted 
into normal and injured hearts of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Niu LL(1), Zheng M, Cao F, Xie C, Li HM, Yue W, Gao YH, Bai CX, Zhu SJ, Pei XT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transfusion, Beijing Academy of Military Medicine, Beijing
100850, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of different microcircumstances on the
migration and differentiation of grafted rat mesenchymal stem cells (rMSC) in
host myocardium and the feasibility of treatment of myocardial infarction by
exogenous adult stem cells.
METHODS: rMSC were isolated from the femurs and tibiae of a male Wistar rat and
then purified, made into cell suspension, and labeled with DAPI. 35 female Wistar
rat were divided randomly into four groups: acute myocardial infarction control
group (AMI group, n = 10, the descending anterior branch of left coronary artery 
was ligated), acute myocardial infarction + rMSC transplantation group (AMI +
rMSC group, n = 10, 1 - 3 hours after the ligation DAPI-labeled rMSC were
injected into the peri-infarct tissues), normal heart + rMSC transplantation
group (normal heart + MSC group, n = 10, DAPI-labeled rMSC were injected into the
corresponding myocardium), and mono-nuclear cells transplantation group (AMI +
MNCS, n = 5 DAPI-labeled mononuclear cells were injected into he periinfarct
tissues). Ten weeks after the implantation, the rats were killed and their hearts
were harvested. Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the troponin, GATA-4 and
connexin-43.
RESULTS: No lymphocyte proliferation and immonologic rejection were seen in the
cardiac tissues of the rats implanted with rMSC. DAPI-labeled rMSC with blue
nuclei were distributed extensively in the myocardium of the AMI + rMSC group,
ovoid in shape and arranged in parallel with the cardiac muscle fibers, and were 
distributed sporadically like islands in the myocardium of the normal heart +
rMSC group, irregular in shape and not arranged in parallel with the cardiac
muscle fibers. No blue nucleus was seen in the cardiac tissues of the hearts
implanted with DAPI-labeled mononuclear cells. Troponin and GATA4 were positive
immunohistochemically in the implanted rMSC with blue nuclei and the host cardiac
muscle cells of the AMI group and AMI + rMSC group, however, were negative in the
implanted rMSC with blue nuclei and normal cardiac muscle cells of the normal
heart + rMSC group.
CONCLUSION: Purified rMSC are immunologically tolerable and can be used as donor 
cells for exogenous cells therapy. Capable of surviving and homing in both in
normal and injured hearts, exogenous rMSC migrate and differentiate into cardiac 
muscle cell-like cells in myocardium with infarction, however, not in normal
heart.

PMID: 14990157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2004 Jan;43(1):19-21.

[CaN-NFAT3 signal pathway: a crucial hinge relates Ca2+ signal with cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu SJ(1), Yang YJ, Yu LJ, Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xinqiao Hospital, the Third Military Medical
University; Chongqing 400037, China. 19321224@mail.tmmu.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of [Ca2+]i from different origins in the
course of myocardial hypertrophy mediated by CaN-NFAT3 signal transduction.
METHODS: The primarily cultured cardiomyocyte were irritated with angiotensin
(Ang) II and ryanodine (RY) which cause Ca2+ inflow and release respectively.
Then to observe the changes of CaN-NFAT3 pathway were then observed. Western
blotting was employed to semi-quantify CaN, NFAT3 and GATA4. The distribution of 
NFAT3 was shown with immunocytochemistry, (3)H-Leu incorporation was used as an
index of myocyte hypertrophy. Cyclosporin A (CsA) was applied to restrain
CaN-NFAT3 pathway as a kind of CaN-selective antagonist.
RESULTS: CaN, NFAT3, GATA4 expression significantly increased 1 and 3 days after 
the stimulation of cardiomyocytes with Ang II and RY (10(-7) mol/L) as compared
with that of a control group (P > 0.05) and (3)H-Leu incorporation distinctly
increased after Ang II and RY (10(-7) mol/L) stimulation (P > 0.05 versus control
group). On the first day of Ang II and RY stimulation, NFAT3 was shown mainly as 
intra-nuclear expression rather than cytoplasmic expression as seen in the
control group. All of the above effects were suppressed by CsA administration,
but they were rarely suppressed if CsA was not administered (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: It is shown that both Ca2+ inflow and release may activate CaN-NFAT3
signal pathway, which responds to increase of [Ca2+]i and is independent of its
origin, indicating the augment of [Ca2+]i may trigger CaN-NFAT3 signal
transduction and consequently induce myocyte hypertrophy. Moreover, CsA may
restrain the expression and activation of CaN-NFAT3 and protein synthesis of
myocytes in response to Ang II and RY stimulation.

PMID: 14990015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 May;18(5):1144-57. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 modulate tissue-specific transcription of the human gene for
P450c17 by direct interaction with Sp1.

Flück CE(1), Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Building MR IV, Room 207, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Cytochrome P450c17 catalyzes steroidogenic 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20 lyase
activities. Expression of the gene for P450c17 is cAMP dependent, tissue
specific, developmentally programmed, and varies among species. Binding of Sp1,
Sp3, and NF1-C (nuclear factor 1-C) to the first 227 bp of 5'flanking DNA
(-227/LUC) is crucial for basal transcription in human NCI-H295A adrenal cells.
Human placental JEG-3 cells contain Sp1, Sp3, and NF1, but do not express
-227/LUC, even when transfected with a vector expressing steroidogenic factor 1
(SF-1). Therefore, other factors are essential for basal expression of P450c17.
Deoxyribonuclease I footprinting and EMSAs identified a GATA consensus site at
-64/-58 and an SF-1 site at -58/-50. RT-PCR identified GATA-4, GATA-6, and SF-1
in NCI-H295A cells and GATA-2 and GATA-3, but not GATA-4, GATA-6, or SF-1 in
JEG-3 cells. Cotransfection of either GATA-4 or GATA-6 without SF-1 activated
-227/LUC in JEG-3 cells, but cotransfection of GATA-2 or GATA-3 with or without
SF-1 did not. Surprisingly, mutation of the GATA binding site in -227/LUC
increased GATA-4 or GATA-6 induced activity, whereas mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site
decreased it. Furthermore, promoter constructs including the GATA site, but
excluding the Sp1/Sp3 site at -196/-188, were not activated by GATA-4 or GATA-6, 
suggesting an interaction between Sp1/Sp3 and GATA-4 or GATA-6.
Glutathione-S-transferase pull-down experiments and coimmunoprecipitation
demonstrated interaction between GATA-4 or GATA-6 and Sp1, but not Sp3. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that this GATA-4/6 interaction with Sp1
occurred at the Sp site in the P450c17 promoter in NCI-H295A cells. Demethylation
with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine permitted JEG-3 cells to express endogenous P450c17,
SF-1, GATA-4, GATA-6, and transfected -227/LUC. Thus, GATA-4 or GATA-6 and Sp1
together regulate expression of P450c17 in adrenal NCI-H295A cells and
methylation of P450c17, GATA-4 and GATA-6 silence the expression of P450c17 in
placental JEG-3 cells.

PMID: 14988427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Feb 20;1676(3):251-60.

Regulation of human microsomal epoxide hydrolase gene (EPHX1) expression by the
transcription factor GATA-4.

Zhu QS(1), Qian B, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, 2011 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) is a bifunctional protein that plays a crucial
role in the metabolism of numerous xenobiotics as well as in mediating the
hepatic sodium-dependent uptake of bile acids that are involved in numerous
physiological processes including the regulation of cholesterol metabolism. The
transcription factors and nuclear receptors that control the constitutive and
inducible expression of the mEH gene (EPHX1), however, have not been described.
To characterize these factors, a series of 5'-deletion constructs have been
transfected into human liver-derived HepG2 cells as well as non-hepatic HeLa
cells. Promoter activity analysis indicated the presence of a positive regulatory
element in the -80/-70 bp region. Sequence analysis revealed a putative GATA site
at -79/-74 bp as well as an additional site at -31/-26 bp. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays with an anti-GATA-4 antibody confirmed that GATA-4 bound to
these two sites with a dissociation constant of 1.56 nM (-79 site) and 0.65 nM
(-31 site). Coexpression of GATA-4 stimulated EPHX1 promoter activity up to
7.5-fold in a dose-dependent manner. Endogenous EPHX1 message in HepG2 cells was 
also significantly increased by overexpression of GATA-4. Mutating the -79
element resulted in a 65% loss of promoter activity, while mutating the -31
element had no effect on basal activity but greatly reduced the response to
additional GATA-4. In HeLa cells, which do not express GATA-4, EPHX1 activity was
negligible; however, activity could be reconstituted by the addition of exogenous
GATA-4. These results demonstrate that GATA-4 plays a critical role in regulating
EPHX1 expression.

PMID: 14984931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19026-34. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Differential expression and function of Tbx5 and Tbx20 in cardiac development.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box transcription factors play critical roles in embryonic development
including cell type specification, tissue patterning, and morphogenesis. Several 
T-box genes are expressed in the heart and are regulators of cardiac development.
At the earliest stages of heart development, two of these genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20, 
are co-expressed in the heart-forming region but then become differentially
expressed as heart morphogenesis progresses. Although Tbx5 and Tbx20 belong to
the same gene family and share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, their
transcriptional activities are distinct. The C-terminal region of the Tbx5
protein is a transcriptional activator, while the C terminus of Tbx20 can repress
transcription. Tbx5, but not Tbx20, activates a cardiac-specific promoter (atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF)) alone and synergistically with other transcription
factors. In contrast, Tbx20 represses ANF promoter activity and also inhibits the
activation mediated by Tbx5. Of the two T-box binding consensus sequences in the 
promoter of ANF, only T-box binding element 1 (TBE1) is required for the
synergistic activation of ANF by Tbx5 and GATA4, but TBE2 is required for
repression by Tbx20. To elucidate upstream signaling pathways that regulate Tbx5 
and Tbx20 expression, recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 was added to
cardiogenic explants from chick embryos. Using real time reverse
transcription-PCR, it was demonstrated that Tbx20, but not Tbx5, is induced by
bone morphogenetic protein-2. Collectively these data demonstrate clear
differences in both the expression and function of two related transcription
factors and suggest that the modulation of cardiac gene expression can occur as a
result of combinatorial regulatory interactions of T-box proteins.

PMID: 14978031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 19;23(7):1428-38.

Gene expression profiling of ErbB receptor and ligand-dependent transcription.

Amin DN(1), Perkins AS, Stern DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Overexpression of ErbB2 and ErbB4 receptors in breast cancers may be accompanied 
by contrasting clinical outcomes. To investigate the molecular mechanisms
contributing to these differences, we undertook a comparative study of gene
expression regulated by the two receptors. Agonistic antibodies were employed to 
activate ErbB2 and ErbB4 in isolation from the other ErbBs in breast cancer
cells. Gene expression profiling using a 16 755-gene oligonucleotide array was
performed to identify transcriptional targets of receptor activation. Our results
indicate that, in the same cell line, ErbB2 and ErbB4 activation influence gene
transcription differentially. Although there are genes that are regulated by
signaling from both receptors, there are also receptor-specific targets that are 
preferentially regulated by each receptor. We further show that two ligands
acting via the same receptor homodimer may activate different subsets of genes.
Many of the induced genes are hitherto unidentified targets of ErbB signaling.
These include ErbB4 targets EPS15R, GATA4, and RAB2 and ErbB2-activated HRY/HES1 
and PPAP2A. Targets of ErbB2 homodimer signaling may be especially important as
markers in breast cancer, where ErbB2 homodimerization mediated by overexpression
and ligand-independent activation is common.

PMID: 14973552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Physiol Genomics. 2004 May 19;17(3):283-91.

Genomic profiling of the human heart before and after mechanical support with a
ventricular assist device reveals alterations in vascular signaling networks.

Hall JL(1), Grindle S, Han X, Fermin D, Park S, Chen Y, Bache RJ, Mariash A, Guan
Z, Ormaza S, Thompson J, Graziano J, de Sam Lazaro SE, Pan S, Simari RD, Miller
LW.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, Univ. of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.
Hallx068@umn.edu

Mechanical unloading of the heart with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
significantly decreases mortality in patients with heart failure. Moreover, it
provides a human model to define the critical regulatory genes governing
myocardial remodeling in response to significant reductions in wall stress.
Statistical analysis of a gene expression library of 19 paired human heart
samples harvested at the time of LVAD implant and again at explant revealed a set
of 22 genes that were downregulated and 85 genes that were upregulated in
response to mechanical unloading with a false discovery rate of less than 1%. The
analysis revealed a high percentage of genes involved in the regulation of
vascular networks including neuropilin-1 (a VEGF receptor), FGF9, Sprouty1,
stromal-derived factor 1, and endomucin. Taken together these findings suggest
that mechanical unloading alters the regulation of vascular organization and
migration in the heart. In addition to vascular signaling networks, GATA-4
binding protein, a critical mediator of myocyte hypertrophy, was significantly
downregulated following mechanical unloading. In summary, these findings may have
important implications for defining the role of mechanical stretch and load on
autocrine/paracrine signals directing vascular organization in the failing human 
heart and the role of GATA-4 in orchestrating reverse myocardial remodeling. This
unbiased gene discovery approach in paired human heart samples has the potential 
to provide critical clues to the next generation of therapeutic treatments aimed 
at heart failure.

PMID: 14872006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Feb 18;126(6):1590-1.

Small molecules that induce cardiomyogenesis in embryonic stem cells.

Wu X(1), Ding S, Ding Q, Gray NS, Schultz PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

A phenotypic cell-based screen of a large combinatorial chemical library led to
the identification of a class of diaminopyrimidine compounds (cardiogenol A-D)
which can selectively and efficiently induce mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to
differentiate into cardiomyocytes. ESC-derived cardiomyocytes were shown to
express multiple cardiac muscle markers, including myosin heavy chain, GATA-4,
MEF2, and Nkx2.5, and spontaneously form beating regions. Such small molecules
will serve as useful chemical probes to study cardiac muscle differentiation and 
may ultimately facilitate the therapeutic application of ESCs for cardiac repair.

PMID: 14871063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Life Sci. 2004 Feb 27;74(15):1829-38.

Regulation of cardiac myocyte apoptosis by the GATA-4 transcription factor.

Suzuki YJ(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell & Molecular Nutrition Program, Friedman School of Nutrition Science and
Policy, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Department of
Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA. yuichiro_sukuki@hotmail.com

Apoptosis of cardiac muscle cells plays important roles in the development of
various heart diseases including myocardial infarction and anthracycline-induced 
cardiomyopathy. Understanding the regulatory mechanisms of cardiac myocyte
apoptosis and survival is important for establishing therapeutic strategies
against heart disease. Our recent experiments demonstrate that the GATA-4
transcription factor not only mediates cardiac hypertrophy, but also regulates
apoptosis and survival of adult cardiac muscle cells. Apoptosis induced by
anthracyclines is associated with decreased expression of GATA-4, while the
restoration of GATA-4 levels via ectopic expression attenuated the apoptosis.
Survival factors of cardiac myocytes such as hepatocyte growth factor and
endothelin-1 activate GATA-4, and this signal transduction mechanism at least in 
part serves to protect the heart against oxidative stress.

PMID: 14761664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Endocrinology. 2004 May;145(5):2131-40. Epub 2004 Jan 28.

Inhibitory effect of C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) on cultured cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy: interference between CNP and endothelin-1 signaling pathways.

Tokudome T(1), Horio T, Soeki T, Mori K, Kishimoto I, Suga S, Yoshihara F, Kawano
Y, Kohno M, Kangawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka 565-8565,
Japan.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2004 May;145(5):2129-30.

C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) is known to play a role in the local regulation 
of vascular tone. We recently found that CNP is also produced by cardiac
ventricular cells. However, its local effect on myocyte hypertrophy remains to be
elucidated. The present study investigated the effects of CNP on cultured cardiac
myocyte hypertrophy and the interaction between CNP and endothelin-1 (ET-1)
signaling pathways. CNP attenuated basal and ET-1-augumented protein synthesis,
atrial natriuretic peptide secretion, hypertrophy-related gene expression, GATA-4
and MEF-2 DNA binding activities, Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase II activity,
and ERK phosphorylation. CNP also inhibited ET-1-induced increase in
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration. These effects of CNP were mimicked by a cGMP 
analog, 8-bromo cGMP. However, the inhibitory effects of CNP on the hypertrophic 
response of myocytes were significantly diminished at high concentrations of
ET-1. Although CNP increased intracellular cGMP levels in myocytes, ET-1
suppressed CNP-induced cellular cGMP accumulation. A protein kinase C activator
and Ca(2+) ionophore mimicked this suppressive effect of ET-1. We further
examined the effect of CNP on the paracrine action of ET-1 secreted from cardiac 
nonmyocytes. CNP and 8-bromo cGMP significantly inhibited ET-1 secretion from
nonmyocytes. Although nonmyocyte-conditioned medium increased the protein
synthesis in myocytes through endogenous ET-1 action, this increase was
significantly attenuated by pretreatment of nonmyocytes with CNP and 8-bromo
cGMP. These findings demonstrate that CNP inhibits ET-1-induced cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy via a cGMP-dependent mechanism, and conversely, ET-1 inhibits CNP
signaling by a protein kinase C- and Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism, suggesting
mutual interference between CNP and ET-1 signaling pathways.

PMID: 14749356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Seikagaku. 2003 Dec;75(12):1493-504.

[Homeodomain transcription factor T/EBP/NKX2.1 in development and differentiation
of the thyroid and lung].

[Article in Japanese]

Kimura S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 37, Rm. 3112B, NIH, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PMID: 14748143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 1;23(14):2564-75.

Identification and validation of an ERBB2 gene expression signature in breast
cancers.

Bertucci F(1), Borie N, Ginestier C, Groulet A, Charafe-Jauffret E, Adélaïde J,
Geneix J, Bachelart L, Finetti P, Koki A, Hermitte F, Hassoun J, Debono S, Viens 
P, Fert V, Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Institut Paoli-Calmettes and UMR119
Inserm, IFR57, and Faculté de Médecine, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille,
France.

ERBB2 is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor encoded by a gene located in
chromosome region 17q12. Overexpression of ERBB2, generally by way of gene
amplification, plays a role in mammary oncogenesis. This alteration can be
overcome by use of the humanized monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin).
Accurate determination of ERBB2 status is required for appropriate use of this
targeted therapy and is currently analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on
tissue sections and/or fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) on interphase
chromosomes. We have studied the gene expression profiles of a series of 213
breast tumours and 16 breast cancer cell lines with known ERBB2 status, using
Ipsogen's DiscoveryChip microarrays with approximately 9000 cDNAs. We have
identified 36 genes and expressed sequence tags that were differentially
expressed in tumours and in cell lines with and without ERBB2 protein
overexpression. This ERBB2-specific gene expression signature (GES) contained 29 
overexpressed genes including the ERBB2 gene itself, five genes located in its
immediate vicinity on 17q12, non-17q genes such as GATA4 and eight downregulated 
genes including oestrogen receptor alpha (ER). Some correlations were validated
at the protein level using IHC on tissue microarrays. The GES was able to
distinguish ERBB2-negative and -positive cancer samples, as well as FISH-negative
and FISH-positive ERBB2 2+ IHC samples.

PMID: 14743203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Jun;286(6):G947-53. Epub 2004 Jan
22.

Rapid induction of GATA transcription factors in developing mouse intestine
following glucocorticoid administration.

Oesterreicher TJ(1), Henning SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentof Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

In the developing intestine, transcription of alpha-glucosidase genes such as
sucrase-isomaltase and trehalase is stimulated by glucocorticoid administration. 
The consequent increase of their respective mRNAs is characterized by a 12-h lag,
suggesting that the response to glucocorticoids represents a secondary effect. We
hypothesized that the primary response of the tissue to glucocorticoids includes 
induction of one or more intestinal transcription factors. To investigate this
hypothesis, we identified a region in the mouse trehalase promoter (located at
nucleotides -406 to -377 from the transcription start site) with potential
binding sites for three transcription factors: Cdx-2, GATA, and C/EBP. Gel shifts
were performed using labeled oligonucleotides from this region with nuclear
extracts from jejunums of either control 8-day-old mouse pups or littermates
treated with dexamethasone (DEX) 4 h before death. A specific shifted band was
observed with DEX extracts but not with control extracts. Supershift assays
indicated the presence of GATA-4 and GATA-6 but not GATA-5 nor Cdx-2, C/EBP
alpha, C/EBP beta, or C/EBP delta. GATA binding was further implicated by
competition studies with mutated oligonucleotides. Finally, Western blot analysis
showed GATA-4 and GATA-6 proteins in DEX but not control nuclear extracts. For
GATA-4, the same pattern was demonstrated with whole cell extracts and with the
cytosol fraction. We conclude that expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 proteins in
the suckling mouse jejunum is stimulated by DEX. This novel finding constitutes
an important first step in understanding the molecular mechanism of
glucocorticoid action on the developing intestine.

PMID: 14739144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1081-95.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 interacts with and is negatively
regulated by the LIM-only protein FHL2 in cardiomyocytes.

Purcell NH(1), Darwis D, Bueno OF, Müller JM, Schüle R, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway regulates diverse
biologic functions including cell growth, differentiation, proliferation, and
apoptosis. The extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) constitute one
branch of the MAPK pathway that has been implicated in the regulation of cardiac 
differentiated growth, although the downstream mechanisms whereby ERK signaling
affects this process are not well characterized. Here we performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen with ERK2 bait and a cardiac cDNA library to identify novel
proteins involved in regulating ERK signaling in cardiomyocytes. This screen
identified the LIM-only factor FHL2 as an ERK interacting protein in both yeast
and mammalian cells. In vivo, FHL2 and ERK2 colocalized in the cytoplasm at the
level of the Z-line, and interestingly, FHL2 interacted more efficiently with the
activated form of ERK2 than with the dephosphorylated form. ERK2 also interacted 
with FHL1 and FHL3 but not with the muscle LIM protein. Moreover, at least two
LIM domains in FHL2 were required to mediate efficient interaction with ERK2. The
interaction between ERK2 and FHL2 did not influence ERK1/2 activation, nor was
FHL2 directly phosphorylated by ERK2. However, FHL2 inhibited the ability of
activated ERK2 to reside within the nucleus, thus blocking ERK-dependent
transcriptional responsiveness of ELK-1, GATA4, and the atrial natriuretic factor
promoter. Finally, FHL2 partially antagonized the cardiac hypertrophic response
induced by activated MEK-1, GATA4, and phenylephrine agonist stimulation.
Collectively, these results suggest that FHL2 serves a repressor function in
cardiomyocytes through its ability to inhibit ERK1/2 transcriptional coupling.

PMCID: PMC321437
PMID: 14729955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):G1086-99. Epub 2004 Jan 
8.

GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 activate the rat liver fatty acid binding protein gene
in concert with HNF-1alpha.

Divine JK(1), Staloch LJ, Haveri H, Jacobsen CM, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, Simon 
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Transcriptional regulation by GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 in intestine and liver
was explored using a transgene constructed from the proximal promoter of the rat 
liver fatty acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An immunohistochemical survey
detected GATA-4 and GATA-6 in enterocytes, GATA-6 in hepatocytes, and GATA-5 in
neither cell type in adult animals. In cell transfection assays, GATA-4 or GATA-5
but not GATA-6 activated the Fabpl transgene solely through the most proximal of 
three GATA binding sites in the Fabpl promoter. However, all three factors
activated transgenes constructed from each Fabpl site upstream of a minimal viral
promoter. GATA factors interact with hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, and the
proximal Fabpl GATA site adjoins an HNF-1 site. GATA-4, GATA-5, or GATA-6 bounded
to HNF-1alpha in solution, and all cooperated with HNF-1alpha to activate the
Fabpl transgene. Mutagenizing all Fabpl GATA sites abrogated transgene activation
by GATA factors, but GATA-4 activated the mutagenized transgene in the presence
of HNF-1alpha. These in vitro results suggested GATA/HNF-1alpha interactions
function in Fabpl regulation, and in vivo relevance was determined with
subsequent experiments. In mice, the Fabpl transgene was active in enterocytes
and hepatocytes, a transgene with mutagenized HNF-1 site was silent, and a
transgene with mutagenized GATA sites had identical expression as the native
transgene. Mice mosaic for biallelic Gata4 inactivation lost intestinal but not
hepatic Fabpl expression in Gata4-deficient cells but not wild-type cells. These 
results demonstrate GATA-4 is critical for intestinal gene expression in vivo and
suggest a specific GATA-4/HNF-1alpha physical and functional interaction in Fabpl
activation.

PMID: 14715527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 16;313(3):475-81.

Involvement of Ras in extraembryonic endoderm differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Yoshida-Koide U(1), Matsuda T, Saikawa K, Nakanuma Y, Yokota T, Asashima M, Koide
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa 
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, derived from the inner cell mass of blastocyst can
differentiate into multiple cell lineages. In this study, we examined the
possible involvement of Ras in ES cell differentiation. We found that Ras was
activated upon formation of embryoid bodies (EBs), an initial step in ES cell
differentiation. When expressed during EB differentiation, a dominant-negative
mutant of Ras suppressed induction of marker genes for extraembryonic endoderm
differentiation, including GATA-4, GATA-6, alpha-fetoprotein, and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3beta, while an activated mutant promoted their induction.
Expression of a Ras mutant that selectively activates the Raf/MEK/Erk pathway
also enhanced induction of extraembryonic endoderm markers, and treatment with a 
MEK inhibitor resulted in their decreased expression. In addition, Ras stimulated
downregulation of Nanog, a suppressor of endoderm differentiation in ES cells.
These data suggest that Ras activation during EB differentiation plays a crucial 
role in initiation of extraembryonic endoderm differentiation.

PMID: 14697213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2003 Dec;228(11):1282-90.

The role of GATA in mammalian reproduction.

LaVoie HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.
hlavoie@med.sc.edu

GATA transcription factors are emerging as critical players in mammalian
reproductive development and function. GATA-4 contributes to fetal male gonadal
development by regulating genes mediating Müllerian duct regression and the onset
of testosterone production. GATA-2 expression appears to be sexually dimorphic
being transiently expressed in the germ cell lineage of the fetal ovary but not
the fetal testis. In the reproductive system, GATA-1 is exclusively expressed in 
Sertoli cells at specific seminiferous tubule stages. In addition, GATA-4 and
GATA-6 are localized primary to ovarian and testicular somatic cells. The
majority of cell transfection studies demonstrate that GATA-1 and GATA-4 can
stimulate inhibin subunit gene promoter constructs. Other studies provide strong 
evidence that GATA-4 and GATA-6 can activate genes mediating gonadal cell
steroidogenesis. GATA-2 and GATA-3 are found in pituitary and placental cells and
can regulate alpha-glycoprotein subunit gene expression. Gonadal expression and
activation of GATAs appear to be regulated in part by gonadotropin signaling via 
the cyclic AMP-protein kinase A pathway. This review will cover the current
knowledge regarding GATA expression and function at all levels of the
reproductive axis.

PMID: 14681544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):8740-6. Epub 2003 Dec 14.

UTP transactivates epidermal growth factor receptors and promotes cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy despite inhibiting transcription of the hypertrophic marker gene,
atrial natriuretic peptide.

Morris JB(1), Pham TM, Kenney B, Sheppard KE, Woodcock EA.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Biochemistry Laboratory, Baker Heart Research Institute, St. Kilda
Road Central, Melbourne, 8008 Victoria, Australia.

In neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, activation of receptors that couple to the 
G(q) family of heterotrimeric G proteins causes hypertrophic growth, together
with expression of "hypertrophic marker" genes, such as atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) and myosin light chain 2 (MLC2). As reported previously for other
G(q)-coupled receptors, stimulation of alpha(1)-adrenergic receptors with
phenylephrine (50 microM) caused phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptors as well as activation of ERK1/2, cellular growth, and ANP
transcription. These responses depended on EGF receptor activation. In marked
contrast, stimulation of G(q)-coupled purinergic receptors with UTP caused EGF
receptor phosphorylation, ERK1/2 activation, and cellular growth but minimal
increases in ANP transcription. UTP inhibited phenylephrine-dependent
transcription from ANP and MLC2 promoters but not transcription from myoglobin
promoters or from AP-1 elements. Myocardin is a muscle-specific transcription
enhancer that activates transcription from ANP and MLC2 promoters but not
myoglobin promoters or AP-1 elements. UTP inhibited ANP and MLC2 responses to
overexpressed myocardin but did not inhibit responses to c-Jun, GATA4, or serum
response factor, all of which are active in nonmuscle cells. Thus, UTP inhibits
transcriptional responses to phenylephrine only at cardiac-specific promoters,
and this may involve the muscle-specific transcription enhancer, myocardin. These
studies show that EGF receptor activation is necessary but not sufficient for ANP
and MLC2 responses to activation of G(q)-coupled receptors in ventricular
myocytes, because inhibitory mechanisms can oppose such stimulation. ANP is a
compensatory and protective factor in cardiac hypertrophy, and mechanisms that
reduce its generation need to be defined.

PMID: 14676212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):377-88.

Gata4 regulates testis expression of Dmrt1.

Lei N(1), Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160.

The doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1) is a putative
transcriptional regulator that is expressed exclusively in the gonads and is
required for postnatal testis differentiation. Here we describe the
transcriptional mechanisms regulating testis-specific expression of the Dmrt1
gene. Transient-transfection analysis identified a region of the promoter between
kb -3.2 and -2.8 that is important for Sertoli cell-specific expression. DNase I 
footprinting revealed four sites of DNA-protein interaction within this region,
three of which were prominent in primary Sertoli cells. Analysis of these sites, 
using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, revealed that Gata4 and another
unknown factor bound within these regions. Further transient-transfection assays 
of various mutant promoters established the functional relevance of the
Gata4-response and unknown factor-response elements, while studies of Dmrt1
expression in 13.5 days postcoitum Fog2 null gonads supported the in vivo
importance of Gata4's regulation. As a whole, these studies identify Gata4 as an 
important regulator in the Dmrt1 transcriptional machinery that is responsible
for robust expression of Dmrt1 in the testis.

PMCID: PMC303372
PMID: 14673170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):558-73. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Assessment of the role of activator protein-1 on transcription of the mouse
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Manna PR(1), Eubank DW, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

cAMP-dependent mechanisms regulate the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR)
protein even though its promoter lacks a consensus cAMP response-element (CRE,
TGACGTCA). Transcriptional regulation of the StAR gene has been demonstrated to
involve combinations of DNA sequences that provide recognition motifs for
sequence-specific transcription factors. We recently identified and characterized
three canonical 5'-CRE half-sites within the cAMP-responsive region (-151/-1 bp) 
of the mouse StAR gene. Among these CRE elements, the CRE2 half-site is analogous
(TGACTGA) to an activator protein-1 (AP-1) sequence [TGA(C/G)TCA]; therefore, the
role of the AP-1 transcription factor was explored in StAR gene transcription.
Mutation in the AP-1 element demonstrated an approximately 50% decrease in StAR
reporter activity. Using EMSA, oligonucleotide probes containing an AP-1 binding 
site were found to specifically bind to nuclear proteins obtained from mouse
MA-10 Leydig and Y-1 adrenocortical tumor cells. The integrity of the
sequence-specific AP-1 element in StAR gene transcription was assessed using the 
AP-1 family members, Fos (c-Fos, Fra-1, Fra-2, and Fos B) and Jun (c-Jun, Jun B, 
and Jun D), which demonstrated the involvement of Fos and Jun in StAR gene
transcription to varying degrees. Disruption of the AP-1 binding site reversed
the transcriptional responses seen with Fos and Jun. EMSA studies utilizing
antibodies specific to Fos and Jun demonstrated the involvement of several AP-1
family proteins. Functional assessment of Fos and Jun was further demonstrated by
transfecting antisense c-Fos, Fra-1, and dominant negative forms of Fos (A-Fos)
and c-Jun (TAM-67) into MA-10 cells, which significantly (P < 0.01) repressed
transcription of the StAR gene. Mutation of the AP-1 site in combination with
mutations in other cis-elements resulted in a further decrease of StAR promoter
activity, demonstrating a functional cooperation between these factors. Mammalian
two-hybrid assays revealed high-affinity protein-protein interactions between
c-Fos and c-Jun with steroidogenic factor 1, GATA-4, and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-beta. These findings demonstrate that Fos and Jun can bind to the TGACTGA
element in the StAR promoter and provide novel insights into the mechanisms
regulating StAR gene transcription.

PMID: 14673133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Reprod Biol. 2001 Jul;1(1):5-9.

Adrenocortical tumorigenesis in transgenic mice: the role of luteinizing hormone 
receptor and transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-61.

Rahman NA(1), Kiiveri S, Siltanen S, Levallet J, Kero J, Lensu T, Wilson DB,
Heikinheimo MT, Huhtaniemi IT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland. nafis.rahman@utu.fi

Transgenic (TG) mice, bearing the Simian Virus 40 T-antigen (Tag) under a 6-kb
fragment of the murine inhibin alpha-subunit promoter (inhalpha), develop gonadal
tumors of granulosa or Leydig cell origin with 100% penetrance by the age of 5-7 
months. When these TG mice were gonadectomized prepubertally, between 21-25 days 
of life, adrenal gland tumors were observed in each mouse by the age of 5-7
months. No adrenal tumors were detected in any intact TG, gonadectomized or
intact or control non-TG littermates. The adrenocortical tumors appeared to
originate from the X-zone of the adrenal cortex. If functional gonadectomy was
induced by GnRH antagonist treatment or by cross-breeding of the TG mice into
hypogonadotropic hpg genetic background, neither gonadal nor adrenal
tumorigenesis appeared. This prompted a hypothesis that adrenal tumor development
in inhalpha/Tag TG mice is related to elevated gonadotropin secretion, which is
the most obvious difference between the surgical and functional gonadectomy
models. The adrenal tumors and a cell line (Calpha1) derived from them, was found
to express luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), but no FSHR, and hCG treatment
stimulated their proliferation. No FSHR was found in the adrenal glands. On the
basis of this it was suggested that expression of the potent oncogene T-antigen, 
allow LH in adrenocortical cells to function as a tumor promoter, and induction
of high level functional LHR expression in adrenal tumors. Given the induction of
expression and regulation of the GATA-4 and GATA-6 zinc finger family of
transcription factors in the gonads by gonadotropins, it was in our interest to
explore their expression in the adrenals. We utilized the inalpha/Tag TG mouse
model and pathological human adrenal samples to explore the role of GATA-4 and
GATA-6 in adrenocortical tumorigenesis. Abundant GATA-6 mRNA expression was found
in normal control adrenal cortex during mouse development, whereas GATA-4 mRNA
was undetectable. In striking contrast to this, GATA-6 was absent from murine
adrenocortical tumors, while GATA-4 mRNA expression was dramatically upregulated 
in the murine adrenal tumors as well as in human adrenocortical carcinomas. Taken
together, these results suggest different roles for GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the
adrenal gland, and implicate GATA-4 in adrenal LHR expression and tumorigenesis. 
Immunohistochemical detection of GATA-4 may serve as a useful marker in
differential diagnosis of human adrenal tumors. In addition, the inhalpha/Tag TG 
model will be helpful for exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying
adrenocortical tumorigenesis, ectopic LHR expression in adrenals and the
GATA-4/LHR interaction that is related to adrenal tumorigenesis in TG mice.

PMID: 14666170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10659-69. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

The cardiac determination factor, Nkx2-5, is activated by mutual cofactors GATA-4
and Smad1/4 via a novel upstream enhancer.

Brown CO 3rd(1), Chi X, Garcia-Gras E, Shirai M, Feng XH, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Center for Cardiovascular
Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The mammalian homologue of Drosophila tinman, Nkx2-5, plays an early role in
regulating cardiac genes and morphogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs),
members of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta family of signaling
molecules, are involved in numerous developmental processes. BMP signaling is
crucial in the regulation of Nkx2-5 expression and specification of the cardiac
lineage. Constitutively active BMP type I receptor or the downstream pathway
components and DNA-binding transcription factors, Smad1/4 directly activated
Nkx2-5 gene transcription. We identified and characterized a novel upstream
Nkx2-5 enhancer, composed of clustered repeats of Smad and GATA DNA binding
sites. This composite Nkx2-5 enhancer was a direct target of BMP signaling via
cooperative interactions between the downstream transducers Smad1/4 and GATA-4.
In mammalian two hybrid assays, Smad factors recruited the hybrid gene GATA4-VP16
to strongly drive transcription of a reporter gene containing multimerized Smad
binding sites These cofactors interacted through the second zinc finger and
adjacent basic domain of GATA-4 and the N-terminal domain of Smads. Smad4 and
GATA4 were also found to bind in vivo with the Nkx2-5 composite enhancer, as
revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of differentiated P19 cells.
Finally, transgenic mice containing the Smad/GATA composite enhancer
recapitulated early murine Nkx2-5 cardiac expression and deletion of this
enhancer within a 10-kb transgene pBS-Nkx2-5 LacZ significantly reduced
expression in the cardiac crescent. Thus, integration of GATA transcription
factors with BMP signaling, through co-association with Smads factors, may
initiate early Nkx2-5 expression; suggesting a vital role for the combination of 
these factors in the specification of cardiac progenitors.

PMID: 14662776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Gene. 2003 Dec 24;323:31-42.

Sp and GATA factors are critical for Apolipoprotein AI downstream enhancer
activity in human HepG2 cells.

Ivanov GS(1), Kater JM, Jha SH, Stutius EA, Sabharwal R, Tricarico MD, Ginsburg
GS, Ozer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University
School of Medicine, 715 Albany Street, Building R-618, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The factors that bind to the hepatic-specific human apolipoprotein AI (apoAI)
48-bp downstream enhancer (DSE) were identified and characterized by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. A significant homology was shown between
the histone 4 (H4) promoters and the hepatic-specific human apoAI DSE at Sp1 and 
H4TF2 binding sites. Human HepG2 nuclear extracts were used to form four specific
complexes with the DSE (referred to as apoAI DSE-1, -2, -3, and -4). The apoAI
DSE-1 and -2 complexes showed similar binding specificity to the Sp/H4TF1
consensus site within the apoAI DSE. The apoAI DSE-1 complex was predominantly
recognized by anti-Sp1 and Sp3 sera in gel shift assays, indicating that the DSE 
was recognized by multiple Sp family members. Nuclear extracts that were prepared
from retinoic acid treated HepG2 cells showed increased levels of Sp factors in
gel shift and Western blot assays. The apoAI DSE-2 complex was identified as
H4TF1 and formed in the absence of magnesium chloride. The apoAI DSE-3 complex
bound to a consensus GATA element within the DSE that was recognized by
recombinant human GATA-6 as well. The apoAI DSE-3 complex was completely
disrupted by a GATA-4 antibody in EMSA. GATA-4 and -6 were detected in nuclear
extracts prepared from retinoic acid treated HepG2 cells using Western blot
assays. The highest apoAI DSE-3 levels were observed with retinoic acid treated
HepG2 cell nuclear extracts in EMSA. ApoAI DSE-4 is a multi-factor complex that
includes an Sp/H4TF1 factor and either H4TF2 or apoAI DSE-3. Because apoAI DSE
mutations revealed transcription defects in transient transfection assays, we
conclude that the entire DSE sequence is required for full apoAI transcriptional 
activity in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 14659877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Trends Mol Med. 2003 Dec;9(12):512-5.

Transcription factor cascades in congenital heart malformation.

Hatcher CJ(1), Diman NY, McDermott DA, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, 
Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

PMID: 14659463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Dec;35(12):1461-72.

Cardiomyocytes purified from differentiated embryonic stem cells exhibit
characteristics of early chamber myocardium.

Fijnvandraat AC(1), van Ginneken AC, Schumacher CA, Boheler KR, Lekanne Deprez
RH, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells easily differentiate towards the cardiac lineage 
making them suitable as an in vitro model to study cardiogenesis and as a
potential source of transplantable cells. In this study, we show by in situ
hybridisation that about 30% of the volume of cultures of differentiating ES
cells consists of cardiomyocytes. RT-PCR analyses showed that the transcription
factors Nkx2.5, Gata4, Mef2c and Irx4 were expressed at levels in the same order 
of magnitude as the levels observed in embryonic, neonatal and adult hearts.
Atrial natriuretic factor and Connexin 40, associated with chamber formation in
vivo, are expressed at relatively low levels, similar to those observed at early 
heart development in vivo. To facilitate the isolation of ES cell-derived
cardiomyocytes, a cell line was constructed by stable transfection of the
aminoglycoside phosphotransferase cDNA driven by the cardiac-specific distant
upstream part of the Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger promoter. To accomplish single-copy
integration, the construct was inserted into the hypoxanthine
phosphoribosyltransferase locus of HM1 ES cells by homologous recombination.
Cardiac-specific resistance to G418-sulphate (neomycin) allowed isolation of a
pure population of cardiomyocytes. Genetically selected and unselected cell
populations were characterised electrophysiologically using patch clamp. To
explore whether clusters of cells have a similar differentiation profile, action 
potentials (APs) were measured in aggregates of differentiating ES cells, using a
new method based on the voltage-dependent fluorescent dye di-4-ANEPPS. Both
whole-cell recordings using patch-clamp and optical measurements with di-4-ANEPPS
of the AP showed that upstroke velocity increases and AP duration decreases with 
differentiation time, accompanied by a decrease in AP interval, suggesting the
initiation of the developmental programme underlying the formation of chamber
myocardium.

PMID: 14654372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Dec 26;312(4):1033-8.

GATA-4 regulates cardiac morphogenesis through transactivation of the N-cadherin 
gene.

Zhang H(1), Toyofuku T, Kamei J, Hori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.

Cardia bifida is known to occur in animal models lacking the cardiogenic
transcriptional factor GATA-4. The downstream target genes responsible for this
cardiac deformity remain unknown, however. Treatment with small interfering RNAs 
(siRNA) specifically targeting GATA-4 into cardiac mesodermal cells led to the
development of cardia bifida in chick embryos. RT-PCR using mRNAs extracted from 
cardiac tubes revealed that the GATA-4-specific siRNA selectively suppresses
expression of N-cadherin mRNA, one of the genes essential for the single heart
formation, without affecting other cardiac marker mRNAs. Analysis of the
N-cadherin gene promoter activity using a luciferase reporter gene system and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that GATA-4 binds directly to the 
N-cadherin gene promoter region, thereby transactivating its expression. We
therefore concluded that the cardia bifida observed in the GATA-4-deleted model
is caused by the transcriptional down-regulation of N-cadherin expression.

PMID: 14651975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Dev Dyn. 2003 Dec;228(4):697-708.

Function of RARgamma and RARalpha2 at the initiation of retinoid signaling is
essential for avian embryo survival and for distinct events in cardiac
morphogenesis.

Romeih M(1), Cui J, Michaille JJ, Jiang W, Zile MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Avian embryogenesis requires retinoid receptor activation by the vitamin A active
form, retinoic acid (RA), during neurulation. We conducted loss-of-function
analysis in quail embryos by nutritional deprivation of RA and by blocking
generation of retinoid receptors. Here we identify a distinct role for RARalpha2 
in cardiac inflow tract morphogenesis and for RARgamma in cardiac left/right
orientation and looping morphogenesis. Blocking normal embryos with antisense
oligonucleotides to RARalpha2 or RXRalpha diminishes GATA-4 transcripts, while
blocking RARgamma or RXRalpha diminishes nodal and Pitx2 transcripts; the
expression of these genes in the heart forming region resembles that of the
vitamin A-deficient embryo. Blocking the function of RARgamma, RARalpha2, and
RXRalpha recapitulates the complete vitamin A-deficient phenotype. RARgamma is
the most potent mediator of the retinoid signal at this time of development. Our 
studies provide strong evidence that critical RA-requiring developmental events
in the early avian embryo are regulated by means of distinct retinoid receptor
signaling pathways.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14648846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Differentiation. 2003 Oct;71(8):506-15.

Regulation of heart size in Xenopus laevis.

Garriock RJ(1), Drysdale TA.

Author information: 
(1)Lawson Health Research Institute Department of Paediatrics, University of
Western Ontario London, Ontario N6A-4V2 Canada.

The region with the potential to form the heart has traditionally been called the
heart field. This region can be approximated by, but is not identical to, the
expression domain of the early cardiac gene Nkx2.5. The region expressing Nkx2.5 
does not change in size, although there are major shape changes and a subdivision
of the region into non-myogenic and myogenic lineages. Using a variety of embryo 
manipulations, we have sought to determine whether cellular interactions could
change the size of the initial Nkx2.5-expressing region and thus change the size 
of the heart. We have shown that if the heart is isolated from the dorsal half of
the embryo, the volume of tissue expressing myocardial differentiation markers
increases, indicating that signals restricting the size of the heart come from
the dorsal side. Despite the change in myocardial volume, the non-myogenic heart 
lineages are still present. The ability of dorsal tissues to restrict the size of
the heart is further demonstrated by fusing two Xenopus embryos shortly after
gastrulation, generating twinned embryos where the heart of one embryo would
develop adjacent to different tissues of the second embryo. The final size of the
differentiated heart was markedly reduced if it developed in close proximity to
the dorso-anterior surface of the head but not if it developed adjacent to the
flank or belly. In all cases, the manipulations that restricted the size of the
myocardium also restricted the expression of Nkx2.5 and GATA-4, both key
regulatory genes in the cardiogenic pathway. These results provide evidence for a
model in which signals from dorso-anterior tissues restrict the size of the heart
after gastrulation but before neural fold closure.

PMID: 14641331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Oncogene. 2003 Nov 20;22(52):8403-12.

Interaction with GATA transcription factors provides a mechanism for
cell-specific effects of c-Fos.

McBride K(1), Charron F, Lefebvre C, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110, avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC,
Canada H2W 1R7.

c-Fos is a multifunctional transcription factor that is involved in cellular
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. c-Fos is rapidly induced by a
variety of hormones, growth factors and other extracellular stimuli, resulting in
cell-specific responses. One potential mechanism underlying the cell-specific
effects of c-Fos may be its ability to regulate gene expression through
interaction with tissue-restricted transcription factors. We report here that
c-Fos interacts with the cell-specific GATA proteins to potentiate their ability 
to transactivate target promoters, via GATA-binding sites. c-Fos is recruited to 
GATA proteins through direct interaction with their N-terminal activation domain.
Neither the leucine zipper nor the DNA-binding domain of c-Fos is required for
physical interaction with GATA proteins. Instead, a C-terminal domain located
between amino acids 235 and 296, which is conserved in FosB but not in the
nontransforming Fos family members, FosB/SF or Fra-1, is essential for c-Fos-GATA
interaction. These data suggest that c-Fos may act as an inducible cofactor for
cell-specific transcription factors and unravel a novel mechanism for
transcriptional regulation by c-Fos, independent of the well-studied AP-1
pathway. The results also raise the possibility that dysregulated interaction
with cell-specific transcription factors may be an important component in
cellular transformation by nuclear oncogenes.

PMID: 14627981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Nov 1;60(2):278-87.

GATA and FOG2 transcription factors differentially regulate the promoter for
Kv4.2 K(+) channel gene in cardiac myocytes and PC12 cells.

Jia Y(1), Takimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, 3343 Forbes Avenue, 15260, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Nov 1;60(2):226-7.

OBJECTIVE: Kv4.2 subunits are major components of transient outward K(+) channels
in cardiac myocytes and somatodendritic A-type channels in neurons. To identify
molecular mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation of Kv4.2 gene, we have
isolated and characterized the promoter for the rat Kv4.2 gene.
METHODS: PCR-based amplification of cDNA end (5'RACE) and RNase protection assays
were used to determine transcription start sites. Transient transfection of Kv4.2
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs into neonatal cardiac myocytes and PC12
cells was employed to measure activity of the Kv4.2 promoter. Cotransfection of
expression vectors for the transcription factors, GATA and/or FOG2, was performed
to determine the effects of these transcription factors on the Kv4.2 promoter.
RESULTS: Transcription of the gene initiates at 552 bp upstream from the
translation initiation site in the brain and heart. Deletion analysis revealed
that the approximately 200-bp fragment encompassing this start site drives
significant transcription in neonatal cardiac myocytes and PC12 cells. The
transcription factors GATA4 and 6 differentially enhance activity of the minimum 
promoter in the two cell types: GATA4 produces a larger increase than GATA6 in
cardiac myocytes, whereas the latter results in a more substantial enhancement in
PC12 cells. Furthermore, the coregulator of GATA, FOG2, markedly suppresses the
GATA-induced increase in myocytes, but enhances it in PC12 cells. The use of GATA
mutants that are incapable of forming complexes with FOG2 indicates that the
formation of GATA-FOG complexes is required for the FOG2-induced suppression in
myocytes, but not for the FOG2-mediated enhancement in PC12 cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that GATA and FOG2 transcription factors use
distinct mechanisms to control the expression of Kv4.2 gene in cardiac myocytes
and PC12 cells. The lack of a GATA-binding consensus sequence in the Kv4.2
minimum promoter suggests that these transcription factors indirectly influence
the channel gene transcription.

PMID: 14613857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8429-39.

GATA-4 and GATA-5 transcription factor genes and potential downstream antitumor
target genes are epigenetically silenced in colorectal and gastric cancer.

Akiyama Y(1), Watkins N, Suzuki H, Jair KW, van Engeland M, Esteller M, Sakai H, 
Ren CY, Yuasa Y, Herman JG, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors participates in gastrointestinal (GI)
development. Increases in GATA-4 and -5 expression occur in differentiation and
GATA-6 expression in proliferation in embryonic and adult settings. We now show
that in colorectal cancer (CRC) and gastric cancer promoter hypermethylation and 
transcriptional silencing are frequent for GATA-4 and -5 but are never seen for
GATA-6. Potential antitumor target genes upregulated by GATA-4 and -5, the
trefoil factors, inhibinalpha, and disabled-2 (Dab2) are also silenced, in GI
cancers, with associated methylation of the promoters. Drug or genetically
induced demethylation simultaneously leads to expression, in CRC cells, of all of
the GATA-4, -5, and downstream genes. Expression of exogenous GATA-5 overrides
methylation at the downstream promoters to activate the target genes. Selection
for silencing of both upstream transcription factors and their target genes in GI
cancers could indicate that epigenetic silencing of the involved genes provides a
summated contribution to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC262684
PMID: 14612389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 15;291(1):56-69.

Early stage-specific inhibitions of cardiomyocyte differentiation and expression 
of Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002.

Naito AT(1), Tominaga A, Oyamada M, Oyamada Y, Shiraishi I, Monzen K, Komuro I,
Takamatsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Regulation, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) has been reported to
block cardiomyocyte differentiation. However, at which stage PI3-kinase plays
this important role and what its molecular targets are remain unknown. To answer 
these questions, we induced cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6 mouse
embryonal carcinoma cells and investigated the activation of PI3-kinase by
analyzing phospho-Akt. We also treated P19CL6 cells with the PI3-kinase-specific 
inhibitor LY294002 either continuously or at various time points and monitored
the expression of cardiac contractile proteins and transcription factors. Most
cells differentiated into sarcomeric myosin heavy chain (MHC)-positive
cardiomyocytes on day 16 after induction. An increase in phospho-Akt was observed
after induction and was maintained throughout the differentiation. LY294002
treatment restricted to the phase from days 0 to 4 was sufficient to inhibit
cardiomyocyte differentiation in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, LY294002
treatment either from days 4 to 8 or from days 8 to 12 did not cause significant 
changes in sarcomeric MHC expression. LY294002 treatment from days 0 to 4 also
suppressed Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 expression. These results demonstrate that
PI3-kinase becomes activated and plays a pivotal role at a very early stage of
cardiomyocyte differentiation, possibly by modulating the expression of the
cardiac transcription factors.

PMID: 14597408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2955-61. Epub 2003 Oct 28.

Hepatic erythropoietin gene regulation by GATA-4.

Dame C(1), Sola MC, Lim KC, Leach KM, Fandrey J, Ma Y, Knöpfle G, Engel JD,
Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Erythropoietin production switches from fetal liver to adult kidney during
development. GATA transcription factors 2 and 3 could be involved in modulating
this switch, because they were shown to negatively regulate erythropoietin gene
transcription through a promoter proximal GATA site. Herein, we analyzed the role
of several GATA factors in the regulation of the erythropoietin gene in human
liver and in hepatoma cells. Although GATA-3 expression in hepatocytes increases 
during human development, erythropoietin mRNA accumulation is unaltered in mutant
mice lacking GATA-3. We found that GATA-2, -3, -4, and -6 are all expressed in
human hepatocytes and that GATA-4 exhibits the most prominent Epo promoter
binding activity in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of GATA-4 expression by RNA
interference leads to a dramatic reduction in Epo gene transcription in Hep3B
cells. Moreover, GATA-4 expression is high and limited to hepatocytes in the
fetal liver, whereas GATA-4 expression in the adult liver is low and restricted
to epithelial cells surrounding the biliary ducts. Thus, GATA-4 is critical for
transcription of the Epo gene in hepatocytes and may contribute to the switch in 
the site of Epo gene expression from the fetal liver to the adult kidney.

PMID: 14583613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 15;9(13):4819-25.

Gene amplification in esophageal adenocarcinomas and Barrett's with high-grade
dysplasia.

Miller CT(1), Moy JR, Lin L, Schipper M, Normolle D, Brenner DE, Iannettoni MD,
Orringer MB, Beer DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine the frequency and overall
contribution of specific gene amplification events in the formation of Barrett's 
adenocarcinomas. The relationship of gene amplification to clinical-pathological 
variables and its potential usefulness as a marker for early cancer detection
were also examined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used quantitative PCR and Southern blot analysis to
screen 87 cases of Barrett's adenocarcinoma for the presence or absence of 13
distinct gene amplification events. Gene amplification was then examined for
correlation with other amplification events and clinical variables (survival,
stage, nodal involvement, tumor invasion, smoking history, and gender).
Additionally, 22 specimens of Barrett's with high-grade dysplasia (HGD) were
examined for the presence of gene amplification.
RESULTS: One or more amplification events were present in 50 of 87 (57%)
adenocarcinomas. The ERBB2 gene was amplified in 19 of 87 (21.8%), CCNE1 in 11 of
87 (12.6%), GATA4 in 9 of 87 (10.3%), KRAS in 9 of 87 (10.3%), EGFR in 7 of 87
(8.0%), CCND1 in 6 of 87 (6.8%), HNF3alpha in 5 of 87 (5.7%), PIK3CA in 5 of 87
(5.7%), C-MYC in 4 of 87 (4.6%), DYRK2 in 2 of 87 (2.3%), and AIB1, AKT1, and
IGF1R were amplified in 0 of 87 (0%) of the tumors. CCND1 amplification was found
to correlate negatively with survival (P < 0.05). In addition, the ERBB2 amplicon
positively correlated (P < 0.05) with GATA4 amplification. Increased copy number 
of the ERBB2 (1 of 22), GATA4 (1 of 22), KRAS (2 of 22), C-MYC (1 of 22), CCNE1
(2 of 22), and CCND1 (2 of 22) genes was also observed in one or more Barrett's
adenocarcinomas with HGD.
CONCLUSIONS: The high frequency of gene amplification in esophageal
adenocarcinomas and HGD indicates the important role of these events in
esophageal adenocarcinoma development. Additionally, these results underscore the
possible usefulness of early detection approaches and chemotherapeutic strategies
(ErbB2 and cyclin D1) targeted against amplified gene products.

PMID: 14581353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):5953-64. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

Tbx5 specifies the left/right ventricles and ventricular septum position during
cardiogenesis.

Takeuchi JK(1), Ohgi M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Shiratori H, Sakaki I, Ogura K,
Saijoh Y, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Extensive misexpression studies were carried out to explore the roles played by
Tbx5, the expression of which is excluded from the right ventricle (RV) during
cardiogenesis. When Tbx5 was misexpressed ubiquitously, ventricular septum was
not formed, resulting in a single ventricle. In such heart, left ventricle
(LV)-specific ANF gene was induced. In search of the putative RV factor(s), we
have found that chick Tbx20 is expressed in the RV, showing a complementary
fashion to Tbx5. In the Tbx5-misexpressed heart, this gene was repressed. When
misexpression was spatially partial, leaving small Tbx5-negative area in the
right ventricle, ventricular septum was shifted rightwards, resulting in a small 
RV with an enlarged LV. Focal expression induced an ectopic boundary of
Tbx5-positive and -negative regions in the right ventricle, at which an
additional septum was formed. Similar results were obtained from the transient
transgenic mice. In such hearts, expression patterns of dHAND and eHAND were
changed with definitive cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, we report that human 
ANF promoter is synergistically activated by Tbx5, Nkx2.5 and GATA4. This
activation was abrogated by Tbx20, implicating the pivotal roles of interactions 
among these heart-specific factors. Taken together, our data indicate that Tbx5
specifies the identity of LV through tight interactions among several
heart-specific factors, and highlight the essential roles of Tbx5 in cardiac
development.

PMID: 14573514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Trends Mol Med. 2003 Oct;9(10):407-9.

Interaction makes the heart grow stronger.

Packham EA(1), David Brook J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, NG7
2UH, Nottingham, UK. elizabeth.packham@nottingham.ac.uk

A novel interaction between GATA4 and TBX5 could explain phenotypic similarities 
(atrial septal defects) between patients with mutations in GATA4 or TBX5. The
cardiac transcription factor GATA4 has not previously been implicated in a human 
disorder but a recent paper by Garg et al. provides evidence of mutations in
GATA4 that cause atrial septal defects. Mutations in TBX5 have already been shown
to cause similar atrial septal defects in Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 14557051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Feb;286(2):L452-9. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

TNF-alpha induces a decrease in eNOS promoter activity.

Neumann P(1), Gertzberg N, Johnson A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Science, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 12208,
USA.

We determined whether TNF-alpha induces a decrease in activity of the promoter
for the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene in pulmonary microvessel
endothelial monolayers (PMEM). eNOS promoter activity was assessed in PMEM
transfected with plasmids coding the wild-type (F1: -1600 nt from transcription
start site) and truncated (F2: -1189, F4: -779, F5: -494, F6: -166) human eNOS
promoters linked to a luciferase reporter. PMEM lysates were analyzed for the
luciferase/galactosidase ratio (Luc/Gal) after incubation with TNF-alpha (50
ng/ml) for 0.5 or 4 h. TNF-alpha caused a decrease in the Luc/Gal ratio in the
PMEM transfected with wild-type F1 and truncated F2, F4, and F5 plasmids but not 
with truncated F6 plasmid. Truncated-promoter analysis indicated the response
elements (-370)CACCC, (-231)GATA, and (-186)CACCC may regulate the effect of
TNF-alpha on the eNOS promoter. DNA-binding activity of (32)P-labeled
oligonucleotide probes that span the GATA-binding site
((-239)-[(-231)GATA]-(-219)) and the two different CACCC-binding regions
((-379)-[(-370)CACCC]-(-358) and (-196)-[(-186) CACCC]-(-176)) were assessed
using EMSA. In response to TNF-alpha treatment for 4 h, nuclear protein binding
to (32)P oligonucleotides was characterized as: 1) a significant increase in
binding to (-370)CACCC, 2) a significant decrease in binding to (-231)GATA, and
3) no change in (-186)CACCC binding. EMSA supershift analysis indicated that the 
transcription factor protein GATA-4 bound to the (-231)GATA site, and Sp3 bound
to the (-370)CACCC site. Our data indicate TNF causes a decrease in eNOS promoter
activity that may be mediated by GATA-4 and Sp3.

PMID: 14555463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 15;262(2):206-24.

Cardiac T-box factor Tbx20 directly interacts with Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5 in
regulation of gene expression in the developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Elliott DA, Rankin S, Haast SJ, Lai D, McDonald LP,
Niederreither K, Dolle P, Bruneau BG, Zorn AM, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 384 Victoria Street, Darlinghurst,
2010, Sydney, Australia.

Tbx20 is a member of the T-box transcription factor family expressed in the
forming hearts of vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. We report here analysis of
Tbx20 expression during murine cardiac development and assessment of DNA-binding 
and transcriptional properties of Tbx20 isoforms. Tbx20 was expressed in
myocardium and endocardium, including high levels in endocardial cushions. cDNAs 
generated by alternative splicing encode at least four Tbx20 isoforms, and Tbx20a
uniquely carried strong transactivation and transrepression domains in its C
terminus. Isoforms with an intact T-box bound specifically to DNA sites
resembling the consensus brachyury half site, although with less avidity compared
with the related factor, Tbx5. Tbx20 physically interacted with cardiac
transcription factors Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5, collaborating to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression. Among cardiac GATA factors, there was
preferential synergy with GATA5, implicated in endocardial differentiation. In
Xenopus embryos, enforced expression of Tbx20a, but not Tbx20b, led to induction 
of mesodermal and endodermal lineage markers as well as cell migration,
indicating that the long Tbx20a isoform uniquely bears functional domains that
can alter gene expression and developmental behaviour in an in vivo context. We
propose that Tbx20 plays an integrated role in the ancient myogenic program of
the heart, and has been additionally coopted during evolution of vertebrates for 
endocardial cushion development.

PMID: 14550786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Hum Mutat. 2003 Nov;22(5):372-7.

Mutations of ZFPM2/FOG2 gene in sporadic cases of tetralogy of Fallot.

Pizzuti A(1), Sarkozy A, Newton AL, Conti E, Flex E, Digilio MC, Amati F, Gianni 
D, Tandoi C, Marino B, Crossley M, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Patologia, Università di Roma La
Sapienza, Rome, Italy. a.pizzuti@css-mendel.it

Two out of 47 patients with sporadic tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), the most common
cyanotic conotruncal heart defect (CTD), showed heterozygous missense mutations
of the ZFPM2/FOG2 gene. Knockout mice carrying mutations in the ZFPM2/FOG2 gene
have similarly been found to exhibit TOF. While both mutant ZFPM2/FOG2 proteins, 
E30G (c.88A>G) and S657G (c.1968A>G), retain the ability to bind the partner
protein GATA4 and repress GATA4 mediated gene activation, the S657G, but not the 
E30G, mutation is subtly impaired in this function. ZFPM2/FOG2 gene mutations may
contribute to some sporadic cases of TOF.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14517948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Genesis. 2003 Sep;37(1):12-7.

RNA inhibition of BMP-4 gene expression in postimplantation mouse embryos.

Gratsch TE(1), De Boer LS, O'Shea KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor 48109-0616, USA.

Short, hairpin RNA (shRNA) directed against bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp-4) 
was delivered to early postimplantation staged mouse embryos via tail vein
injection of pregnant dams. As early as 24 h postinjection, embryos expressed a
DsRed marker and later exhibited defects of neural fold elevation and closure and
of cardiac morphogenesis. Immunohistochemical analysis of sectioned embryos
indicated that Bmp-4 protein was depleted and gene expression analysis indicated 
there was a reduction in Bmp-4 mRNA and an upregulation of the Bmp-4 antagonists,
noggin and chordin, in embryos exposed to the shRNA, but not in control embryos. 
There was no change in the expression of Gata4, brachyury, or claudin6 in RNAi
exposed embryos, indicating that RNA silencing was specific to Bmp-4 rather than 
producing widespread gene inhibition. Delivery of shRNA to embryos has the
potential to specifically knockdown the expression of developmentally essential
genes and to rescue gene mutations, significantly decreasing the time required to
analyze the function(s) of individual genes in development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14502572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):50691-701. Epub 2003 Sep 10.

Molecular basis of constitutive production of basement membrane components. Gene 
expression profiles of Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor and F9 embryonal carcinoma
cells.

Futaki S(1), Hayashi Y, Yamashita M, Yagi K, Bono H, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y,
Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, ERATO, Japanese Science and Technology 
Agency (JST), Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Yazako Nagakute-cho,
Aichi-gun, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan.

Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) tumors produce large amounts of basement membrane
(BM) components that are widely used as cell culture substrates mimicking BM
functions. To delineate the tissue/organ origin of the tumor and the mechanisms
operating in the BM overproduction, a genome-wide expression profile of EHS tumor
was analyzed using RIKEN cDNA microarrays containing approximately 40,000 mouse
cDNA clones. Expression profiles of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells that produce
laminin-1 and other BM components upon differentiation into parietal
endoderm-like cells (designated F9-PE) were also analyzed. Hierarchical
clustering analysis showed that the gene expression profiles of EHS and F9-PE
were the most similar among 49 mouse tissues/organs in the RIKEN Expression Array
Database, suggesting that EHS tumor is parietal endoderm-derived. Quantitative
PCR analysis confirmed that not only BM components but also the machineries
required for efficient production of BM components, such as enzymes involved in
post-translational modification and molecular chaperones, were highly expressed
in both EHS and F9-PE. Pairs of similar transcription factor isoforms, such as
Gata4/Gata6, Sox7/Sox17, and Cited1/Cited2, were also highly expressed in both
EHS tumor and F9-PE. Time course analysis of F9 differentiation showed that
up-regulation of the transcription factors was associated with those of BM
components, suggesting their involvement in parietal endoderm specification and
overproduction of the BM components.

PMID: 12968032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Endocrinol. 2003 Sep;178(3):405-16.

Endocrine and molecular influences on testicular development in Meishan and White
Composite boars.

McCoard SA(1), Wise TH, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, US
Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska 68933, USA.
sue.mccoard@agreresearch.co.nz

The aim of this study was to evaluate developmental changes in thyroid hormone
and other key endocrine hormones/molecular markers produced by testicular cells, 
in relation to breed differences in proliferation and maturation of Sertoli cells
and general testicular morphological development in Meishan (MS) and White
Composite (WC) boars. Blood samples and testes were collected on days 60, 75, 90 
and 105 post coitum (dpc) and days 1, 7, 14 and 25 post partum (dpp). Testes were
immunostained for thyroid hormone receptor-beta1 (THRbeta1), GATA4,
Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS), 17-alpha-hydroxylase (P450(c17)) and
inhibin subunits (alpha, betaA, betaB). In addition, protein levels were
determined by densitometry. Plasma concentrations of free triiodothyronine (T(3))
were greater in MS (hyperthyroid) compared with WC (hypothyroid) boars (P<0.01)
during fetal life, but the reverse was evident postnatally. Elevated levels of
free T(3) during fetal life were associated with increased levels of THRbeta1,
suggesting increased thyroid responsiveness of the testis during this time,
contrasting with observations during early postnatal life. Localization patterns 
of THRbeta1, MIS, GATA4 and the inhibin subunits were consistent with previous
studies. MIS protein levels declined more rapidly (P<0.001) in MS compared with
WC Sertoli cells postnatally, consistent with earlier maturation of Sertoli cells
as indicated by our previous study. In this study, transient neonatal
hyperthyroidism in MS boars during late gestation was associated with a decline
in proliferation and early maturation of Sertoli cells, followed by early onset
of puberty in this breed. These observations indicate a possible role for thyroid
hormone in the modification of Sertoli cell development, thereby influencing
growth and differentiation of the testis in pigs.

PMID: 12967333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Endocrinol. 2003 Sep;178(3):395-403.

Stereological evaluation of Sertoli cell ontogeny during fetal and neonatal life 
in two diverse breeds of swine.

McCoard SA(1), Wise TH, Lunstra DD, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, US
Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska 68933, USA.
sue.mccoard@agresearch.co.nz

Chinese Meishan (MS) boars have smaller testes due to fewer Sertoli cells
compared with White Composite (WC) boars. The objective was to describe Sertoli
cell development relative to circulating FSH concentrations in fetal and neonatal
MS and WC boars. Testes and blood samples were collected on days 60, 75, 90 and
105 postcoitum (dpc) and 1, 7, 14 and 25 postpartum (dpp). One testis was
immunostained for GATA4 or Ki67 antigen to evaluate total and proliferating
Sertoli cell numbers respectively. Testicular size was greater (P<0.01) in WC
than MS boars at all ages, associated with a greater mass of interstitial tIssue.
Tubular mass (P<0.01) was greater in prenatal WC boars, but postnatally increased
more rapidly (P<0.001) in MS boars, exceeding WC boars by 25 dpp. Sertoli cell
numbers increased with age, was greater (P<0.001) in WC than MS boars during
prenatal development but increased rapidly (P<0.01) by 1 dpp in MS and thereafter
was similar in both breeds. The proportion of Ki67-positive Sertoli cells was
maximal at 90 dpc, declining thereafter, did not differ between breeds through 7 
dpp, but was greater (P<0.05) in WC than MS boars at 14 and 25 dpp. Plasma FSH
concentrations were greater (P<0.05) in WC than MS boars at 75 dpc. FSH
concentrations were elevated at 105 dpc (MS) and 1 dpp (WC) but declined
thereafter with advancing postnatal age in both breeds. This study illustrates
that late gestation represents the period of maximal Sertoli cell proliferation. 
Despite asynchronous Sertoli cell population growth between breeds during early
postnatal life, differential mature Sertoli cell numbers and testicular size are 
probably due to differences in duration of the proliferative period after 25 dpp,
potentially regulated by Sertoli cell maturation and blood-testis barrier
formation. These events were not associated with fetal or early postnatal changes
in FSH secretion.

PMID: 12967332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Poult Sci. 2003 Sep;82(9):1462-7.

Profiles of mRNA expression of genes related to sex differentiation of the gonads
in the chicken embryo.

Yamamoto I(1), Tsukada A, Saito N, Shimada K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, 
Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

Sex is determined genetically in birds. The homogametic sex is male (ZZ), whereas
the heterogametic sex is female (ZW). According to the genetic sex, gonads
develop into testes or ovary. In this study, we performed experiments to reveal
mRNA expression patterns in the gonad between d 5.5 and 8.5 of incubation and
examined a possible role of Dss-Ahc critical region on the X chromosome 1 (Dax1),
Steroidogenic factor 1 (Sf1), P450aromatase (P450arom), Estrogen receptor alpha
(ER alpha), doublesex and mab3 related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1),
Sry-related HMG box gene 9 (Sox9), Gata binding protein 4 (Gata4), and
anti-müllerian hormone (Amh) in sex differentiation in chicken embryonic gonads
using RNase protection assay. In embryonic chicken gonads, Dax1 mRNA was
expressed in both sexes but was higher in females than in males at d 6.5 and 7.5 
of incubation. The Sf1 mRNA was expressed in both sexes, but it was expressed
more in males at d 5.5 than in females but more in females than in males at d 7.5
and 8.5 of incubation. The P450arom mRNA was expressed only in female gonads from
d 5.5 of incubation. The ER alpha mRNA was expressed in both sexes, but it did
not show a sex difference. On the other hand, the Dmrt1 mRNA was expressed in
both sexes, but it showed a male-specific expression pattern. The male-specific
expression pattern was observed in Sox9 mRNA, but it was not expressed in female 
gonads. The Gata4 mRNA was expressed in both sexes, and sex differences were not 
revealed throughout the observational period. Amh mRNA was expressed in both
sexes, but it had male-specific mRNA expression pattern at d 6.5 to 8.5 of
incubation. These results indicate that Dax1, Sf1, and P450arom have possible
roles in ovary formation, whereas Dmrt1, Sox9, and Amh are related to testis
formation in differentiating chicken gonads at d 5.5 to 8.5 of incubation.

PMID: 12967261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Basic Res Cardiol. 2003 Sep;98(5):285-94. Epub 2003 Apr 16.

Upregulation of embryonic transcription factors in right ventricular hypertrophy.

Bär H(1), Kreuzer J, Cojoc A, Jahn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Bergheimer Strasse 58, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
harald_baer@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Increased ventricular expression of genes encoding for various structural and
contractile proteins has been reported in cardiac hypertrophy. Mechanisms leading
to this altered gene expression are only partly understood. Recently, various
transcription factors (TF), among them GATA-4, Nkx-2.5/Csx, MEF-2 and the HAND
family (eHAND and dHAND), and their role in embryonic cardiac development have
been described. These transcription factors are known to have binding sites to
promotor regions of many genes known to be regulated in hypertrophy of adult
ventricular myocardium. We investigated the temporal and spatial expression
pattern of these transcription factors in a rat model of acute pressure-overload 
of the right ventricle, induced by banding (coarctation) of the pulmonary artery.
Expression of GATA-4, Nkx-2.5/Csx, MEF-2 and dHAND protein was found to increase 
in the right ventricle after the banding procedure as determined by
immunohistochemistry and western blotting. A marker of the onset of cardiac
hypertrophy was expression of ANP protein. We conclude that TF known to regulate 
embryonic heart development are involved in the adaptational response of adult
ventricular myocardium to pressure overload.

PMID: 12955401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Androl. 2003 Sep-Oct;24(5):653-60.

Effects of ethanol on embryonic and neonatal rat testes in organ cultures.

Li H(1), Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington, USA.

Ethanol exposure in adult animals and humans has shown to elicit significant
inhibitory effects on the function of male reproduction, but consequences of
ethanol exposure on the embryonic and early postnatal testis development are not 
known. The current study investigated the effect of ethanol on embryonic and
neonatal testis development using an organ culture technique. In embryonic day 13
(E13) testis organ cultures, ethanol had no effect on the testicular cord
formation, the expression of Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) in Sertoli
cells or the number of gonocytes. Similarly, in the ethanol-treated embryonic day
18 (E18) testes, both the number of gonocytes and the expression of GATA-4 and
MIS were similar to those from the control testes. In contrast, in postnatal day 
3 (P3) testes, ethanol at concentrations of 150 and 200 mM significantly
decreased the number of gonocytes without affecting the expression of GATA-4 and 
MIS in Sertoli cells. This effect was shown to be resulting from the enhanced
apoptosis of gonocytes. In addition, ethanol abnormally activated retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARalpha), as indicated by increased nuclear localization of
RARalpha with increasing doses of ethanol treatment. These observations suggest
that the effect of ethanol on testis varies at different stages during embryonic 
and neonatal testis development. Furthermore, germ cells may be the main target
for the action of ethanol on the early postnatal testis.

PMID: 12954654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Surgery. 2003 Aug;134(2):189-96.

Induction of hepatic differentiation in embryonic stem cells by co-culture with
embryonic cardiac mesoderm.

Fair JH(1), Cairns BA, Lapaglia M, Wang J, Meyer AA, Kim H, Hatada S, Smithies O,
Pevny L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

BACKGROUND: Modifications in vitro have been used to direct embryonic stem (ES)
cells toward endodermal phenotypes including hepatocytes; however, developmental 
correlates and evidence of biologic activity is lacking, and critical cell-cell
interactions have not been investigated. In this study, we hypothesized that
cardiac mesoderm (CM) signals ES cells in co-culture to undergo differentiation
toward early hepatocyte lineage as determined by morphology and induction of
genes essential for endodermal competence and hepatocyte development.
METHODS: Green fluorescent protein ES derived from A129 mice were cultured with
or without embryonic chick cardiac mesoderm. Cultures from day 1, 2, and 4 were
analyzed for colony formation and ES morphology and 10(6) ES-derived cells were
isolated for mRNA analysis.
RESULTS: ES in co-culture with CM displayed colony formation, polymorphic
appearance, and definitive interface with CM. In addition, ES + CM co-culture
activated crucial transcription factors (sox 17alpha, HNF3beta, and GATA 4)
required for hepatocyte development by day 1. mRNA for albumin and especially
a-fetoprotein were also increased by culture days 2 and 4.
CONCLUSIONS: ES cells co-cultured with CM display morphology and gene expression 
pattern required for hepatocyte differentiation and appear to recapitulate the
molecular events of hepatogenesis.

PMID: 12947317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jun;85(2-5):291-8.

Novel roles for GATA transcription factors in the regulation of steroidogenesis.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Room T1-49, CHUL Research Centre, 2705
Laurier Blvd. Sainte-Foy, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.

Steroidogenesis is a tightly regulated process that is dependent on pituitary
hormones. In steroidogenic tissues, hormonal stimulation triggers activation of
an intracellular signalling pathway that typically involves cAMP production,
activation of PKA, and phosphorylation of target transcription factors. In the
classic cAMP signalling pathway, phosphorylation of CREB (cAMP response element
(CRE)-binding protein) and its subsequent binding to cAMP-response elements
(CREs) in the regulatory regions of target genes play a key role in mediating
cAMP responsiveness. However, the cAMP responsive regions of several genes
expressed in steroidogenic tissues do not contain consensus CREs indicating that 
other transcription factors are also involved. We have been studying the role
played by the GATA family of transcription factors. GATA factors are expressed in
a variety of tissues including the adrenals and gonads. Since the regulatory
regions of several steroidogenic genes contain GATA elements, we have proposed
that GATA factors, particularly GATA-4 and GATA-6, might represent novel
downstream effectors of hormonal signalling in steroidogenic tissues. In vitro
experiments have revealed that GATA-4 is indeed phosphorylated in steroidogenic
cells and that phosphorylation levels are rapidly induced by cAMP. GATA-4
phosphorylation is mediated by PKA. Phosphorylation increases GATA-4 DNA-binding 
activity and enhances its transcriptional properties on multiple steroidogenic
promoters. We now define a new molecular mechanism whereby phospho-GATA factors
contribute to increased transcription of steroidogenic genes in response to
hormonal stimulation.

PMID: 12943715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 15;63(16):4967-77.

Anomalous expression of epithelial differentiation-determining GATA factors in
ovarian tumorigenesis.

Capo-chichi CD(1), Roland IH, Vanderveer L, Bao R, Yamagata T, Hirai H, Cohen C, 
Hamilton TC, Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer and Tumor Biology Programs, Department of Medical Oncology, Fox
Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Tumor cells often appear in a deviant differentiated stage, and dedifferentiation
is a hallmark of malignancy; however, the causative mechanism of the global
changes in dedifferentiation is not understood. The GATA transcription factors
function in cell lineage specification during embryonic development and organ
formation. The transcriptional targets of the GATA factors in early embryonic
development include Disabled-2 and collagen IV, markers for epithelial lineages. 
GATA-4 and GATA-6 are expressed strongly and are localized in the nucleus in
ovarian surface epithelial cells in tissues or primary cell cultures. By
immunohistochemistry, we found that 82% of the 50 tumors analyzed had lost GATA-6
function, either by a complete absence of expression or by cytoplasmic
mislocalization. The frequent loss of GATA-6 was also confirmed in a panel of
ovarian surface epithelial and tumor cell lines. Although GATA-4 is absent only
in a small percentage (14%) of ovarian tumors, it is lost in the majority of
established cell lines in culture. The loss of GATA-6 correlates with the loss of
Disabled-2, collagen IV, and laminin, markers for epithelial cell types. Loss of 
GATA factors was also found in an in vitro model for spontaneous transformation
of rat ovarian epithelial cells. Repression of GATA-6 by small interfering
(si)RNA approach in cultured cells leads to dedifferentiation as indicated by the
loss of Disabled-2 and laminin expression. Restoration of GATA factors expression
by ectopic transfection suppresses cell growth and is incompatible with the
maintenance of the cells in culture. However, restoration of GATA-4 and GATA-6
expression is not able to induce expression of endogenous Disabled-2 in tumor
cells, suggesting that the loss of GATA factors and dedifferentiation are
irreversible processes. In conclusion, we observed the inappropriate expression
and cellular localization of the GATA transcription factors in ovarian tumor
tissues and cancer cell lines, and we have demonstrated that down-regulation of
GATA factor expression leads to dedifferentiation. We propose that alterations of
GATA transcription factor expression and aberrant nucleocytoplasmic localization 
may contribute to the anomalous epithelial dedifferentiation of the ovarian tumor
cells.

PMID: 12941822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):116-31.

Transgenic analysis of the atrialnatriuretic factor (ANF) promoter: Nkx2-5 and
GATA-4 binding sites are required for atrial specific expression of ANF.

Small EM(1), Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona Health Sciences 
Center, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

The atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene is initially expressed throughout the
myocardial layer of the heart, but during subsequent development, expression
becomes limited to the atrial chambers. Mouse knockout and mammalian cell culture
studies have shown that the ANF gene is regulated by combinatorial interactions
between Nkx2-5, GATA-4, Tbx5, and SRF; however, the molecular mechanisms leading 
to chamber-specific expression are currently unknown. We have isolated the
Xenopus ANF promoter in order to examine the temporal and spatial regulation of
the ANF gene in vivo using transgenic embryos. The mammalian and Xenopus ANF
promoters show remarkable sequence similarity, including an Nkx2-5 binding site
(NKE), two GATA sites, a T-box binding site (TBE), and two SRF binding sites
(SREs). Our transgenic studies show that mutation of either SRE, the TBE or the
distal GATA element, strongly reduces expression from the ANF promoter. However, 
mutations of the NKE, the proximal GATA, or both elements together, result in
relatively minor reductions in transgene expression within the myocardium.
Surprisingly, mutation of these elements results in ectopic ANF promoter activity
in the kidneys, facial muscles, and aortic arch artery-associated muscles, and
causes persistent expression in the ventricle and outflow tract of the heart. We 
propose that the NKE and proximal GATA elements serve as crucial binding sites
for assembly of a repressor complex that is required for atrial-specific
expression of the ANF gene.

PMID: 12941624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 Sep;11(9):659-64.

Polymorphisms of genes of the cardiac calcineurin pathway and cardiac
hypertrophy.

Poirier O(1), Nicaud V, McDonagh T, Dargie HJ, Desnos M, Dorent R, Roizès G,
Schwartz K, Tiret L, Komajda M, Cambien F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U525, Epidemiologic and Molecular Genetics of Cardiovascular Diseases, 
Faculté de Médecine Pitié-Salpêtrière, 91 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75634 Paris
cedex 13, France.

The study investigated the role of genetic polymorphisms in four genes of the
calcineurin pathway on cardiac hypertrophy and dilated cardiomyopathy. The
cardiac calcineurin pathway has been suggested to play a role in the development 
of cardiac hypertrophy in response to a number of physiological and pathological 
stimuli. Calcineurin, a heterodimeric protein composed of a catalytic and a
regulatory subunit, activates the nuclear factor NFATC4 which after translocation
to the nucleus associates with the transcription factor GATA4 to activate several
cardiac genes involved in hypertrophic response. We have screened the genes
encoding the four major components of the heart calcineurin pathway in 95
individuals and identified 27 polymorphisms. These polymorphisms were
investigated in 400 selected subjects obtained from a population-based study
(LOVE) in relation to echocardiographic parameters. A Gly/Ala substitution at
position 160 of the NFATC4 protein (G160A) was associated with left ventricular
mass and wall thickness (P=0.02 and 0.006, respectively, GA+AA vs GG), the minor 
allele (Ala) being associated with lower mean values of these parameters. The
other polymorphisms identified by the gene screen were not associated with
cardiac phenotypes. For the G160A polymorphism in NFATC4, genotype frequencies
were compared between patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and controls obtained 
from the CARDIGENE Study. Allele A carriers were less frequent in the patient
than in the control group (P=0.04). Although the strength of the associations was
rather weak, these observations raise the hypothesis that the G160A polymorphism 
of the NFATC4 gene plays a role in the development of human cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 12939651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):4123-33.

Mouse strain susceptibility to gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical tumor formation
correlates with the expression of GATA-4 and luteinizing hormone receptor.

Bielinska M(1), Parviainen H, Porter-Tinge SB, Kiiveri S, Genova E, Rahman N,
Huhtaniemi IT, Muglia LJ, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Certain inbred strains of mice, including DBA/2J, develop adrenocortical tumors
in response to gonadectomy. Spindle-shaped cells with limited steroidogenic
capacity, termed A cells, appear in the subcapsular region of the adrenal gland, 
followed by sex steroid-producing cells known as B cells. These changes result
from unopposed gonadotropin production by the pituitary, but the adrenocortical
factors involved in tumorigenesis have not been characterized. GATA-4, a
transcription factor normally expressed in fetal, but not adult, adrenocortical
cells, was found in neoplastic cells that proliferate in the adrenal cortex of
gonadectomized DBA/2J mice. GATA-4 mRNA was detected in the adrenal glands of
female mice 0.5 months after ovariectomy and reached a maximum by 4 months.
Castrated male mice developed adrenocortical tumors more slowly than
gonadectomized females, and the onset of GATA-4 expression in the adrenal was
delayed. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry revealed GATA-4 mRNA and 
protein in A and B cells, but not in normal adrenocortical cells. mRNA encoding
another factor associated with adrenocortical tumorigenesis, LH receptor (LHR),
was detected in A and B cells. In addition, transcripts for P450 17
alpha-hydroxylase/C17-C20 lyase, an enzyme essential for the production of sex
steroids, and inhibin-alpha were found in B cells. Unilateral ovarian
regeneration, a phenomenon known to occur in gonadectomized mice, was observed in
a subset of DBA/2J mice undergoing complete ovariectomy. In these animals,
adrenocortical tumor progression was arrested; A cells and GATA-4 expression were
evident, but there was no expression of LHR or P450 17 alpha-hydroxylase/C17-C20 
lyase. Strain susceptibility to adrenocortical tumorigenesis (DBA/2J >> FVB/N)
correlated with the expression of GATA-4 and LHR, implicating these factors in
the process of adrenocortical neoplasia in response to continuous gonadotropin
stimulation.

PMID: 12933687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42637-42. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

A mutated form of steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1 G35E) that causes sex reversal in 
humans fails to synergize with transcription factor GATA-4.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, CHUL Research Centre and Centre de
Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Université Laval, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Sainte-Foy, Quebec G1V 4G2,
Canada.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is a transcription factor belonging to the nuclear 
receptor superfamily. SF-1 regulates the expression of many genes involved in
reproduction, steroidogenesis, and sexual differentiation. An important SF-1
target for male sexual differentiation is the gene encoding the
Müllerian-inhibiting substance hormone that induces regression of the Müllerian
ducts in the developing male embryo. Not long ago, a mutation (G35E) in the human
SF-1 gene was identified as the cause of sex reversal and adrenal failure in a
phenotypically female but genotypically XY individual. This suggested that the
mutated SF-1 protein might interfere with the expression of SF-1 target gene(s)
involved in the male sexual differentiation pathway, such as MIS. Surprisingly,
the initial biochemical characterization of the SF-1 G35E mutant revealed that it
could bind and activate the MIS promoter as efficiently as wild-type SF-1. MIS
expression, however, does not rely solely on SF-1 but rather requires the
concerted action of several transcription factors including GATA-4. We have
previously reported that GATA-4 and SF-1 transcriptionally cooperate to
synergistically activate the MIS promoter. Thus, we hypothesized that the
phenotype observed with the SF-1 G35E mutation could be explained, at least in
part, by a failure and/or a disruption of GATA-4/SF-1 synergism. We found that
the SF-1 G35E mutant failed to synergize with GATA-4 despite a direct physical
interaction between the two proteins. Interestingly, the SF-1 G35E mutant also
disrupted transcriptional synergism between wild-type SF-1 and GATA-4, indicating
that it could act as a dominant negative competitor. Thus, our results strengthen
the importance of a GATA-4/SF-1 cooperation for MIS transcription and reveal that
disruption of this synergism might be responsible for some cases of abnormal sex 
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 12907682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biol Reprod. 2003 Dec;69(6):1964-72. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

Effects of mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate on fetal and neonatal rat testis organ
cultures.

Li H(1), Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) and its active metabolite, mono-(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate (MEHP), have been shown to cause reproductive toxicity in both
developing and adult animals. In this study, we used organ cultures of fetal and 
neonatal rat testes to assess the in vitro effect of MEHP on seminiferous cord
formation in Embryonic Day 13 (E13) testes and on the development of E18 and
Postnatal Day 3 (P3) testes. Interestingly, MEHP had no effect on cord formation 
in the organ cultures of E13 testes, indicating that it has no effect on sexual
differentiation of the indifferent gonad to testis. Consistently, the expression 
of a Sertoli cell-specific protein, mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS), or the 
number of gonocytes did not change in E13 testes after MEHP treatment. In
contrast, MEHP decreased the levels of MIS and GATA-4 proteins in Sertoli cells
and impaired Sertoli cell proliferation in the organ cultures of E18 and P3
testes. These results suggest that MEHP negatively influences proliferation and
differentiation of Sertoli cells in both fetal and neonatal testes. In addition, 
MEHP treatment did not alter the number of gonocytes in E18 testes, whereas the
number of gonocytes in P3 testes decreased in a dose-dependent manner, apparently
due to enhanced apoptosis. These results suggest that MEHP adversely affects the 
gonocytes, which are mitotically active and undergoing migration and
differentiation in neonatal testes, but it has no effect on fetal gonocytes that 
are mitotically quiescent.

PMID: 12904314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nature. 2003 Jul 24;424(6947):443-7. Epub 2003 Jul 6.

GATA4 mutations cause human congenital heart defects and reveal an interaction
with TBX5.

Garg V(1), Kathiriya IS, Barnes R, Schluterman MK, King IN, Butler CA, Rothrock
CR, Eapen RS, Hirayama-Yamada K, Joo K, Matsuoka R, Cohen JC, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Rm. NA8.124, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.
Vidu.Garg@UTSouthwestern.edu

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are the most common developmental anomaly and are
the leading non-infectious cause of mortality in newborns. Only one causative
gene, NKX2-5, has been identified through genetic linkage analysis of pedigrees
with non-syndromic CHDs. Here, we show that isolated cardiac septal defects in a 
large pedigree were linked to chromosome 8p22-23. A heterozygous G296S missense
mutation of GATA4, a transcription factor essential for heart formation, was
found in all available affected family members but not in any control
individuals. This mutation resulted in diminished DNA-binding affinity and
transcriptional activity of Gata4. Furthermore, the Gata4 mutation abrogated a
physical interaction between Gata4 and TBX5, a T-box protein responsible for a
subset of syndromic cardiac septal defects. Conversely, interaction of Gata4 and 
TBX5 was disrupted by specific human TBX5 missense mutations that cause similar
cardiac septal defects. In a second family, we identified a frame-shift mutation 
of GATA4 (E359del) that was transcriptionally inactive and segregated with
cardiac septal defects. These results implicate GATA4 as a genetic cause of human
cardiac septal defects, perhaps through its interaction with TBX5.

PMID: 12845333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3865-76.

Induction of cardiomyocytes by GATA4 in Xenopus ectodermal explants.

Latinkic BV(1), Kotecha S, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The earliest step in heart formation in vertebrates occurs during gastrulation,
when cardiac tissue is specified. Dorsoanterior endoderm is thought to provide a 
signal that induces adjacent mesodermal cells to adopt a cardiac fate. However,
the nature of this signalling and the precise role of endoderm are unknown
because of the close proximity and interdependence of mesoderm and endoderm
during gastrulation. To better define the molecular events that underlie cardiac 
induction, we have sought to develop a simple means of inducing cardiac tissue.
We show that the transcription factor GATA4, which has been implicated in
regulating cardiac gene expression, is sufficient to induce cardiac
differentiation in Xenopus embryonic ectoderm (animal pole) explants, frequently 
resulting in beating tissue. Lineage labelling experiments demonstrate that GATA4
can trigger cardiac differentiation not only in cells in which it is present, but
also in neighbouring cells. Surprisingly, cardiac differentiation can occur
without any stable differentiation of anterior endoderm and is in fact enhanced
under conditions in which endoderm formation is inhibited. Remarkably, cardiac
tissue is formed even when GATA4 activity is delayed until long after explants
have commenced differentiation into epidermal tissue. These findings provide a
simple assay system for cardiac induction that may allow elucidation of pathways 
leading to cardiac differentiation. Better knowledge of the pathways governing
this process may help develop procedures for efficient generation of
cardiomyocytes from pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 12835401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Biol Reprod. 2003 Oct;69(4):1281-93. Epub 2003 Jun 11.

Dynamics of ovarian development in the FORKO immature mouse: structural and
functional implications for ovarian reserve.

Balla A(1), Danilovich N, Yang Y, Sairam MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Reproduction Research Laboratory, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Adult Follitropin Receptor Knockout (FORKO) female mice are infertile and
estrogen deficient. In order to understand the peri/postnatal developmental
changes, we have now characterized the structural and molecular aberrations by
comparing several markers of follicular development in 2-, 10-, and 24-day-old
wild-type and FORKO females. By Day 24, FORKO mice have 40%-50% smaller uteri and
vaginas. Estradiol is undetectable but testosterone and LH levels are already
elevated at this age. FORKO ovaries are 45% smaller, indicating a postnatal or
perinatal deficit consequent to FSH receptor ablation. This is attributable to
decreased numbers of growing follicles and reduced diameter. Developmental
markers, such as Müllerian inhibiting substance, GATA-4, estrogen receptor beta, 
and androgen receptor, were differentially expressed in granulosa cells. In the
2-day-old mutant neonates, a faster recruitment process was noted that later
slowed down, impeding development of follicles. This is noteworthy in light of
the controversy regarding the direct role of FSH/receptor system as a determinant
of small and preantral follicle development in rodents. As the pool of nongrowing
primordial follicles specifies the duration of female fertility and timing of
reproductive senescence, we believe that the postnatal FORKO female mouse could
help in exploring the signals that impact on early folliculogenesis. In addition,
our data suggest that the FSH/receptor system is a major contributor to the
formation and recruitment of the nongrowing pool of follicles as early as
Postnatal Day 2 in the mouse.

PMID: 12801993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003 Jun 15;34(12):1589-98.

Stress-induced activation of GATA-4 in cardiac muscle cells.

Suzuki YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University,
Boston, MA 02111, USA. yuichiro.suzuki@tufts.edu

GATA-4 regulates gene transcription in the heart. This study examined whether
GATA-4 is influenced by stress-induced signaling events. Treatment of HL-1
cardiac muscle cells with mercury results in the induction of apoptosis that is
blocked by overexpression of catalase. Similar to daunorubicin (DNR), mercury
causes downregulation of GATA-4 mRNA expression. However, mercury is less
effective in inducing apoptosis compared to DNR. Analyses of GATA-4 protein
expression and activity reveal that mercury initially enhances the GATA-4
DNA-binding activity, before subsequent downregulation of GATA-4 expression. The 
mercury-induced GATA-4 activation is associated with a phosphorylation of GATA-4,
which appears to occur via the MEK/ERK pathway. The level of phosphorylated
GATA-4 is more slowly decreased by mercury or actinomycin D, compared to
unphosphorylated GATA-4, suggesting that phosphorylated GATA-4 is more resistant 
to cellular degradation. Consistent with a previous finding that GATA-4
phosphorylation induces cell survival, mercury decreases cell death induced by
DNR. These results suggest that cardiac muscle cells respond to mercury stress by
eliciting MEK/ERK signaling to form phosphorylated GATA-4 that is more resistant 
to cellular degradation and induce cell survival.

PMID: 12788478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Aug;17(8):1508-21. Epub 2003 May 29.

The different cardiac expression of the type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase gene
between human and rat is related to the differential response of the Dio2 genes
to Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 transcription factors.

Dentice M(1), Morisco C, Vitale M, Rossi G, Fenzi G, Salvatore D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Pathologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facolta di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Universita degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II," 80131
Naples, Italy.

By producing T3 from T4, type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase (D2) catalyzes the first
step in the cascade underlying the effect exerted by thyroid hormone. Type 2
iodothyronine deiodinase mRNA is expressed at high levels in human heart but is
barely detectable in the corresponding rodent tissue. Although the heart is a
major target of thyroid hormone, the role of cardiac D2 and the factors that
regulate its expression are unknown. Here we report that the human Dio2 promoter 
is very sensitive to the cardiac transcription factors Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4.
Nkx-2.5 transactivates a 6.5-kb human (h)Dio2-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
construct, with maximal induction reached with a 633-bp proximal promoter region.
Interestingly, despite 73% identity with the corresponding human region, the rat 
Dio2 promoter is much less responsive to Nkx-2.5 induction. Using EMSA, we found 
that two sites in the human promoter (C and D) specifically bind Nkx-2.5. In
coexpression studies, GATA-4 alone was a poor inducer of the hDio2 promoter;
however in synergy with Nkx-2.5, it activated D2 reporter gene expression in the 
human, but not the rat promoter. Functional analysis showed that both C and D
sites are required for the complete Nkx-2.5 response and for the Nkx-2.5/GATA-4
synergistic effect. In neonatal rat primary myocardiocytes, most of the
hDio2-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity was suppressed by mutation of
the Nkx-2.5 binding sites. Finally, a mutant Nkx-2.5 protein (N188K), which
causes, in heterozygosity, congenital heart diseases, did not transactivate the
Dio2 promoter and interfered with its activity in cardiomyocytes, possibly by
titrating endogenous Nkx-2.5 protein away from the promoter. In conclusion, this 
study shows that Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 play prime roles in Dio2 gene regulation in
the human heart and suggests that it is their synergistic action in humans that
causes the differential expression of the cardiac Dio2 gene between humans and
rats.

PMID: 12775767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):280-90.

Intracellular calcium plays an essential role in cardiac development.

Porter GA Jr(1), Makuck RF, Rivkees SA.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Health Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Cardiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520-8064, USA. george.porter@yale.edu

Intracellular calcium signaling plays an essential role in cardiac physiology and
modulates cardiac gene expression. However, the role that intracellular calcium
signaling plays during cardiac development is not known. To address this issue,
we examined the effects of altered intracellular calcium levels on cardiac
morphogenesis. In acutely cultured mouse embryos, L-type calcium channel blockade
decreased resting intracellular calcium levels and inhibited calcium transients. 
Embryos cultured at embryonic day (E) 7.5-8.5 in the presence of the L-type
calcium channel blockers nifedipine and verapamil developed hearts that had a
large left ventricle, lacked a right ventricle and had a long, thin outflow
tract. If embryos were cultured at E7.5, calcium channel blockade also induced an
abnormal, anterior cardiac loop. These alterations in development were not due to
altered cardiac function, as heart rates at the end of the culture period were
not affected by calcium channel blockade and blood flow was observed. Treatment
with nifedipine altered the mRNA expression of the transcription factor Gata4,
which was absent in the developing ventricles, and the sarcomeric protein Mylpc
(myosin light chain 2V), which was decreased distal to the left ventricle and was
absent at the site of the developing right ventricle. In contrast, the expression
pattern of other cardiac transcription factor (Hand1, Hand2, Mef2c, Nkx2-5) and
cytoskeletal protein (Myhca, Tagln) mRNA did not change with calcium channel
blockade. These data demonstrate that proper intracellular calcium signaling is
essential for normal cardiac looping, gene expression, and organ development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. FASEB J. 2003 Jul;17(10):1361-3. Epub 2003 May 8.

Beating is necessary for transdifferentiation of skeletal muscle-derived cells
into cardiomyocytes.

Iijima Y(1), Nagai T, Mizukami M, Matsuura K, Ogura T, Wada H, Toko H, Akazawa H,
Takano H, Nakaya H, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Cell transplantation could be a potential therapy for heart damage. Skeletal
myoblasts have been expected to be a good cell source for autologous
transplantation; however, the safety and efficacy of their transplantation are
still controversial. Recent studies have revealed that skeletal muscle possesses 
the stem cell population that is distinct from myoblasts. To elucidate whether
skeletal muscle stem cells can transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes, we
cocultured skeletal muscle cells isolated from transgenic mice expressing green
fluorescent protein with cardiomyocytes of neonatal rats. Skeletal muscle-derived
cells expressed cardiac-specific proteins such as cardiac troponin T and atrial
natriuretic peptide as well as cardiac-enriched transcription factors such as
Nkx2E (formerly called Csx/Nkx2.5) and GATA4 by coculture with cardiomyocytes.
Skeletal muscle-derived cells also expressed cadherin and connexin 43 at the
junctions with neighboring cardiomyocytes. Cardiomyocyte-like action potentials
were recorded from beating skeletal muscle-derived cells. Treatment of nifedipine
or culture in Ca2+-free media suppressed contraction of cardiomyocytes and
inhibited skeletal muscle cells to express cardiac-specific proteins. Cyclic
stretch completely restored this inhibitory effect. These results suggest that
some part of skeletal muscle cells can transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes and
that direct cell-to-cell contact and contraction of neighboring cardiomyocytes
are important for the transdifferentiation.

PMID: 12738802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 25;278(30):28101-8. Epub 2003 May 5.

SOX8 is expressed during testis differentiation in mice and synergizes with SF1
to activate the Amh promoter in vitro.

Schepers G(1), Wilson M, Wilhelm D, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane
4072, Australia.

Sox8 is a member of the Sox family of developmental transcription factor genes
and is closely related to Sox9, a key gene in the testis determination pathway in
mammals. Like Sox9, Sox8 is expressed in the developing mouse testis around the
time of sex determination, suggesting that it might play a role in regulating the
expression of testis-specific genes. An early step in male sex differentiation is
the expression of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) in Sertoli cells. Expression of
the Amh gene during sex differentiation requires the interaction of several
transcription factors, including SF1, SOX9, GATA4, WT1, and DAX1. Here we show
that SOX8 may also be involved in regulating the expression of Amh. Expression of
Sox8 begins just prior to that of Amh at 12 days post coitum (dpc) in mouse
testes and continues beyond 16 dpc in Sertoli cells. In vitro assays showed that 
SOX8 binds specifically to SOX binding sites within the Amh minimal promoter and,
like SOX9, acts synergistically with SF1 through direct protein-protein
interaction to enhance Amh expression, albeit at lower levels compared with SOX9.
SOX8 and SOX9 appear to have arisen from a common ancestral gene and may have
retained some common functions during sexual development. Our data provide the
first evidence that SOX8 may partially compensate for the reduced SOX9 activity
in campomelic dysplasia and substitute for Sox9 where Sox9 is either not
expressed or expressed too late to be involved in sex determination or regulation
of Amh expression.

PMID: 12732652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Exp Cell Res. 2003 May 15;286(1):102-14.

Multiprotein bridging factor 1 cooperates with c-Jun and is necessary for cardiac
hypertrophy in vitro.

Busk PK(1), Wulf-Andersen L, Strøm CC, Enevoldsen M, Thirstrup K, Haunsø S,
Sheikh SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Medical Department B, H:S Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, Juliane Mariesvej 20, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

Cardiac hypertrophy is induced by a number of stimuli and can lead to
cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is characterized by
increased cell size and altered gene expression. By differential-display
polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting we found that the transcriptional 
coactivator MBF1 was upregulated during hypertrophy in cardiomyocyte cultures.
Furthermore, MBF1 protein level increased in two animal models of hypertrophy,
angiotensin II treatment and aortic banding. MBF1 antisense oligodeoxynuclotides 
blocked phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy, suggesting MBF1 plays a key role in
hypertrophic growth. In contrast, overexpression of MBF1 potentiated the
hormone-induced response of the atrial natriuretic peptide promoter. MBF1
overexpressed by transient transfection cooperated with the transcription factor 
c-Jun in activation of transcription but not with GATA4. MBF1 and c-Jun induced
the activity of a transiently transfected atrial natriuretic peptide promoter,
whereas neither MBF1 nor c-Jun could induce the promoter alone. Moreover, MBF1
bound to c-Jun in vitro. These data suggest that MBF1 is a transcriptional
coactivator of c-Jun regulating hypertrophic gene expression. Inhibitor studies
suggested that MBF1 activates the atrial natriuretic peptide promoter
independently of the calcineurin and CaMK signaling pathways. Our results
indicate that MBF1 participates in hormone-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and 
activates hypertrophic gene expression as a coactivator of c-Jun.

PMID: 12729799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3593-606.

Cardiac p300 is involved in myocyte growth with decompensated heart failure.

Yanazume T(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kawamura T, Wada H, Matsumori A, Kawase Y,
Hirai M, Kita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A variety of stresses on the heart initiate a number of subcellular signaling
pathways, which finally reach the nuclei of cardiac myocytes and cause myocyte
hypertrophy with heart failure. However, common nuclear pathways that lead to
this state are unknown. A zinc finger protein, GATA-4, is one of the
transcription factors that mediate changes in gene expression during
myocardial-cell hypertrophy. p300 not only acts as a transcriptional coactivator 
of GATA-4, but also possesses an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity. In
primary cardiac myocytes derived from neonatal rats, we show that stimulation
with phenylephrine increased an acetylated form of GATA-4 and its DNA-binding
activity, as well as expression of p300. A dominant-negative mutant of p300
suppressed phenylephrine-induced nuclear acetylation, activation of
GATA-4-dependent endothelin-1 promoters, and hypertrophic responses, such as
increase in cell size and sarcomere organization. In sharp contrast to the
activation of cardiac MEK-1, which phosphorylates GATA-4 and causes compensated
hypertrophy in vivo, p300-mediated acetylation of mouse cardiac nuclear proteins,
including GATA-4, results in marked eccentric dilatation and systolic
dysfunction. These findings suggest that p300-mediated nuclear acetylation plays 
a critical role in the development of myocyte hypertrophy and represents a
pathway that leads to decompensated heart failure.

PMCID: PMC154243
PMID: 12724418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):23807-16. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

GATA-4 is a nuclear mediator of mechanical stretch-activated hypertrophic
program.

Pikkarainen S(1), Tokola H, Majalahti-Palviainen T, Kerkela R, Hautala N, Bhalla 
SS, Charron F, Nemer M, Vuolteenaho O, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, PO Box 5000,
FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland.

In overloaded heart the cardiomyocytes adapt to increased mechanical and
neurohumoral stress by activation of hypertrophic program, resulting in
morphological changes of individual cells and specific changes in gene
expression. Accumulating evidence suggests an important role for the zinc finger 
transcription factor GATA-4 in hypertrophic agonist-induced cardiac hypertrophy. 
However, its role in stretch-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is not known. We
employed an in vitro mechanical stretch model of cultured cardiomyocytes and used
rat B-type natriuretic peptide promoter as stretch-sensitive reporter gene.
Stretch transiently increased GATA-4 DNA binding activity and transcript levels, 
which was followed by increases in the expression of B-type natriuretic peptide
as well as atrial natriuretic peptide and skeletal alpha-actin genes. The stretch
inducibility mapped primarily to the proximal 520 bp of the B-type natriuretic
peptide promoter. Mutational studies showed that the tandem GATA consensus sites 
of the proximal promoter in combination with an Nkx-2.5 binding element are
critical for stretch-activated B-type natriuretic peptide transcription.
Inhibition of GATA-4 protein production by adenovirus-mediated transfer of GATA-4
antisense cDNA blocked stretch-induced increases in B-type natriuretic peptide
transcript levels and the sarcomere reorganization. The proportion of myocytes
with assembled sarcomeres in control adenovirus-infected cultures increased from 
14 to 59% in response to stretch, whereas the values for GATA-4 antisense-treated
cells were 6 and 13%, respectively. These results show that activation of GATA-4,
in cooperation with a factor binding on Nkx-2.5 binding element, is essential for
mechanical stretch-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMID: 12704188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Regul Pept. 2003 May 15;113(1-3):139-47.

Cell-specific expression of the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide gene
functions through a GATA and an ISL-1 motif in a mouse neuroendocrine tumor cell 
line.

Jepeal LI(1), Boylan MO, Wolfe MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine and Boston
Medical Center, 650 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a 42-amino
acid gastrointestinal regulatory peptide that, in the presence of glucose,
stimulates insulin secretion from beta-cells. GIP is expressed in
gastrointestinal K-cells. Prior analysis of the GIP promoter demonstrated that
193 bases of the promoter are required to direct cell specific expression. Here
we sought to identify and characterize the transcription factors involved.
RESULTS: By mutational analysis of the GIP promoter in a neuroendocrine cell line
(STC-1), we identified two regions located between bases -193 and -182 and bases 
-156 and -151 that, when independently altered, were responsible for a 90% and
85% reduction in transcription, respectively. When we compared these two regions 
with known motifs from transcription factor databases, we identified the cis
elements as potential GATA and ISL-1 binding sites. With subsequent
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis (EMSA) using STC-1 nuclear extracts, we
demonstrated the ability of these regions to form specific DNA protein complexes.
Furthermore, we utilized antisera to confirm the specific binding of GATA-4 to
the upstream site and ISL-1 to the downstream element.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide evidence for the involvement of the
transcription factors GATA-4 and ISL-1 in the cell-specific expression of the GIP
gene.

PMID: 12686473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):22128-35. Epub 2003 Mar 31.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is activated by phosphorylation of serine 261 via the
cAMP/protein kinase a signaling pathway in gonadal cells.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université
Laval Research Centre and Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec G1V
4G2, Canada.

Gonadal gene expression is regulated by pituitary hormones acting through the
cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signal transduction pathway. The downstream molecular
effectors of these signals, however, have yet to be fully understood. We have
recently shown that cAMP stimulation of gonadal cells leads to phosphorylation of
the transcription factor GATA-4, a key regulator of gonadal gene expression, thus
suggesting that this factor might be a novel target for the cAMP/PKA signaling
pathway. We now show that the rapid phosphorylation of GATA-4 induced by cAMP in 
vivo can be blocked by a PKA-specific inhibitor but not by mitogen-activated
protein kinase inhibitors, indicating that GATA-4 is predominantly phosphorylated
by PKA in response to cAMP in gonadal cells. In addition, using in vitro kinase
assays, we show that PKA phosphorylation of GATA-4 occurs predominantly on an
evolutionarily conserved serine residue located at position 261. Phosphorylation 
of GATA-4 Ser261 by PKA enhances its transcriptional activity on different
gonadal promoters, an effect that was markedly reduced with a S261A mutant.
Moreover, the S261A mutant blunted cAMP-induced promoter activity in gonadal
cells. Finally, PKA-dependent phosphorylation of GATA-4 also led to enhanced
recruitment of the CREB-binding protein coactivator. This recruitment and
transcriptional cooperation were dramatically impaired with the S261A mutant.
Thus, our results identify GATA-4 as a novel downstream effector of cAMP/PKA
signaling in gonadal cells, where phosphorylation of Ser261 and recruitment of
CREB-binding protein likely represent a key mechanism for conveying the cAMP
responsiveness of gonadal genes that lack classical cAMP regulatory elements.

PMID: 12670947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Circulation. 2003 Apr 15;107(14):1912-6. Epub 2003 Mar 31.

Ascorbic acid enhances differentiation of embryonic stem cells into cardiac
myocytes.

Takahashi T(1), Lord B, Schulze PC, Fryer RM, Sarang SS, Gullans SR, Lee RT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass, USA.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells are capable of self-renewal and
differentiation into cellular derivatives of all 3 germ layers. In appropriate
culture conditions, ES cells can differentiate into specialized cells, including 
cardiac myocytes, but the efficiency is typically low and the process is
incompletely understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated a chemical library for its potential to induce 
cardiac differentiation of ES cells in the absence of embryoid body formation.
Using ES cells stably transfected with cardiac-specific alpha-cardiac myosin
heavy chain (MHC) promoter-driven enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), 880 
compounds approved for human use were screened for their ability to induce
cardiac differentiation. Treatment with ascorbic acid, also known as vitamin C,
markedly increased the number of EGFP-positive cells, which displayed spontaneous
and rhythmic contractile activity and stained positively for sarcomeric myosin
and alpha-actinin. Furthermore, ascorbic acid induced the expression of cardiac
genes, including GATA4, alpha-MHC, and beta-MHC in untransfected ES cells in a
developmentally controlled manner. This effect of ascorbic acid on cardiac
differentiation was not mimicked by the other antioxidants such as
N-acetylcysteine, Tiron, or vitamin E.
CONCLUSIONS: Ascorbic acid induces cardiac differentiation in ES cells. This
study demonstrates the potential for chemically modifying the cardiac
differentiation program of ES cells.

PMID: 12668514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Endocr Dev. 2003;5:1-23.

Male sex determination and prenatal differentiation of the testis.

Töhönen V(1), Ritzén EM, Nordqvist K, Wedell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

PMID: 12629889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Circ Res. 2003 Apr 4;92(6):623-9. Epub 2003 Mar 6.

Dynorphin B is an agonist of nuclear opioid receptors coupling nuclear protein
kinase C activation to the transcription of cardiogenic genes in GTR1 embryonic
stem cells.

Ventura C(1), Zinellu E, Maninchedda E, Maioli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Biotechnology Development and
Biodiversity Research, University of Sassari, Viale San Pietro 43/B, 07100
Sassari, Italy. cvent@libero.it

The cardiac differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells was found to involve
prodynorphin gene and dynorphin B expression and was associated with the
interaction of secreted dynorphin B with cell surface opioid receptors coupled
with protein kinase C (PKC) signaling and complex subcellular redistribution
patterning of selected PKC isozymes. Here, confocal microscopy revealed the
presence of immunoreactive dynorphin B-like material in GTR1 ES cells, suggesting
that dynorphin peptides may also act intracellularly. Opioid binding sites were
identified in ES cell nuclei, with a single dissociation constant in the low
nanomolar range. A significant increase in Bmax for a kappa opioid receptor
ligand was observed in nuclei isolated from ES-derived cardiomyocytes compared
with nuclei from undifferentiated cells. Direct exposure of nuclei isolated from 
undifferentiated ES cells to dynorphin B or U-50,488H, a synthetic kappa opioid
receptor agonist, time- and dose-dependently activated the transcription of
GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5, 2 cardiac lineage-promoting genes. Nuclear exposure to
dynorphin B also enhanced the rate of prodynorphin gene transcription. These
responses were abolished in a stereospecific fashion by the incubation of
isolated nuclei with selective opioid receptor antagonists. Nuclei isolated from 
undifferentiated cells were able to phosphorylate the acrylodan-labeled MARCKS
peptide, a high-affinity fluorescent PKC substrate. Exposure of isolated nuclei
to dynorphin B induced a remarkable increase in nuclear PKC activity, which was
suppressed by opioid receptor antagonists. Nuclear treatment with PKC inhibitors 
abolished the capability of dynorphin B to prime the transcription of cardiogenic
genes.

PMID: 12623878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17525-31. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Activation of GATA-4 by serotonin in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells.

Suzuki YJ(1), Day RM, Tan CC, Sandven TH, Liang Q, Molkentin JD, Fanburg BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.
yuichiro.suzuki@tufts.edu

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)) is a mitogen of pulmonary artery smooth
muscle cells (PASMC) and plays an important role in the development of pulmonary 
hypertension. Signal transduction initiated by 5-HT involves serotonin
transporter-dependent generation of reactive oxygen species and activation of the
MEK-ERK pathway. However, the downstream transcriptional regulatory components
have not been identified. In systemic smooth muscle cells, GATA-6 has been shown 
to regulate mitogenesis by driving cells into a quiescent state, and the
down-regulation of GATA-6 induces mitogenesis. Thus, the present study tested the
hypothesis that 5-HT induces mitogenesis of PASMC by down-regulating GATA-6.
Quiescent bovine PASMC were treated with 5-HT, and the binding activity of
nuclear extracts toward GATA DNA sequence was monitored. Surprisingly, PASMC
express GATA-4, and 5-HT up-regulates the GATA DNA binding activity. Pretreatment
of cells with inhibitors of serotonin transporter, reactive oxygen species, and
MEK blocks GATA-4 activation by 5-HT. GATA-4 is not activated when the ERK
phosphorylation site is mutated, indicating that 5-HT phosphorylates GATA-4 via
the MEK/ERK pathway. GATA up-regulation is also induced by other mitogens of
PASMC such as endothelin-1 and platelet-derived growth factor. Dominant negative 
mutants of GATA-4 suppress cyclin D2 expression and cell growth, indicating that 
GATA-4 activation regulates PASMC proliferation. Thus, GATA-4 mediates
5-HT-induced growth of PASMC and may be an important therapeutic target for the
prevention of pulmonary hypertension.

PMID: 12615926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17263-8. Epub 2003 Feb 28.

Upstream stimulatory factor represses the induction of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-Ibeta expression by PGC-1.

Moore ML(1), Park EA, McMillin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, UT-Houston Health Science Center, The Texas Medical
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1beta (CPT-1beta) is
coordinated with contractile gene expression through cardiac-enriched
transcription factors, GATA4 and SRF. Metabolic modulation of CPT-1beta promoter 
activity has been described with the stimulation of gene expression by oleate
that is mediated through the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
pathway. The coactivator, peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator (PGC-1), enhances gene expression through interactions with nuclear
hormone receptors and the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family. PGC-1 and
MEF2A synergistically activate CPT-1beta promoter activity. This stimulation is
enhanced by mutation of the E-box sequences that flank the MEF2A binding site.
These elements bind the upstream stimulatory factors (USF1 and USF2), which
activate transcription in CV-1 fibroblasts. However, overexpression of the USF
proteins in myocytes depresses CPT-1beta activity and significantly reduces MEF2A
and PGC-1 synergy. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate that PGC-1 and USF2
proteins can physically interact. Our studies demonstrate that PGC-1 stimulates
CPT-1beta gene expression through MEF2A. USF proteins have a novel role in
repressing the expression of the CPT-1beta gene and modulating the induction by
the coactivator, PGC-1.

PMID: 12611894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biol Reprod. 2003 Apr;68(4):1333-40. Epub 2002 Oct 30.

FOG-2 and GATA-4 Are coexpressed in the mouse ovary and can modulate
mullerian-inhibiting substance expression.

Anttonen M(1), Ketola I, Parviainen H, Pusa AK, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

Transcription factor GATA-4 has been suggested to have a role in mammalian
gonadogenesis, e.g., through activation of the Müllerian-inhibiting substance
(MIS) gene expression. Although the expression of GATA-4 during gonadogenesis has
been elucidated in detail, very little is known about FOG-2, an essential
cofactor for GATA-4, in ovarian development. We explored in detail the expression
of FOG-2 and GATA-4 in the fetal and postnatal mouse ovary and in the fetal
testis using Northern blotting, RNA in situ hybridization, and
immunohistochemistry. GATA-4 and FOG-2 are evident in the bipotential urogenital 
ridge, and their expression persists in the fetal mouse ovary; this result is
different from earlier reports of GATA-4 downregulation in the fetal ovary. In
contrast to ovary, FOG-2 expression is lost in the fetal Sertoli cells along with
the formation of the testicular cords, leading to the hypothesis that FOG-2 has a
specific role in the fetal ovaries counteracting the transactivation of the MIS
gene by GATA-4. In vitro transfection assays verified that FOG-2 is able to
repress the effect of GATA-4 on MIS transactivation in granulosa cells. In
postnatal ovary, granulosa cells of growing follicles express FOG-2, partially
overlapping with the expression of MIS. These data suggest an important role for 
FOG-2 and the GATA transcription factors in the developing ovary.

PMID: 12606418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Dev Biol. 2003 Feb 1;254(1):131-48.

Transcriptional activation of BMP-4 and regulation of mammalian organogenesis by 
GATA-4 and -6.

Nemer G(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Canada.

Transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6 constitute an evolutionary conserved
subfamily of vertebrate zinc finger regulators highly expressed in the developing
heart and gut. Genetic evidence suggests that each protein is essential for
embryonic development, but their exact functions are not fully elucidated.
Moreover, because all three proteins share similar transcriptional properties in 
vitro, and because transcripts for two or more GATA genes are present in similar 
tissues, the molecular basis underlying in vivo specificity of GATA factors
remains undefined. Knowledge of the exact cell types expressing each protein and 
identification of downstream targets would greatly help define their function. We
have used high-resolution immunohistochemistry to precisely determine the
cellular distribution of the GATA-4, -5, and -6 proteins in murine embryogenesis.
The results reveal novel sites of expression in mesodermal and ectodermal cells. 
In particular, GATA-4 and -6 expression was closely associated with yolk sac
vasculogenesis and early endoderm-mesoderm signaling. Additionally, GATA-6 was
strongly expressed in the embryonic ectoderm, neural tube, and neural
crest-derived cells. This pattern of expression closely paralled that of BMP-4,
and the BMP-4 gene was identified as a direct downstream target for GATA-4 and
-6. These findings offer new insight into the function of GATA-4 and -6 during
early stages of embryogenesis and reveal the existence of a positive
cross-regulatory loop between BMP-4 and GATA-4. They also raise the possibility
that part of the early defects in GATA-4 and/or GATA-6 null embryos may be due to
impaired BMP-4 signaling.

PMID: 12606287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Mar 15;117A(3):212-22.

A series of supernumerary small ring marker autosomes identified by FISH with
chromosome probe arrays and literature review excluding chromosome 15.

Daniel A(1), Malafiej P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Hawkesbury
Road, Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia. artd@chw.edu.au

Seven supernumerary small ring marker autosomes were studied. The pantelomere
probe (Oncor) in conjunction with scoring for dicentric rings was used to confirm
ring morphology. The small rings were identified mainly by FISH with chromosome
probe arrays (Cytocell) containing representations from all 24 chromosomes and
the rings were derived from chromosomes 7, 8 (three cases), 11, 12, and 14. The
effectiveness of the array methodology in identifying markers was tested.
Microsatellite DNA data showed biparental disomy (BPD) was present for the rings 
from chromosomes 7 and 14 thereby excluding UPD, both were de novo but the ring
14 was of paternal origin. The literature on supernumerary small ring autosomes
was reviewed excluding chromosome 15. The grade and distribution of mosaicism was
invoked as the major determinant of the differences in phenotype and, in
addition, variation was attributed to the possibility of different contributions 
from each chromosome arm. There are 88 published supernumerary small ring cases
in total, with phenotypic data attributable to the respective rings in 77 cases
and all chromosomes being represented except chromosome 17. Of the prenatally
ascertained cases, where there was adequate phenotypic data, 30% had an abnormal 
phenotype attributable to the ring, and there were 44% familial cases in this
group. Of the postnatally ascertained small rings, 75% had an abnormal phenotype 
attributable to the ring and there were 13% familial cases. This higher
abnormality rate is concordant with the considerable ascertainment bias of this
latter group and the prenatal data are recommended for genetic counseling.
Although data are small there were some differences between the rings derived
from different chromosomes. Chromosomes 3 and 8 demonstrate the extremes. Of the 
supernumerary small r(8) cases reviewed including the three presently described, 
8/11 had an abnormal phenotype attributable to the marker but of the small r(3)
cases, only 1/6 had an abnormal phenotype. Two of the present r(8) were studied
with the GATA4 probe at 8p23.1. The r(8) in case 2 (patient moderately retarded) 
was comprised mostly of an intact 8p whereas the larger r(8) in case 3 (normal
phenotype) was missing 8p23.1 --> pter and had more of 8q contributing to the
ring. In other supernumerary rings postnatally ascertained, there is mostly
insufficient data but there is an abnormal phenotype in 8/11 cases with multiple 
small rings, in 5/6 cases with r(20), and in 5/10 with r(1). A novel origin for
supernumerary small rings is proposed: that they may originate from incompletely 
digested superfluous (haploid) pronuclei. The small rings presumptively so formed
may occasionally be transfected into the zygote nucleus. The high proportion (
approximately 12.5%) of cases with multiple supernumerary small rings almost
always of different centromeric origin is consistent with this concept.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12599184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Xenobiotica. 2002 Dec;32(12):1173-83.

PCBs alter gene expression of nuclear transcription factors and other
heart-specific genes in cultures of primary cardiomyocytes: possible implications
for cardiotoxicity.

Borlak J(1), Thum T.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Aerosol Research, Center for Drug
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nicolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany. borlak@ita.fhg.de

Erratum in
    Xenobiotica. 2003 May;33(5):571-3.

1. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are well-known environmental pollutants that 
bioaccumulate mainly in the fatty tissue of animals and humans. Although
contamination occurs primarily via the food chain, waste combustion leads to
airborne PCBs. From epidemiological studies, there is substantial evidence that
cardiovascular disease is linked to air pollution, but little is known about the 
underlying molecular events. 2. We investigated the effects of Aroclor 1254, a
complex mixture of >80 PCB isomers and congeners, on the expression of nuclear
transcription factors (GATA-4, Nkx-2.5, MEF-2c, OCT-1) and of downstream target
genes (atrial and brain natriuretic peptide, alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chain, 
alpha-cardiac and alpha-skeletal actin), which play an important role in cardiac 
biology. 3. We treated cultures of primary cardiomyocytes of adult rats with
Aroclor 1254 (10.0 micro M) and found significant induction of the transcription 
factor genes GATA-4 and MEF-2c and of genes regulated by these factors, i.e.
atrial natriuretic peptide, brain-type natriuretic peptide, alpha- and
beta-myosin heavy chain, and skeletal alpha actin. 4. We have shown PCBs to
modulate expression of genes coding for programmes of cellular differentiation
and stress (e.g. atrial natriuretic peptide, brain-type natriuretic peptide) and 
these alterations may be important in the increase of cardiovascular disease in
polluted areas.

PMID: 12593764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2003 Jun;284(6):G1053-65. Epub 2003 Feb 
5.

High-level activation by a duodenum-specific enhancer requires functional GATA
binding sites.

Dusing MR(1), Florence EA, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The purine metabolic gene adenosine deaminase (ADA) is expressed at high levels
in a well-defined spatiotemporal pattern in the villous epithelium of proximal
small intestine. A duodenum-specific enhancer module responsible for this
expression pattern has been identified in the second intron of the human ADA
gene. It has previously been shown that binding of the factor PDX-1 is essential 
for function of this enhancer. The studies presented here examine the proposed
roles of GATA factors in the enhancer. Site-directed mutagenesis of the
enhancer's GATA binding sites crippled enhancer function in 10 lines of
transgenic mice, with 9 of the lines demonstrating <1% of normal activity.
Detailed studies along the longitudinal axis of mouse small intestine indicate
that GATA-4 and GATA-5 mRNA levels display a reciprocal pattern, with low levels 
of GATA-6 throughout. Interestingly, gel shift studies with duodenal nuclear
extracts showed binding only by GATA-4.

PMID: 12571085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):412-22.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcription factors: expression, immunohistochemical
localization, and possible function in the porcine ovary.

Gillio-Meina C(1), Hui YY, LaVoie HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

The expression and localization of GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs and proteins were
assessed in porcine ovaries at different stages of the estrous cycle. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses revealed that
GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts and proteins were strongly expressed in granulosa
cells isolated from antral follicles, intact antral follicles, corpora
hemorrhagica (CH), and midluteal phase corpora lutea (CL). Immunoblot analyses
showed two predominant proteins with molecular masses of approximately 53 and 55 
kDa for GATA-4 and one 55-kDa protein for GATA-6. Immunohistochemical studies
revealed GATA-4 and GATA-6 nuclear staining in granulosa cells of healthy
primordial and primary antral follicles and antral follicle of various sizes. The
percentage of immunopositive thecal cell nuclei increased with follicular
development. In CH and CL, luteal cells displayed nuclear immunoreactivity for
both transcription factors. Regressing CL showed a decrease in
GATA-immunopositive cells. Immunoreactivity for GATA-4 and GATA-6 was present in 
most blood vessels. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, nuclear protein
extracts isolated from granulosa cells and CL exhibited both GATA-4 and GATA-6
binding to a GATA consensus oligonucleotide, with GATA-4 the predominant binding 
protein. GATA-4 and GATA-6 DNA binding was elevated in granulosa cell nuclear
extracts from preovulatory (8-10 mm) follicles. Cotransfection of primary
cultures of luteinizing granulosa cells with GATA-4 or GATA-6 expression vectors 
increased the activity of the porcine steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene
promoter significantly but did not significantly activate the inhibin alpha gene 
promoter. The detection of GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs and proteins in porcine
ovaries and the identification of at least one possible target gene may help to
establish roles for these GATA factors in follicular development and luteal
function.

PMID: 12533404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2003 Jan;27(1):70-4.

Melanocortin-3-receptor gene variants in morbid obesity.

Schalin-Jäntti C(1), Valli-Jaakola K, Oksanen L, Martelin E, Laitinen K, Krusius 
T, Mustajoki P, Heikinheimo M, Kontula K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
camilla.scalin-jantti@hus.fi

BACKGROUND: Linkage and knock-out mice studies suggest that the
melanocortin-3-receptor (MC3R) is a candidate gene for obesity.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether MC3R mutations underlie morbid obesity.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: MC3R coding and 5(')-flanking regions were sequenced in 48 
subjects and the detected variants genotyped in 252 morbidly obese (BMI>/=40
kg/m(2)) Finns. Gel shifts were used to examine whether a mutation in the
putative promoter alters GATA-factor binding.
RESULTS: Three common MC3R variants were found: a 17C>A variant, changing
Thr6-->Lys in 16%, a 241G>A variant changing Val81-->Ile in 15%, and a -239A>G
substitution in the GATA binding site in 21% of the subjects. Four other variants
were detected in the 5(') flanking region. Frequencies of the three common
variants did not differ between obese and contol subjects. Among the obese, the
17C>A and 241G>A variants were coinherited and associated with increased
insulin-glucose ratios (P<0.05) and leptin levels (P<0.05). GATA-4 bound
efficiently to wild type oligonucleotide, but only weakly to the oligonucleotide 
with the -239A>G mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: MC3R gene variants are common and do not explain human morbid
obesity. These variants associated with subtle changes in onset of weight gain,
hyperleptinemia and insulin-glucose ratios. The -239A>G mutation abolishes
binding of GATA-4 to the MC3R promoter region.

PMID: 12532156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Endocr Res. 2002 Nov;28(4):647-50.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 during mouse and human adrenocortical
development.

Kiiveri S(1), Liu J, Westerholm-Ormio M, Narita N, Wilson DB, Voutilainen R,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, P.O. Box 63, 00014, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Our earlier work implicates transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the murine
adrenal. We have now studied their expression during mouse and human adrenal
development in detail. GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs are readily detectable from
embryonic day 15 in mouse and gestational week 19 in human adrenal cortex. In
postnatal adrenal, GATA-4 expression is down-regulated, whereas GATA-6 mRNA and
protein continue to be abundantly present. In a human adrenocortical cell line
NCI-H295R, GATA-6 mRNA is up-regulated by cAMP. This cell line does not express
GATA-4. Our findings suggest that GATA-6 expression is hormonally controlled, and
required throughout adrenal development from fetal to adult age. GATA-4, on the
other hand, may serve a role in fetal adrenal gene regulation.

PMID: 12530677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Feb;63(2):368-77.

Anthracycline-induced suppression of GATA-4 transcription factor: implication in 
the regulation of cardiac myocyte apoptosis.

Kim Y(1), Ma AG, Kitta K, Fitch SN, Ikeda T, Ihara Y, Simon AR, Evans T, Suzuki
YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer United States Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Anthracyclines are effective cancer chemotherapeutic agents but can induce
serious cardiotoxicity. Understanding the mechanism of cardiac damage by these
agents will help in development of better therapeutic strategies against cancer. 
The GATA-4 transcription factor is an important regulator of cardiac muscle
cells. The present study demonstrates that anthracyclines can down-regulate
GATA-4 activity. Treatment of HL-1 cardiac muscle cells or isolated adult rat
ventricular myocytes with anthracyclines such as daunorubicin and doxorubicin
decreased the level of GATA-4 DNA-binding activity. The mechanism of decreased
GATA-4 activity acts at the level of the GATA-4 gene, because anthracyclines
caused significantly decreased levels of GATA-4 protein and mRNA. The rate of
decline in GATA-4 transcript levels in the presence of actinomycin D was
unaltered by anthracyclines, indicating that these agents may affect directly
GATA-4 gene transcription. To determine whether decreased GATA-4 levels are
functionally related to cardiac muscle cell death that can be induced by
anthracyclines, the ability of ectopic GATA factors to rescue
anthracycline-induced apoptosis was tested. Adenovirus-mediated expression of
either GATA-4 or GATA-6 was sufficient to attenuate the incidence of apoptosis.
Furthermore, suppression of GATA-4 DNA-binding activity by a dominant negative
mutant of GATA-4 induced the apoptosis. These results suggest that the mechanism 
of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity may involve the down-regulation of GATA-4
and the induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 12527808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biol Reprod. 2003 Jan;68(1):140-50.

Sertoli cells in the boar testis: changes during development and compensatory
hypertrophy after hemicastration at different ages.

Lunstra DD(1), Wise TH, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, R.L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, Reproduction Research
Unit, Clay Center, Nebraska 68933-0166, USA. lunstra@email.marc.usda.gov

Changes in Sertoli cell numbers and testicular structure during normal
development and compensatory hypertrophy were assessed in crossbred Meishan x
White Composite males. Boars were assigned at birth to unilateral castration at
1, 10, 56, or 112 days or to remain as intact controls through 220 days. The
first testes removed were compared to assess testicular development. At 220 days,
testicular structure was evaluated in boars representing the 25% with the largest
(Lg) testis and the 25% with the smallest (Sm) testis in each treatment group.
The number of Sertoli cells per testis reached a maximum by Day 56 in Sm testis
but not until Day 112 in Lg testis boars, indicating a longer duration of Sertoli
cell proliferation in Lg testis boars. Unilateral castration of Lg testis boars
on Days 1, 10, 56, and 112 caused the weight of the remaining testis to
hypertrophy by 149%, 135%, 119%, and 120%, respectively, and total sperm
production to increase to 127%, 128%, 97%, and 106%, respectively. However,
Sertoli cell numbers changed little in hemicastrate boars. In Lg testis boars,
compensatory hypertrophy primarily involved proliferation of Leydig cells and
expansion of existing Sertoli cells with little increase in Sertoli cell numbers,
but in Sm testis boars, it involved expansion of existing Leydig and Sertoli
cells without increase in cell numbers. These results indicate that Lg and Sm
testis boars display intriguing differences during both development and
compensatory hypertrophy, and they identify a unique animal model for further
studies of factors that program and control Sertoli cell proliferation.

PMID: 12493706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5760-7. Epub 2002 Dec 11.

Retinoid X receptor alpha represses GATA-4-mediated transcription via a
retinoid-dependent interaction with the cardiac-enriched repressor FOG-2.

Clabby ML(1), Robison TA, Quigley HF, Wilson DB, Kelly DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research, Department of Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Dietary vitamin A and its derivatives, retinoids, regulate cardiac growth and
development. To delineate mechanisms involved in retinoid-mediated control of
cardiac gene expression, the regulatory effects of the retinoid X receptor alpha 
(RXR alpha) on atrial naturietic factor (ANF) gene transcription was
investigated. The transcriptional activity of an ANF promoter-reporter in rat
neonatal ventricular myocytes was repressed by RXR alpha in the presence of
9-cis-RA and by the constitutively active mutant RXR alpha F318A indicating that 
liganded RXR confers the regulatory effect. The RXR alpha-mediated repression
mapped to the proximal 147 bp of the rat ANF promoter, a region lacking a
consensus retinoid response element but containing several known cardiogenic cis 
elements including a well characterized GATA response element. Glutathione
S-transferase "pull-down" assays revealed that RXR alpha interacts directly with 
GATA-4, in a ligand-independent manner, via the DNA binding domain of RXR alpha
and the second zinc finger of GATA-4. Liganded RXR alpha repressed the activity
of a heterologous promoter-reporter construct containing GATA-response element
recognition sites in cardiac myocytes but not in several other cell types,
suggesting that additional cardiac-enriched factors participate in the repression
complex. Co-transfection of liganded RXR alpha and the known cardiac-enriched
GATA-4 repressor, FOG-2, resulted in additive repression of GATA-4 activity in
ventricular myocytes. In addition, RXR alpha was found to bind FOG-2, in a
9-cis-RA-dependent manner. These data reveal a novel mechanism by which retinoids
regulate cardiogenic gene expression through direct interaction with GATA-4 and
its co-repressor, FOG-2.

PMID: 12480945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4705-12. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

Hepatocyte growth factor induces GATA-4 phosphorylation and cell survival in
cardiac muscle cells.

Kitta K(1), Day RM, Kim Y, Torregroza I, Evans T, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is released in response to myocardial infarction
and may play a role in regulating cardiac remodeling. Recently, HGF was found to 
inhibit the apoptosis of cardiac muscle cells. Because GATA-4 can induce cell
survival, the effects of HGF on GATA-4 activity were investigated. Treatment of
HL-1 cells or primary adult rat cardiac myocytes with HGF, at concentrations that
can be detected in the human serum after myocardial infarction, rapidly enhances 
GATA-4 DNA-binding activity. The enhanced DNA-binding activity is associated with
the phosphorylation of GATA-4. HGF-induced phosphorylation and activation of
GATA-4 is abolished by MEK inhibitors or the mutation of the ERK phosphorylation 
site (S105A), suggesting that HGF activates GATA-4 via MEK-ERK pathway-dependent 
phosphorylation. HGF enhances the expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-x(L), and this
is blocked by dominant negative mutants of MEK or GATA-4. Forced expression of
wild-type GATA-4, but not the GATA-4 mutant (S105A) increases the expression of
Bcl-x(L). Furthermore, expression of the GATA-4 mutant (S105A) suppresses
HGF-mediated protection of cells against daunorubicin-induced apoptosis. These
results demonstrate that HGF protects cardiac muscle cells against apoptosis via 
a signaling pathway involving MEK/ERK-dependent phosphorylation of GATA-4.

PMID: 12468531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Endocrinol. 2002 Nov;175(2):365-74.

Expression levels of Mullerian-inhibiting substance, GATA4 and
17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase cytochrome P450 during embryonic gonadal
development in two diverse breeds of swine.

McCoard SA(1), Wise TH, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, US
Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska 68933, USA.
sue.mccoard@agresearch.co.nz

Sexual differentiation and early embryonic/fetal gonad development is a tightly
regulated process controlled by numerous endocrine and molecular signals. These
signals ensure appropriate structural organization and subsequent development of 
gonads and accessory organs. Substantial differences exist in adult reproductive 
characteristics in Meishan (MS) and White Composite (WC) pig breeds. This study
compared the timing of embryonic sexual differentiation in MS and WC pigs.
Embryos/fetuses were evaluated on 26, 28, 30, 35, 40 and 50 days postcoitum
(dpc). Gonadal differentiation was based on morphological criteria and on
localization of GATA4, Mullerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) and
17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase cytochrome P450 (P450(c17)). The timing of
testicular cord formation and functional differentiation of Sertoli and Leydig
cells were similar between breeds. Levels of GATA4, MIS and P450(c17) proteins
increased with advancing gestation, with greater levels of MIS and P450(c17) in
testes of MS compared with WC embryos. Organization of ovarian medullary cords
and formation of egg nests was evident at similar ages in both breeds; however, a
greater number of MS compared with WC embryos exhibited signs of ovarian
differentiation at 30 dpc. In summary, despite breed differences in MIS and
P450(c17) levels in the testis, which may be related to Sertoli and Leydig cell
function, the timing of testicular differentiation did not differ between breeds 
and is unlikely to impact reproductive performance in adult boars. In contrast,
female MS embryos exhibited advanced ovarian differentiation compared with WC
embryos which may be related to the earlier reproductive maturity observed in
this breed.

PMID: 12429034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):221-32.

Different patterns of anti-Müllerian hormone expression, as related to DMRT1,
SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, Wnt-4, and Lhx9 expression, in the chick differentiating
gonads.

Oréal E(1), Mazaud S, Picard JY, Magre S, Carré-Eusèbe D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur l'Endocrinologie du Développement, INSERM U493, Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, Montrouge, France.

In mammals, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is produced by Sertoli cells from the
onset of testicular differentiation and by granulosa cells after birth. In birds,
AMH starts to be expressed in indifferent gonads of both sexes at a similar level
and is later up-regulated in males. We previously demonstrated that, unlike in
mammals, the onset of AMH expression occurs in chick embryo in the absence of
SOX9. We looked for potential factors that might be involved in regulating AMH
expression at different stages of chick gonad differentiation by comparing its
expression pattern in embryos and young chicken with that of DMRT1, SF-1, WT1,
GATA-4, Wnt-4, and Lhx9, by in situ hybridization. The results allowed us to
distinguish different phases. (1) In indifferent gonads of both sexes, AMH is
expressed in dispersed medullar cells. SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, Wnt-4, and DMRT1 are
transcribed in the same region of the gonads, but none of these factors has an
expression strictly coincident with that of AMH. Lhx9 is present only in the
cortical area. (2) After this period, AMH is up-regulated in male gonads. The
up-regulation is concomitant with the beginning of SOX9 expression and a sex
dimorphic level of DMRT1 transcripts. It is followed by the aggregation of the
AMH-positive cells (Sertoli cells) into testicular cords in which AMH is
coexpressed with DMRT1, SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, and SOX9. (3) In the females, the low 
level of dispersed medullar AMH expression is conserved. With development of the 
cortex in the left ovary, cells expressing AMH accumulate in the juxtacortical
part of the medulla, whereas they remain dispersed in the right ovary. At this
stage, AMH expression is not strictly correlated with any of the studied factors.
(4) After hatching, the organization of left ovarian cortex is characterized by
the formation of follicles. Follicular cells express AMH in conjunction with
SF-1, WT1, and GATA-4 and in the absence of SOX9, as in mammals. In addition,
they express Lhx9 and Wnt-4, the latter being also found in the oocytes. (5)
Moreover, unlike in mammals, the chicken ovary retains a dispersed AMH expression
in cortical interstitial cells between the follicles, with no obvious correlation
with any of the factors studied. Thus, the dispersed type of AMH expression in
indifferent and female gonads appears to be bird-specific and not controlled by
the same factors as testicular or follicular AMH transcription.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Gene. 2002 Sep 4;297(1-2):1-9.

Alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of the cardiac ankyrin repeat protein gene in
cardiac myocytes.

Maeda T(1), Sepulveda J, Chen HH, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Cardiac ankyrin repeat protein (CARP) is a nuclear transcription cofactor that is
activated by multiple signaling pathways in hypertrophic cardiac myocytes. Since 
CARP has been reported to be a transcriptional co-repressor, its activation
during hypertrophy might contribute to the deregulation of gene expression
leading to heart failure. Here, we found that alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling
activates CARP mRNA expression in rat cardiac myocytes. To examine how
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling activates the CARP gene, a 660 bp fragment of the
mouse CARP promoter was cloned. Previous reports suggested that the mouse CARP
promoter was dependent on the GATA4 transcription factor whereas the human CARP
promoter was dependent on transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). TEF-1 and
GATA4 transcription factors, known mediators of alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling,
bound to the mouse CARP promoter at several sites as determined by gel mobility
shift assays. These sites are highly conserved between the mouse and human
promoters, suggesting that they are functionally important in both. Mutation
analysis showed that binding of TEF-1 factors is required for basal activity of
the CARP promoter in cardiac myocytes. However, over-expression of TEF-1 factors 
could not potentiate the response of the CARP promoter to alpha(1)-adrenergic
stimulation. On the other hand, the alpha(1)-adrenergic response was potentiated 
by GATA4 over-expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling regulates CARP expression in cardiac myocytes, in
part through the transcription factor GATA4.

PMID: 12384280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):794-804.

Inducible differentiation and morphogenesis of bipotential liver cell lines from 
wild-type mouse embryos.

Strick-Marchand H(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

This work shows that hepatic cell lines reproducibly can be derived from E14
embryos of many mouse inbred strains. These bipotential mouse embryonic liver
(BMEL) cell lines present a mixed morphology, containing both epithelial and
palmate-like cells, and an uncoupled phenotype, expressing hepatocyte
transcription factors (HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, GATA4) but not functions
(apolipoproteins, albumin). BMEL cells are bipotential: under inducing conditions
they express hepatocyte and bile duct functions. In addition, they can undergo
morphogenesis in Matrigel culture to form bile duct units. When returned to basal
culture conditions, the differentiated cells revert, within a few days, to an
undifferentiated state. The ensemble of markers expressed by BMEL cells implies
that they originate from hepatoblasts, the endodermal precursors of the liver. In
conclusion, the establishment of a simple and reproducible method to isolate from
any mouse embryo bipotential hepatic cell lines that exhibit the properties of
transit stem cells provides a novel paradigm for investigation of hepatic cell
lineage relationships.

PMID: 12297826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Endocrinology. 2002 Oct;143(10):3935-45.

Protein kinase A-dependent cooperation between GATA and CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein transcription factors regulates steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
promoter activity.

Tremblay JJ(1), Hamel F, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université
Laval (CHUL) Research Center, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1V 4G2.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) is an essential cholesterol
transporter in steroidogenic tissues. Hormone-induced StAR expression is
regulated through the cAMP-dependent pathway involving activation of protein
kinase A (PKA). The StAR promoter contains several conserved DNA regulatory
elements. These include binding sites for steroidogenic factor 1,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP), and GATA transcription factors. Although 
these elements are important for StAR promoter activity, how the various
transcription factors that bind these elements cooperate to confer cAMP
responsiveness remains poorly understood. As induction of StAR transcription by
cAMP in steroidogenic MA-10 cells does not require de novo protein synthesis,
this suggests that all essential transcription factors are present and that
posttranslational modifications of the factors are involved. We now report that
GATA-4 is phosphorylated in MA-10 cells in response to cAMP and in heterologous
CV-1 cells, GATA-4 transcriptional activity is stimulated by PKA. Moreover, we
show that GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta directly interact in vitro and in vivo and
synergistically activate the StAR promoter in CV-1 cells exclusively in the
presence of PKA. As PKA-dependent synergy was also observed with other GATA and
C/EBP family members, this transcriptional cooperation may contribute to
hormone-stimulated StAR expression in all steroidogenic tissues.

PMID: 12239105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Sep 17;99(19):12333-8.

Akt induces enhanced myocardial contractility and cell size in vivo in transgenic
mice.

Condorelli G(1), Drusco A, Stassi G, Bellacosa A, Roncarati R, Iaccarino G, Russo
MA, Gu Y, Dalton N, Chung C, Latronico MV, Napoli C, Sadoshima J, Croce CM, Ross 
J Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 South 10th Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. gianluigi.condorelli@mail.tju.edu

The serine-threonine kinase Akt seems to be central in mediating stimuli from
different classes of receptors. In fact, both IGF-1 and IL6-like cytokines induce
hypertrophic and antiapoptotic signals in cardiomyocytes through PI3K-dependent
Akt activation. More recently, it was shown that Akt is involved also in the
hypertrophic and antiapoptotic effects of beta-adrenergic stimulation. Thus, to
determine the effects of Akt on cardiac function in vivo, we generated a model of
cardiac-specific Akt overexpression in mice. Transgenic mice were generated by
using the E40K, constitutively active mutant of Akt linked to the rat
alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter. The effects of cardiac-selective Akt
overexpression were studied by echocardiography, cardiac catheterization,
histological and biochemical techniques. We found that Akt overexpression
produced cardiac hypertrophy at the molecular and histological levels, with a
significant increase in cardiomyocyte cell size and concentric LV hypertrophy.
Akt-transgenic mice also showed a remarkable increase in cardiac contractility
compared with wild-type controls as demonstrated by the analysis of left
ventricular (dP/dt(max)) in an invasive hemodynamic study, although with graded
dobutamine infusion, the maximum response was not different from that in
controls. Diastolic function, evaluated by left ventricular dP/dt(min), was not
affected at rest but was impaired during graded dobutamine infusion.
Isoproterenol-induced cAMP levels, beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) density,
and beta-AR affinity were not altered compared with control mice. Moreover,
studies on signaling pathway activation from myocardial extracts demonstrated
that glycogen synthase kinase3-beta is phosphorylated, whereas p42/44
mitogen-activated protein kinases is not, indicating that Akt induces hypertrophy
in vivo by activating the glycogen synthase kinase3-beta/GATA 4 pathway. In
summary, our results not only demonstrate that Akt regulates cardiomyocyte cell
size in vivo, but, importantly, show that Akt modulates cardiac contractility in 
vivo without directly affecting beta-AR signaling capacity.

PMCID: PMC129445
PMID: 12237475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Life Sci. 2002 Oct 4;71(20):2369-81.

Selective changes in DNA binding activity of transcription factors in UM-X7.1
cardiomyopathic hamsters.

Ambra R(1), Di Nardo P, Fantini C, Minieri M, Canali R, Natella F, Virgili F.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radicals Research Group, National Institute for Food and Nutrition
Research, via Ardeatina 546, 00178, Rome, Italy. ambra@inran.it

UM-X7.1 hamsters (CH) are considered a representative model for human
cardiomyopathy. CH display the loss of the cytoskeletal delta-sarcoglycan
protein, associated with myocardium remodeling and fatal reduction of heart
functional efficiency. Even though altered redox balance and calcium homeostasis 
have already been reported to affect cardiomyocyte function, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this pathology are largely unknown. We found no significant
differences in DNA binding activity of redox-related (NF-kappaB, Sp1, AP-1 and
AP-2) transcription factors in heart ventricles of 90 day-old CH, compared to
normal animals. On the other hand, DNA binding activity of calcium-dependent
transcription factors NF-AT3 and CREB were increased and decreased respectively
in CH vs. normal ventricles. Western blot experiments confirmed the down
regulation of CREB levels and suggest a novel regulation mechanism for this
transcription factor in the heart. Our results are consistent with recent studies
on NF-AT3, GATA4 and CREB transgenic mice, and provide clues for the
comprehension of pathogenetic mechanisms of hamster hereditary cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 12231398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48617-26. Epub 2002 Sep 10.

Requirement of nuclear factor of activated T-cells in calcineurin-mediated
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

van Rooij E(1), Doevendans PA, de Theije CC, Babiker FA, Molkentin JD, de Windt
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht,
University Hospital, P. Debyelaan 25, the Netherlands.

The calcium-activated phosphatase calcineurin has been implicated as a critical
intracellular signal transducer of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Although previous
data suggested the nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) as its sole
transcriptional effector, the absolute requirement of NFAT as a mediator of
calcineurin signaling has not been examined in the heart. We therefore
investigated the expression and activation profile of NFAT genes in the heart.
Four members (NFATc1-c4) are expressed in cardiomyocytes, elicit nuclear
translocation upon calcineurin activation, and are able to drive transactivation 
of cardiac promoter luciferase constructs. To define the necessary function of
NFAT factors as hypertrophic transducers, a dominant negative NFAT construct was 
created, encompassing part of the N-terminal region of NFATc4 containing a
conserved calcineurin-binding motif. Cotransfection of this construct
dose-dependently abrogated promoter activation, irrespective of the NFAT isoform 
used, whereas a control construct with the calcineurin-binding motif mutated
displayed no such effects. Adenoviral gene transfer of dominant negative NFAT
rendered cardiomyocytes resistant toward all aspects of calcineurin or
agonist-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, whereas adenoviral gene transfer of
the control construct had no discernable effect on these parameters. These
results indicate that multiple NFAT isoforms are expressed in cardiomyocytes
where they function as necessary transducers of calcineurin in facilitating
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMID: 12226086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4627-34.

Gonadal differentiation, sex determination and normal Sry expression in mice
require direct interaction between transcription partners GATA4 and FOG2.

Tevosian SG(1), Albrecht KH, Crispino JD, Fujiwara Y, Eicher EM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

In mammals, Sry expression in the bipotential, undifferentiated gonad directs the
support cell precursors to differentiate as Sertoli cells, thus initiating the
testis differentiation pathway. In the absence of Sry, or if Sry is expressed at 
insufficient levels, the support cell precursors differentiate as granulosa
cells, thus initiating the ovarian pathway. The molecular mechanisms upstream and
downstream of Sry are not well understood. We demonstrate that the transcription 
factor GATA4 and its co-factor FOG2 are required for gonadal differentiation.
Mouse fetuses homozygous for a null allele of Fog2 or homozygous for a targeted
mutation in Gata4 (Gata4(ki)) that abrogates the interaction of GATA4 with FOG
co-factors exhibit abnormalities in gonadogenesis. We found that Sry transcript
levels were significantly reduced in XY Fog2(-/-) gonads at E11.5, which is the
time when Sry expression normally reaches its peak. In addition, three genes
crucial for normal Sertoli cell function (Sox9, Mis and Dhh) and three Leydig
cell steroid biosynthetic enzymes (p450scc, 3betaHSD and p450c17) were not
expressed in XY Fog2(-/-) and Gata(ki/ki) gonads, whereas Wnt4, a gene required
for normal ovarian development, was expressed ectopically. By contrast, Wt1 and
Sf1, which are expressed prior to Sry and necessary for gonad development in both
sexes, were expressed normally in both types of mutant XY gonads. These results
indicate that GATA4 and FOG2 and their physical interaction are required for
normal gonadal development.

PMID: 12223418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;147(3):397-406.

Developmental expression and spermatogenic stage specificity of transcription
factors GATA-1 and GATA-4 and their cofactors FOG-1 and FOG-2 in the mouse
testis.

Ketola I(1), Anttonen M, Vaskivuo T, Tapanainen JS, Toppari J, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-4 have been implicated in
the regulation of testicular development and function. Their cofactors FOG-1 and 
FOG-2 are expressed in the gonads, but their cell-specific and developmental
expression in the testis remains unresolved. Therefore, we analyzed GATA-1,
GATA-4, FOG-1 and FOG-2 expression in detail, from undifferentiated male
urogenital ridge to adult testis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization were applied on mouse
testicular samples.
RESULTS: GATA-4 and FOG-2, but not GATA-1 or FOG-1, were expressed as early as in
the male urogenital ridge. FOG-2 expression was localized in the Sertoli cells at
embryonal day 12.5 (E12.5), but it diminished with advancing fetal testicular
development. In E17.5 testis, FOG-2 was present only in the testicular capsule
and a subset of fetal Leydig cells. FOG-1 was expressed from E15.5 Sertoli cells 
onwards, whereas GATA-1 was not detected during the fetal period at all. In the
postnatal testis, FOG-2 was abundantly expressed immediately after birth, but in 
adult testis its expression was predominantly restricted to stage VII-XII
seminiferous tubules. Stage specificity was also found for FOG-1, which,
similarly to GATA-1, was abundantly expressed in stage VII-XII tubules during
adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that FOG-2, in addition to GATA-4, has a role
in early gonadal development and sexual differentiation, and FOG-1 at later fetal
stages, while GATA-1 executes its action postnatally. The findings suggest that, 
in contrast to the hematopoietic system and the heart, GATA-1 and GATA-4 do not
use FOG-1 and FOG-2 respectively as their only cofactors during the early stages 
of testicular development.

PMID: 12213678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;16(9):2101-12.

Identification of the RUSH consensus-binding site by cyclic amplification and
selection of targets: demonstration that RUSH mediates the ability of prolactin
to augment progesterone-dependent gene expression.

Hewetson A(1), Hendrix EC, Mansharamani M, Lee VH, Chilton BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

RUSH-1alpha(beta) transcription factors were cloned by recognition site screening
with an 85-bp region (-170/-85) of the rabbit uteroglobin gene. Deletion analysis
showed this region was essential to prolactin (PRL) action, but conclusions were 
limited by the complexity of the large deletion. Cyclic amplification and
selection of targets (CASTing) was used to identify the RUSH-binding site
(-126/-121). Endometrial nuclear proteins were incubated with a pool of
degenerate oligonucleotides and immunoprecipitated with RUSH-1alpha(beta)
antibodies. Bound DNA was amplified by PCR. The consensus motif (MCWTDK) was
identified after five rounds of CASTing, authenticated by CASTing with
RUSH-1alpha-specific antibodies and recombinant protein, and refined with EMSA.
Dissociation rate constants (K(d) = 0.1-1.0 nM; r = 0.99) revealed high-affinity 
binding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed in vivo binding of RUSH to the
transcriptionally active uteroglobin promoter. CASTing also revealed RUSH-GATA
transcription factor interactions. Endometrial GATA-4 expression is progesterone 
dependent (Northern analysis) and preferentially localized in the epithelium (in 
situ hybridization). Although physically affiliated with RUSH, uterine forms of
GATA-4 were not required for RUSH-DNA binding. Site-directed mutagenesis and
transient transfection assays showed the RUSH motif mediates the ability of PRL
to augment progesterone-dependent uteroglobin transcription. RUSH is central to
the mechanism whereby PRL augments progesterone-dependent gene transcription.

PMID: 12198246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Cell. 2002 Aug;3(2):171-81.

Formation of multiple hearts in mice following deletion of beta-catenin in the
embryonic endoderm.

Lickert H(1), Kutsch S, Kanzler B, Tamai Y, Taketo MM, Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute for Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Using Cre/loxP, we conditionally inactivated the beta-catenin gene in cells of
structures that exhibit important embryonic organizer functions: the visceral
endoderm, the node, the notochord, and the definitive endoderm. Mesoderm
formation was not affected in the mutant embryos, but the node was missing,
patterning of the head and trunk was affected, and no notochord or somites were
formed. Surprisingly, deletion of beta-catenin in the definitive endoderm led to 
the formation of multiple hearts all along the anterior-posterior (A/P) axis of
the embryo. Ectopic hearts developed in parallel with the normal heart in regions
of ectopic Bmp2 expression. We provide evidence that ablation of beta-catenin in 
embryonic endoderm changes cell fate from endoderm to precardiac mesoderm,
consistent with the existence of bipotential mesendodermal progenitors in mouse
embryos.

PMID: 12194849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):171-8.

Genes essential for early events in gonadal development.

Parker KL(1), Schimmer BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75390, USA. keith.parker@utsouthwestern.edu

The acquisition of a sexually dimorphic phenotype is a key event in mammalian
development. The underlying principle of this essential process is that genetic
sex, determined by the presence or absence of a Y chromosome at fertilization,
directs the embryonic gonads to differentiate into either testes or ovaries.
Hormones produced by the testes then trigger the developmental program that leads
to male phenotypic sexual differentiation. Without testes and their biochemical
products, differentiation proceeds along the female pathway. Recent studies have 
identified several transcription factors that are required for gonadal
development and sexual differentiation, i.e. Wilms' tumor related 1 (WT1),
steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), SOX9, and GATA4, presumably because they activate 
the expression of essential target genes. Studies also have identified another
transcriptional regulator, designated DAX-1, that inhibits target gene induction 
by all of these transcriptional activators. This chapter provides an overview of 
gonadal development and sexual differentiation, reviews the studies that have led
to the isolation and characterization of these genes in the gonads, and then
discusses how they interact to regulate critical events in sexual
differentiation.

PMID: 12173687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Pathol. 2002 Aug;161(2):381-9.

Cardiomyogenic differentiation in cardiac myxoma expressing lineage-specific
transcription factors.

Kodama H(1), Hirotani T, Suzuki Y, Ogawa S, Yamazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
hkodama@mbg.sphere.ne.jp

We investigated five cases of cardiac myxoma and one case of cardiac
undifferentiated sarcoma by light and electron microscopy, in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemical staining, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
for cardiomyocyte-specific transcription factors, Nkx2.5/Csx, GATA-4, MEF2, and
eHAND. Conventional light microscopy revealed that cardiac myxoma and sarcoma
cells presented variable cellular arrangements and different histological
characteristics. Ultrastructurally, some of the myxoma cells exhibited
endothelium-like or immature mesenchymal cell differentiation.
Immunohistochemistry for Nkx2.5/Csx, GATA-4, and eHAND was slightly to intensely 
positive in all myxoma cases. MEF2 immunoreactivity was observed in all cases
including the case of sarcoma, thus suggesting myogenic differentiation of myxoma
or sarcoma cells. In situ hybridization for Nkx2.5/Csx also revealed that all
myxoma cells, but not sarcoma cells, expressed mRNA of the cardiac homeobox gene,
Nkx2.5/Csx. Furthermore, nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue was performed and demonstrated that
the Nkx2.5/Csx and eHAND gene product to be detected in all cases, and in three
of six cases, respectively. In conclusion, cardiac myxoma cells were found to
express various amounts of cardiomyocyte-specific transcription factor gene
products at the mRNA and protein levels, thus suggesting cardiomyogenic
differentiation. These results support the concept that cardiac myxoma might
arise from mesenchymal cardiomyocyte progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC1850740
PMID: 12163362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):38390-8. Epub 2002 Aug 1.

Genomic structures of the human and murine corin genes and functional GATA
elements in their promoters.

Pan J(1), Hinzmann B, Yan W, Wu F, Morser J, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Berlex Biosciences, Richmond,
California 94806, USA. junliang_pan@berlex.com

Corin is a multiple-domain type II transmembrane serine protease highly expressed
in the heart. It converts pro-atrial natriuretic peptide to atrial natriuretic
peptide, a cardiac hormone that regulates blood volume and pressure. Here we
describe the genomic structures of the human and murine corin genes and
functional analysis of their promoters. Both corin genes contain 22 exons and
span >200 kb. Their intron/exon boundaries are well conserved, with most exons
encoding distinct structural domains, supporting the idea that corin evolved as a
result of exon duplication and rearrangement. Comparison of the 5'-flanking
regions of the human and murine corin genes revealed several conserved sequences,
including binding sites for TBX5, GATA, NKX2.5, and Krüppel-like transcription
factors. Transfection experiments with reporter gene constructs driven by the
human or murine corin 5'-flanking region indicated that the sequences from -405
to -15 in human and from -646 to -77 in mouse are sufficient to promote high
levels of gene expression in murine cardiomyocytes. In contrast, these sequences 
produced only minimal levels of expression in HeLa cells. Within these sequences,
we identified a conserved GATA element that bound to GATA-4. Mutation of the core
sequence impaired both GATA-4 binding and gene expression. These data indicate
that the GATA element and its binding to GATA-4 are essential for cardiac
expression of the human and murine corin genes.

PMID: 12154094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Plant Mol Biol. 2002 Sep;50(1):43-57.

Arabidopsis thaliana GATA factors: organisation, expression and DNA-binding
characteristics.

Teakle GR(1), Manfield IW, Graham JF, Gilmartin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds, UK.

Many light-responsive promoters contain GATA motifs and a number of nuclear
proteins have been defined that interact with these elements. Type-IV zinc-finger
proteins have been extensively characterised in animals and fungi and are
referred to as GATA factors by virtue of their affinity for promoter elements
containing this sequence. We previously identified cDNA sequences representing
four Arabidopsis thaliana type-TV zinc-finger proteins. Here we define the
organisation and expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3 and GATA-4 as well as
DNA-binding characteristics of their encoded proteins. Transcripts from all four 
genes can be detected in all tissues examined suggesting that they are not
developmentally regulated at the level of transcription. In vitro binding
experiments with Escherichia coli-derived recombinant proteins were performed
using motifs previously defined as targets for nuclear GATA-binding proteins.
These studies reveal differences in DNA binding specificity of GATA-1 as compared
to the other three proteins. In vivo protein-DNA interactions monitored by yeast 
one-hybrid assays reveal different binding characteristics as compared to those
defined with E. coli-derived recombinant protein. Trans-activation of gene
expression by the four Arabidopsis proteins via some, but not all, DNA elements
tested indicates that the Arabidopsis proteins can form functional interactions
with previously defined promoter elements containing GATA motifs. We conclude
that the Arabidopsis type-IV zinc-finger proteins may represent the previously
defined family of nuclear GATA-binding proteins implicated in light-responsive
transcription.

PMID: 12139008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Endocrinology. 2002 Aug;143(8):3136-43.

Differential expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in fetal and adult mouse and human
adrenal tissue.

Kiiveri S(1), Liu J, Westerholm-Ormio M, Narita N, Wilson DB, Voutilainen R,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014 Umiversity of Helsinki, 00290
Helsinki, Finland.

Earlier work implicates transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in murine adrenal
function. We have now studied their expression during mouse and human adrenal
development in detail. GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs and protein are readily detectable
from embryonic d 14 and gestational wk 19 onwards in the mouse and human adrenal 
cortex, respectively. In the postnatal adrenal, GATA-4 expression is
down-regulated, whereas GATA-6 mRNA and protein continue to be expressed. To
clarify the significance of GATA-4 for early adrenocortical development, Gata4-/-
ES cells were injected into eight-cell-stage embryos derived from ROSA26 mice, a 
transgenic line expressing beta-galactosidase in all cell types, including the
adrenocortical cells. The resultant chimeric embryos were stained with X-gal to
discriminate ES cell- and host-derived tissue. Gata4-/- cells contributed to
adrenocortical cells in these chimeras, and these cells also expressed GATA-6.
Taken together, our findings suggest that GATA-6 expression is needed throughout 
adrenal development from fetal to adult age. GATA-4, on the other hand, may serve
a role in the fetal adrenal gene regulation, although it is not essential for
early adrenocortical differentiation.

PMID: 12130579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5467-78.

A novel colonic repressor element regulates intestinal gene expression by
interacting with Cux/CDP.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, Swain GP, Sinclair AM, Suh ER, Silberg DG, Scheuermann
RH, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Intestinal gene regulation involves mechanisms that direct temporal expression
along the vertical and horizontal axes of the alimentary tract.
Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), the product of an enterocyte-specific gene, exhibits a
complex pattern of expression. Generation of transgenic mice with a mutated SI
transgene showed involvement of an overlapping CDP (CCAAT displacement
protein)-GATA element in colonic repression of SI throughout postnatal intestinal
development. We define this element as CRESIP (colon-repressive element of the SI
promoter). Cux/CDP interacts with SI and represses SI promoter activity in a
CRESIP-dependent manner. Cux/CDP homozygous mutant mice displayed increased
expression of SI mRNA during early postnatal development. Our results demonstrate
that an intestinal gene can be repressed in the distal gut and identify Cux/CDP
as a regulator of this repression during development.

PMCID: PMC133930
PMID: 12101240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2002 Aug;12(4):416-22.

The GATA family (vertebrates and invertebrates).

Patient RK(1), McGhee JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, UK.

Over the past year, vertebrate GATA factors have been found to participate
directly in several signal-transduction pathways. Smad3, phosphorylated by
TGF-beta signalling, interacts with GATA3 to induce differentiation of T helper
cells. Hypertrophic stimuli act through RhoA GTPase and ROCK kinase to activate
GATA4 in cardiac myocytes. In the liver, GATA4 is elevated by BMP and FGF
signalling, and is able to bind to chromatin targets. Invertebrate GATA factors
play a central role in specifying the mesendoderm.

PMID: 12100886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Fertil Steril. 2002 Jul;78(1):108-13.

Effects of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and human chorionic gonadotropin in
individuals with an inactivating mutation of the FSH receptor.

Vaskivuo TE(1), Aittomäki K, Anttonen M, Ruokonen A, Herva R, Osawa Y,
Heikinheimo M, Huhtaniemi I, Tapanainen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Comment in
    Fertil Steril. 2003 Jan;79(1):238-9; author reply 239.

OBJECTIVE: To study the gonadal steroid responses to FSH and hCG in individuals
with the inherited Finnish-type inactivating Ala189Val mutation of the FSH
receptor gene.
DESIGN: Prospective clinical and descriptive study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): Two women and one man homozygous for the Ala189Val mutation of the
FSH receptor gene, and ovarian biopsies from four affected and four healthy
women, and four normal fetuses.
INTERVENTION(S): Individuals were treated with increasing doses of recombinant
FSH (300 IU/day start, 900 IU/day final) and/or a single dose of hCG (5000 IU).
Ovarian biopsies were used in immunohistochemical analyses for detection of
aromatase cytochrome P450 and transcription factor GATA-4. In situ 3'-end
labeling analyses were used for detection of apoptosis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Measurements of serum concentrations of
follicle-stimulating hormone, leuteinizing hormone, inhibin A and B, estradiol,
testosterone (T), androstenedione, and prolactin, immunostaining for ovarian
aromatase, GATA-4, and apoptosis.
RESULT(S): Administration of FSH had no effect on production of the steroids.
Similarly, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) treatment, alone or after FSH
administration, failed to raise serum steroid concentrations. Ovarian apoptosis
was absent, and the expression of transcription factor GATA-4 and aromatase was
negligible in the ovarian biopsies from Ala189Val homozygous individuals.
CONCLUSION(S): The Ala189Val mutation of the FSH receptor gene results in a
complete block of FSH action in vivo. Furthermore, the failure of hCG to increase
both ovarian estradiol and testosterone secretion emphasizes the possible
contribution of FSH in regulating ovarian androgen synthesis, and supports the
concept that both gonadotropins are necessary for appropriate ovarian
steroidogenesis in humans.

PMID: 12095499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2002 Mar;42(1):1-9.

Molecular characterization of regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from adult
mesenchymal stem cells.

Fukuda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. kfukuda@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp.

We recently isolated a cardiomyogenic (CMG) cell line from murine bone marrow
stroma, and in this paper characterize regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from
adult mesenchymal stem cells at the molecular level. Stromal cells were
immortalized, exposed to 5-azacytidine, and repeatedly screened for spontaneously
beating cells. CMG cells began to beat spontaneously after 2 weeks, and beat
synchronously after 3 weeks. They exhibited sinus-node-like or
ventricular-cell-like action potentials. Analysis of the isoforms of contractile 
protein genes, such as of myosin and alpha-actin, indicated that their phenotype 
was similar to that of fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes. The cells expressed
Nkx2.5, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF2-C mRNA before 5-azacytidine exposure, and MEF2-A
and MEF2-D after exposure. CMG cells expressed alpha1A, alpha1B, and
alpha1D-adrenergic receptor mRNA prior to differentiation, and beta1,
beta2-adrenergic and M1, M2-muscarinic receptors after acquiring the
cardiomyocyte phenotype. Phenylephrine induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and the
phosphorylation was inhibited by prazosin. Isoproterenol increased the cAMP level
38-fold and beating rate, cell motion, %shortening, and contractile velocity by
48%, 38%, 27%, and 51%, respectively, and the increases were blocked by CGP20712A
(beta1-selective blocker). Carbachol increased IP3 32-fold, and the increase was 
inhibited by AFDX116 (M2-selective blocker). These findings demonstrated that the
regenerated cardiomyocytes were capable of responding to adrenergic and
muscarinic stimulation. This new cell line provides a model for the study of
cardiomyocyte transplantation.

PMID: 12094073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Haematologica. 2002 Jul;87(7):ELT30.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is not involved in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.

Cmejlova J, Pospisilova D, Cmejla R.

PMID: 12091145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jun 28;294(5):1052-63.

Downregulation of beta2-microglobulin in human cord blood somatic stem cells
after transplantation into livers of SCID-mice: an escape mechanism of stem
cells?

Beerheide W(1), von Mach MA, Ringel M, Fleckenstein C, Schumann S, Renzing N,
Hildebrandt A, Brenner W, Jensen O, Gebhard S, Reifenberg K, Bender J, Oesch F,
Hengstler JG.

Author information: 
(1)Kourion Therapeutics, Himmelgeister Str. 248, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
walter.beerheide@cytonet.de

Adherently growing, non-hematopoietic somatic stem cells isolated from human cord
blood were stained with the fluorescent dye PKH26 and transplanted into livers of
SCID-mice to examine a possible cell fate transition. Already 7 days after
transplantation stem cells were well integrated into the liver tissue. Human
albumin that was not expressed by the stem cells before transplantation was
detectable in the host's livers after injection of cord blood stem cells. Human
alpha1-antitrypsin was detectable in stem cells already before transplantation
and remained positive in the mouse liver. The most interesting observation in
this study was the downregulation of human beta2-microglobulin (beta2M) in the
stem cells after transplantation: beta2M is expressed constitutively in our cord 
blood stem cells. However, beta2M was no longer detectable by RT-PCR in all
tissues where human albumin and alpha1-antitrypsin were expressed after stem cell
transplantation. beta2M is known to participate as an integral part of the major 
histocompatibility complex. Absence of beta2M makes the residual heavy chain
inactive as an antigen. Thus, downregulation of beta2M may represent an escape
mechanism from killer-T cells and may be a molecular mechanism explaining the
recently described "immunological blindness" [37] of stem cells. In contrast to
the results obtained after direct injection of stem cells as a suspension, no
consistent downregulation of beta2M was observed after transplantation of stem
cells encapsulated in alginate beads to generate a compartment where stem cells
are protected from the host's natural killer cells. No expression of human genes 
was observed after transplantation of human cord blood derived mononuclear cells 
(MNC) that were used as a negative control. In conclusion, we have shown that
human cord blood somatic stem cells survive and are reprogrammed after
transplantation into mouse livers, although a complete transdifferentiation to
hepatocytes did not occur within 7 days, since some marker genes (GATA4 and
alpha-fetoprotein) were still negative. Switching off expression of beta2M may be
part of an intriguing and novel mechanism explaining why stem cells escape the
host's immune system.

PMID: 12074584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 1;247(1):116-26.

A role for the RNA-binding protein, hermes, in the regulation of heart
development.

Gerber WV(1), Vokes SA, Zearfoss NR, Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona Health Sciences 
Center, Tucson 85724, USA.

RNA-binding proteins are known to play an important role in a number of aspects
of development, although in most cases the precise mechanism of action remains
unknown. We have previously described the isolation of an RNA-binding protein,
hermes, that is expressed at very high levels in the differentiating myocardium. 
Here, we report experiments aimed at elucidating the functional role of hermes in
development. Utilizing the Xenopus oocyte, we show that hermes is localized
primarily to the cytoplasm, can associate in a multiprotein complex, and is able 
to bind to mature RNA transcripts in vivo. Overexpression of hermes in the
developing embryo dramatically and specifically inhibits heart development. In
particular, transcripts encoding the myocardial differentiation markers, cardiac 
troponin I and cardiac alpha-actin, are absent, and overall morphological
development of the heart is eliminated. Examination of markers of precardiac
tissue showed that expression of GATA-4 is normal, while the levels of Nkx2-5
mRNA are strongly reduced. Overall, these studies suggest that hermes plays a
role in the regulation of mature transcripts required for myocardial
differentiation. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence for an RNA-binding 
protein playing a direct role in regulation of vertebrate heart development.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12074556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;283(1):E50-7.

Regulation of the human brain natriuretic peptide gene by GATA-4.

He Q(1), Mendez M, LaPointe MC.

Author information: 
(1)Hypertension and Vascular Research Division, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, USA.

Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a cardiac hormone constitutively expressed in 
the adult heart. We previously showed that the human BNP (hBNP) proximal promoter
region from -127 to -40 confers myocyte-specific expression. The proximal hBNP
promoter contains several putative cis elements. Here we tested whether the
proximal GATA element plays a role in basal and inducible regulation of the hBNP 
promoter. The hBNP promoter was coupled to a luciferase reporter gene
(1818hBNPLuc) and transferred into neonatal ventricular myocytes (NVM), and
luciferase activity was measured as an index of hBNP promoter activity. Mutation 
of the putative GATA element at -85 of the hBNP promoter [1818(mGATA)hBNPLuc]
reduced activity by 97%. To study transactivation of the hBNP promoter, we
co-transfected 1818hBNPLuc with the GATA-4 expression vector. GATA-4 activated
1818hBNPLuc, and this effect was eliminated by mutation of the proximal GATA
element. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that an oligonucleotide
containing the hBNP GATA motif bound to cardiomyocyte nuclear protein, which was 
competed for by a consensus GATA oligonucleotide but not a mutated hBNP GATA
element. The beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol and its second messenger cAMP 
stimulated hBNP promoter activity and binding of nuclear protein to the proximal 
GATA element. Thus the GATA element in the proximal hBNP promoter is involved in 
both basal and inducible transcriptional regulation in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 12067842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31909-17. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha, GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain protein
Cdx2 interact functionally to modulate intestinal gene transcription. Implication
for the developmental regulation of the sucrase-isomaltase gene.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, van Wering HM, Kim RK, Swain GP, Krasinski SD, Moffett
J, Grand RJ, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), an intestine-specific gene, is induced in the
differentiated small intestinal villous epithelium during the suckling-weaning
transition in mice. We have previously identified cis-acting elements within a
short evolutionarily conserved SI promoter. However, the nature and profile of
expression of the interacting proteins have not been fully characterized during
this developmental transition. Herein, we show that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and
Cdx1 are the primary transcription factors from the adult mouse intestinal
epithelium to interact with the SIF3, GATA, and SIF1 elements of the SI promoter.
We wanted to study whether HNF-1 alpha, GATA-4, and Cdx2 can cooperate in the
regulation of SI gene expression. Immunolocalization experiments revealed that
HNF-1 alpha is detected in rare epithelial cells of suckling mice and becomes
progressively more expressed in the villous epithelial cells during the
suckling-weaning transition. GATA-4 protein is expressed exclusively in villous
differentiated epithelial cells of the proximal small intestine, decreases in
expression in the ileum, and becomes undetectable in the colon. HNF-1 alpha,
GATA-4, and Cdx2 interact in vitro and in vivo. These factors activate SI
promoter activity in cotransfection experiments where GATA-4 requires the
presence of both HNF-1 alpha and Cdx2. These findings imply a combinatory role of
HNF-1 alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 for the time- and position-dependent regulation of 
SI transcription during development.

PMID: 12060663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Jun;34(6):611-6.

Divergent signaling pathways converge on GATA4 to regulate cardiac hypertrophic
gene expression.

Liang Q, Molkentin JD.

PMID: 12054848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Physiol Genomics. 2002;9(3):145-55. Epub 2002 Apr 16.

Microarray analysis of global changes in gene expression during cardiac myocyte
differentiation.

Peng CF(1), Wei Y, Levsky JM, McDonald TV, Childs G, Kitsis RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Molecular Cardiology), Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Physiol Genomics. 2002;9(3):131-3.

Significant progress has been made in defining pathways that mediate the
formation of the mammalian heart. Little is known, however, about the genetic
program that directs the differentiation of cardiac myocytes from their precursor
cells. A major hindrance to this kind of investigation has been the absence of an
appropriate cell culture model of cardiac myocyte differentiation. Recently, a
subline of P19 cells (P19CL6) was derived that, following dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) treatment, differentiate efficiently over 10 days into spontaneously
beating cardiac myocytes. We demonstrate that these cells are indeed cardiac
myocytes as they express cell type-specific markers and exhibit
electrophysiological properties indicative of cardiac myocytes. The requirement
for DMSO stimulation in this paradigm was shown to be limited to the first 4
days, suggesting that critical events in the differentiation process occur over
this interval. To uncover relationships among known genes and identify novel
genes that mediate cardiac myocyte differentiation, a detailed time course of
changes in global gene expression was carried out using cDNA microarrays. In
addition to the activation of genes encoding cardiac transcription factors and
structural proteins, increases were noted in the expression of multiple known
genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Analysis of the former suggested the
involvement of a variety of signaling pathways in cardiac myocyte
differentiation. The 16 ESTs whose expression was increased during the early,
stimulus-dependent phase of cardiac myocyte differentiation may be novel
regulators of this process. Thus this first report of large-scale changes in gene
expression during cardiac myocyte differentiation has delineated relationships
among the expression patterns of known genes and identified a number of novel
genes that merit further study.

PMID: 12045295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Jun 7;1576(1-2):198-202.

GATA proteins are potential negative regulators of HDC gene expression in the
gastric epithelium.

Watson F(1), Kiernan RS, Dimaline R.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology, Duncan Building, The University of Liverpool,
Daulby Street, Liverpool L69 3GA, UK. watso@liv.ac.uk

In this study, we used the gastric epithelial cell line AGS-G(R) to investigate
the role of GATA transcription factors in the regulation of both basal and
gastrin-stimulated L-histidine decarboxylase (HDC) gene transcription. Using
reporter gene technology, we compared the transcriptional activity of a
construct, hHDC503, which contained the 5'-flanking region of the human HDC gene 
with that of similar constructs lacking selected GATA consensus sequences. We
demonstrated the expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 proteins within the AGS-G(R)
cells and found evidence that these transcription factors can negatively regulate
HDC gene expression.

PMID: 12031502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Clin Invest. 2002 May;109(10):1291-302.

Multipotent adult progenitor cells from bone marrow differentiate into functional
hepatocyte-like cells.

Schwartz RE(1), Reyes M, Koodie L, Jiang Y, Blackstad M, Lund T, Lenvik T,
Johnson S, Hu WS, Verfaillie CM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

We have derived from normal human, mouse, and rat postnatal bone marrow
primitive, multipotent adult progenitor cells (MAPCs) that can differentiate into
most mesodermal cells and neuroectodermal cells in vitro and into all embryonic
lineages in vivo. Here, we show that MAPCs can also differentiate into
hepatocyte-like cells in vitro. Human, mouse, and rat MAPCs, cultured on Matrigel
with FGF-4 and HGF, differentiated into epithelioid cells that expressed
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta), GATA4, cytokeratin 19 (CK19),
transthyretin, and alpha-fetoprotein by day 7, and expressed CK18, HNF-4, and
HNF-1alpha on days 14-28. Virtually all human, as well as a majority of rodent
cells stained positive for albumin and CK18 on day 21; 5% (rodent) to 25% (human)
cells were binucleated by day 21. These cells also acquired functional
characteristics of hepatocytes: they secreted urea and albumin, had
phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome p450, could take up LDL, and stored glycogen. 
MAPCs, which can be expanded in vitro and maintained in an undifferentiated state
for more than 100 population doublings, can thus differentiate into cells with
morphological, phenotypic, and functional characteristics of hepatocytes. MAPCs
may therefore be an ideal cell for in vivo therapies for liver disorders or for
use in bioartificial liver devices.

PMCID: PMC150983
PMID: 12021244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24390-8. Epub 2002 May 6.

The transcription factors GATA4 and dHAND physically interact to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression through a p300-dependent mechanism.

Dai YS(1), Cserjesi P, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

An intricate array of heterogeneous transcription factors participate in
programming tissue-specific gene expression through combinatorial interactions
that are unique to a given cell-type. The zinc finger-containing transcription
factor GATA4, which is widely expressed in mesodermal and endodermal derived
tissues, is thought to regulate cardiac myocyte-specific gene expression through 
combinatorial interactions with other semi-restricted transcription factors such 
as myocyte enhancer factor 2, nuclear factor of activated T-cells, serum response
factor, and Nkx2.5. Here we determined that GATA4 also interacts with the
cardiac-expressed basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND (also known
as HAND2). GATA4 and dHAND synergistically activated expression of
cardiac-specific promoters from the atrial natriuretic factor gene, the b-type
natriuretic peptide gene, and the alpha-myosin heavy chain gene. Using artificial
reporter constructs this functional synergy was shown to be GATA site-dependent, 
but E-box site-independent. A mechanism for the transcriptional synergy was
suggested by the observation that the bHLH domain of dHAND physically interacted 
with the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA4 forming a higher order complex.
This transcriptional synergy observed between GATA4 and dHAND was associated with
p300 recruitment, but not with alterations in DNA binding activity of either
factor. Moreover, the bHLH domain of dHAND directly interacted with the CH3
domain of p300 suggesting the existence of a higher order complex between GATA4, 
dHAND, and p300. Taken together with previous observations, these results suggest
the existence of an enhanceosome complex comprised of p300 and multiple
semi-restricted transcription factors that together specify tissue-specific gene 
expression in the heart.

PMID: 11994297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Novartis Found Symp. 2002;244:4-18; discussion 18-22, 35-42, 253-7.

Sex-determining genes in mice: building pathways.

Lovell-Badge R(1), Canning C, Sekido R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK.

Sry is active in the mouse for a very brief period in somatic cells of the
genital ridge to initiate Sertoli cell differentiation. SRY protein must act
within the context of other gene products required for gonadal development and
must itself act on one or more target genes that will ensure the further
differentiation and maintenance of Sertoli cells. Over the last few years several
genes have been found that have important roles in gonadal development and sex
determination. These include genes encoding transcription factors such as Lhx9,
Wt1, Sf1, Dax1, Gata4, Dmrt1 and Sox9, and some involved in cell cell signalling,
including Amh, Wnt4 and Dhh. While more await discovery, it is now possible to
start putting some of the known genes into pathways or networks. Sox9 probably
occupies a critical role in mammals for both the initiation and maintenance of
Sertoli cell differentiation. Data will be presented that are consistent with SRY
acting directly on Sox9 to ensure its up-regulation. SF1 is also central to
gonadal differentiation. Our results imply that it contributes to transcriptional
activation of several relevant genes, not just those required for male
development, including Sox9 and Amh, but also those that can have an antagonistic
effect on Sertoli cell differentiation, such as Dax1. Progress in establishing
other regulatory interactions will also be discussed.

PMID: 11990796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25775-82. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

Combinatorial expression of GATA4, Nkx2-5, and serum response factor directs
early cardiac gene activity.

Sepulveda JL(1), Vlahopoulos S, Iyer D, Belaguli N, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

Herein, the restricted expression of serum response factors (SRF) closely
overlapped with Nkx2-5 and GATA4 transcripts in early chick embryos coinciding
with the earliest appearance of cardiac alpha-actin (alphaCA) transcripts and
nascent myocardial cells. The combinatorial expression of SRF, a MADS box factor 
Nkx2-5 (a NK4 homeodomain), and/or GATA4, a dual C4 zinc finger protein, in
heterologous CV1 fibroblasts and Schneider 2 insect cells demonstrated
synergistic induction of alphaCA promoter activity. These three factors induced
endogenous alphaCA mRNA over a 100-fold in murine embryonic stem cells. In
addition, the DNA-binding defective mutant Nkx2-5pm efficiently coactivated the
alphaCA promoter in the presence of SRF and GATA4 in the presence of all four
SREs and was substantially weakened when individual SREs were mutated and or
serially deleted. In contrast, the introduction of SRFpm, a SRF DNA-binding
mutant, blocked the activation with all of the alphaCA promoter constructions.
These assays indicated a dependence upon cooperative SRF binding for facilitating
the recruitment of Nkx2-5 and GATA4 to the alphaCA promoter. Furthermore, the
recruitment of Nkx2-5 and GATA4 by SRF was observed to strongly enhance SRF DNA
binding affinity. This mechanism allowed for the formation of higher ordered
alphaCA promoter DNA binding complexes, led to a model of SRF physical
association with Nkx2-5 and GATA4.

PMID: 11983708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Physiol. 2002 Apr 15;540(Pt 2):397-409.

Charge movement and transcription regulation of L-type calcium channel alpha(1S) 
in skeletal muscle cells.

Zheng Z(1), Wang ZM, Delbono O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Erratum in
    J Physiol 2002 Jun 15;541(Pt 3):1059.

Several factors, such as Ca(2+), trophic factors and ageing, regulate
dihydropyridine-sensitive receptor (DHPR) alpha(1) subunit expression. However,
basic mechanisms of DHPR alpha(1S) expression are unknown. To better understand
the regulatory elements that control transcription, the 1.2 kb 5'-flanking region
fragment immediately upstream of the mouse L-type Ca(2+) channel or DHPR
alpha(1S) gene was isolated and sequenced. Luciferase reporter constructs driven 
by different promoter regions of mouse DHPR alpha(1S) gene were used for
transient transfection assays in muscle C2C12 cells. In these preparations we
found that three regions corresponding to CREB, GATA-2 and SOX-5 consensus
sequence within the 5'-flanking region of the DHPR alpha(1S) gene are important
for DHPR alpha(1S) gene transcription. Antisense oligonucleotides against CREB,
GATA-2 and SOX-5 significantly reduced charge movement in C2C12 cells. Charge
movement was recorded in the whole-cell configuration of the patch clamp
technique. Results from cells transfected with antisense (AS) and sense (S)
oligonucleotides and nontransfected cells were compared. Charge movement
experiments were fitted to a Boltzmann equation. Maximum charge movement (Q(max))
(nC microF(-1), mean +/- S.E.M.) for S- and AS-CREB was 70.3 +/- 2.9 and 52.8 +/-
3.3, respectively (P < 0.05). The same parameter for S- and AS-GATA-2 was 71.3
+/- 3.9 and 48.2 +/- 2.3, respectively (P < 0.05) and for S- and AS-SOX-5 was
70.4 +/- 4.2 and 45.1 +/- 3.2, respectively (P < 0.05). Values recorded in cells 
transfected with sense S-CREB, S-GATA-2 and S-SOX-5 oligonucleotides were not
significantly different from those recorded in nontransfected cells. This study
demonstrates that the transcription factors CREB, GATA-2 and SOX-5 play a
significant role in the expression of the skeletal muscle DHPR or L-type Ca(2+)
channel alpha(1S).

PMCID: PMC2290248
PMID: 11956331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 1;16(7):784-9.

Differentiation of embryonic stem cells is induced by GATA factors.

Fujikura J(1), Yamato E, Yonemura S, Hosoda K, Masui S, Nakao K, Miyazaki Ji J,
Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Regulation Research, Area of Molecular Therapeutics, Course of
Advanced Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, 
Japan.

Extraembryonic endoderm (ExE) is differentiated from the inner cell mass of the
late blastocyst-stage embryo to form visceral and parietal endoderm, both of
which have an important role in early embryogenesis. The essential roles of
Gata-6 and Gata-4 on differentiation of visceral endoderm have been identified by
analyses of knockout mice. Here we report that forced expression of either Gata-6
or Gata-4 in embryonic stem (ES) cells is sufficient to induce the proper
differentiation program towards ExE. We believe that this is the first report of 
a physiological differentiation event induced by the ectopic expression of a
transcription factor in ES cells.

PMCID: PMC186328
PMID: 11937486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2002 Apr;129(8):1935-43.

Regulation of avian cardiogenesis by Fgf8 signaling.

Alsan BH(1), Schultheiss TM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The avian heart develops from paired primordia located in the anterior lateral
mesoderm of the early embryo. Previous studies have found that the endoderm
adjacent to the cardiac primordia plays an important role in heart specification.
The current study provides evidence that fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling
contributes to the heart-inducing properties of the endoderm. Fgf8 is expressed
in the endoderm adjacent to the precardiac mesoderm. Removal of endoderm results 
in a rapid downregulation of a subset of cardiac markers, including Nkx2.5 and
Mef2c. Expression of these markers can be rescued by supplying exogenous Fgf8. In
addition, application of ectopic Fgf8 results in ectopic expression of cardiac
markers. Expression of cardiac markers is expanded only in regions where bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) signaling is also present, suggesting that
cardiogenesis occurs in regions exposed to both Fgf and Bmp signaling. Finally,
evidence is presented that Fgf8 expression is regulated by particular levels of
Bmp signaling. Application of low concentrations of Bmp2 results in ectopic
expression of Fgf8, while application of higher concentrations of Bmp2 result in 
repression of Fgf8 expression. Together, these data indicate that Fgf signaling
cooperates with Bmp signaling to regulate early cardiogenesis.

PMID: 11934859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):279-89.

Opening of compacted chromatin by early developmental transcription factors HNF3 
(FoxA) and GATA-4.

Cirillo LA(1), Lin FR, Cuesta I, Friedman D, Jarnik M, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):209-11.

The transcription factors HNF3 (FoxA) and GATA-4 are the earliest known to bind
the albumin gene enhancer in liver precursor cells in embryos. To understand how 
they access sites in silent chromatin, we assembled nucleosome arrays containing 
albumin enhancer sequences and compacted them with linker histone. HNF3 and
GATA-4, but not NF-1, C/EBP, and GAL4-AH, bound their sites in compacted
chromatin and opened the local nucleosomal domain in the absence of ATP-dependent
enzymes. The ability of HNF3 to open chromatin is mediated by a high affinity DNA
binding site and by the C-terminal domain of the protein, which binds histones H3
and H4. Thus, factors that potentiate transcription in development are inherently
capable of initiating chromatin opening events.

PMID: 11864602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):209-11.

Opening chromatin.

Lomvardas S(1), Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):279-89.

How the transcriptional apparatus gains access to and subsequently opens
compacted chromatin has remained a mystery. Now in this issue of Molecular Cell, 
Zaret and coworkers show that chromatin opening in vitro is not mediated by the
classical chromatin remodeling machines but instead occurs through specific
transcription factor-histone interactions.

PMID: 11864594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Jan;80(1):51-60. Epub 2001 Sep 22.

Decoy oligonucleotide characterization of GATA-4 transcription factor in
hypertrophic agonist induced responses of cardiac myocytes.

Pikkarainen S(1), Kerkelä R, Pöntinen J, Majalahti-Palviainen T, Tokola H,
Eskelinen S, Vuolteenaho O, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 90014 Oulu, Finland.

GATA-4 transcription factor is required for normal cardiac development. However, 
it is unknown whether GATA-4 is an essential mediator of hypertrophic responses
in the heart. Rat B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene promoter contains a
region of two adjacent GATA binding sites (between -68 and -97) with high
affinity for GATA-4. In order to block GATA-4 dependent signaling in cultured
neonatal rat ventricular myocytes we administered a synthetic 30-bp
phosphorothioated double-stranded DNA complementary to the rat BNP promoter
region (between -68 and -97) as a "decoy" cis-element to bind GATA-4. GATA decoy 
oligodeoxynucleotide treatment of cardiomyocytes blocked GATA-4 DNA binding
activity in electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and decreased baseline
expression of cardiac natriuretic peptides and GATA-dependent promoter activity. 
In contrast, blocked GATA-4 DNA binding did not prevent endothelin-1 or
phenylephrine induced expression of cardiac natriuretic peptides. Mutation of
GATA binding sites at -80 and -91 rat BNP promoter downregulated baseline but did
not affect endothelin-1 or angiotensin II induced promoter activity. Additively, 
GATA decoy oligodeoxynucleotide treatment was insufficient to block endothelin-1 
induced activation of protein synthesis or sarcomeric protein assembly. In
conclusion, a targeted disruption of GATA-4 DNA binding activity is insufficient 
to prevent hypertrophic agonist induced responses of ventricular myocytes.

PMID: 11862325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Feb 15;30(4):1056-64.

GATA-4 interacts distinctively with negative and positive regulatory elements in 
the Fgf-3 promoter.

Murakami A(1), Ishida S, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. amurakam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

GATA-4 binds two sites in the Fgf-3 promoter, PS4A and PS13, which function as
positive and negative regulatory elements, respectively. In spite of their
opposite functions, both PS4A and PS13 acted as potent enhancer elements when
three copies of each were appended to a minimal tk promoter. Mutational analysis 
showed that the negative regulatory activity of PS13 was dependent on its close
proximity to the major transcription initiation site (P3), since it was a
stronger repressor when moved closer to P3, but had no significant activity when 
moved to more distal positions. While only the C-terminal zinc finger and the
basic domain of GATA-4 were required for binding to PS13, this was insufficient
for binding at PS4A. In addition to the PS4A GATA site, the presence of sequences
located 10-12 bp distant was required for efficient binding. Both the sequence
and location of this second site was crucial for binding and enhancer activity.
Truncation deletions of GATA-4 showed that efficient binding to PS4A was
dependent on both zinc fingers and the basic domain, suggesting a direct
interaction between one zinc finger domain and a possible second site (AGACAA)
that shows some similarity to a GATA motif. GATA-4 binding to PS4A through both
zinc finger domains was essential for Fgf-3 promoter activity. The substitution
in PS4A of a GATA-binding sequence similar to PS13, which only requires a single 
zinc finger domain, bound GATA-4 efficiently but did not activate the Fgf-3
promoter. These differences in GATA-4 binding were also reflected in DNA bending 
assays that suggested clear conformational differences between complexes formed
on PS4A and PS13.

PMCID: PMC100337
PMID: 11842118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Free Radic Biol Med. 2002 Feb 15;32(4):341-9.

Roles of protein kinase C and alpha-tocopherol in regulation of signal
transduction for GATA-4 phosphorylation in HL-1 cardiac muscle cells.

Clément SA(1), Tan CC, Guo J, Kitta K, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Antioxidants Research Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Our previous study demonstrated that endothelin-1 induced a phosphorylation of
GATA-4 transcription factor, which plays important roles in cardiac hypertrophy
and failure. The goal of the present study was to determine whether protein
kinase C (PKC) is involved in the signaling pathway, and, if so, whether
alpha-tocopherol inhibits the GATA-4 phosphorylation. Treatment of HL-1 adult
mouse cardiac muscle cells with PMA, a known activator of PKC, induced a
transient phosphorylation of GATA-4. PMA also phosphorylated MEK and ERK, and
PMA-induced GATA-4 phosphorylation was blocked by an MEK inhibitor, PD98059,
suggesting that PMA phosphorylates GATA-4 via the MEK-ERK pathway. Treatment of
HL-1 cells with 1 microM PMA for 24 h resulted in a downregulation of PKC. In
PKC-downregulated cells, PMA- or ET-1-induced GATA-4 phosphorylation was
suppressed, suggesting the role of PKC in GATA-4 phosphorylation. However,
alpha-tocopherol (5--100 microM) did not inhibit the phosphorylation of GATA-4 or
ERK in HL-1 cells. In contrast, alpha-tocopherol potently inhibited the
PMA-induced ERK activation in smooth muscle cells. Our studies in HL-1 cells
showed that PKC inhibitors, such as calphostin C and chelerythrin, failed to
inhibit the PMA signaling. Furthermore, HL-1 cells appear to possess a unique
PKC-signaling mechanism as PKC is constitutively phosphorylated and PMA did not
cause further phosphorylation. Thus, in HL-1 cardiac muscle cells, PMA activates 
the MEK-ERK-GATA-4 pathway, apparently via a PKC-independent mechanism.

PMID: 11841924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 19;277(16):13752-60. Epub 2002 Feb 4.

Distinct roles of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in GATA-4
transcription factor-mediated regulation of B-type natriuretic peptide gene.

Kerkelä R(1), Pikkarainen S, Majalahti-Palviainen T, Tokola H, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biocenter Oulu, P. O. Box 5000, University of
Oulu, 90014 Oulu, Finland.

The expression of cardiac hormones, atrial natriuretic peptide and B-type
natriuretic peptide, is induced by cardiac wall stretch and responds to various
hypertrophic agonists such as endothelin-1. In cardiac myocytes, endothelin-1
induces GATA-4 binding to the B-type natriuretic peptide gene, but the signaling 
pathways involved in endothelin-1-induced GATA-4 activation are unknown.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways are stimulated in response to various
extracellular stimuli, and they modulate the function of several transcription
activators. Here we show that inhibition of p38 kinase with SB203580 inhibited
endothelin-1-induced GATA-4 binding to B-type natriuretic peptide gene and serine
phosphorylation of GATA-4. Inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinase with MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 reduced basal and p38-induced GATA-4 binding
activity, but it had no significant effect on endothelin-1-induced GATA-4 binding
activity. Overexpression of p38 kinase pathway, but not extracellular
signal-regulated kinase or c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase, activated GATA-4
binding to B-type natriuretic peptide gene and induced rat B-type natriuretic
peptide promoter activity via proximal GATA binding sites. In conclusion, these
findings demonstrate that activation of p38 kinase is necessary for hypertrophic 
agonist-induced GATA-4 binding to B-type natriuretic peptide gene and sufficient 
for GATA-dependent B-type natriuretic peptide gene expression.

PMID: 11827958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Ann Med. 2001 Dec;33(9):604-10.

Regulation of heart development and function through combinatorial interactions
of transcription factors.

Nemer G(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms controlling cardiac-specific gene
transcription requires the dissection of the cis-elements that govern the complex
spatio-temporal expression of these genes. The four-chambered vertebrate heart is
formed during the late phases of fetal development following a series of complex 
morphogenetic events that require the functional presence of different proteins. 
The gradient-like expression of some genes, as well as the chamber-specific
expression of others, is tightly regulated by combinatorial interactions of
several transcription factors and their cofactors. Chamber- and stage-specific
cardiac myocyte cultures have been invaluable for identifying transcription
factor binding sites involved in basal, chamber-specific, and inducible
expression of many cardiac promoters; these studies, which were largely confirmed
in vivo in transgenic mouse models, led to the isolation of key regulators of
heart development. In addition, the use of pluripotent embryonic stem cells
helped elucidate the early molecular events controlling cardiomyocyte
differentiation. Together, these studies point to a major role for GATA
transcription factors and their interacting partners in transcriptional control
of heart development. In addition, members of the T-box family of transcription
factors and homeodomain containing proteins, together with chamber-restricted
transcriptional repressors and co-repressors play critical roles in heart
septation and chamber specification. These fine-tuned cooperative interactions
between different classes of proteins are at the basis of normal cardiac
function, and alteration in their expression level or function leads to cardiac
pathologies.

PMID: 11817655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pflugers Arch. 2002 Jan;443(3):362-9. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

Direct left ventricular wall stretch activates GATA4 binding in perfused rat
heart: involvement of autocrine/paracrine pathways.

Hautala N(1), Tenhunen O, Szokodi I, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, 90014 University of
Oulu, Finland.

The signaling cascades that activate transcription factors during cardiac
hypertrophy are largely unknown. To evaluate the mechanisms for GATA4 and
activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation, isolated perfused rat hearts were exposed 
to elevated wall stretch by inflating a left ventricular balloon. Gel mobility
shift assays were used to analyze the transacting factors that interact with the 
GATA or the AP-1 motifs of the B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) promoter. Direct 
wall stretch for 30 min produced a twofold increase ( P<0.001) in left
ventricular BNP GATA4- but not GATA5- and GATA6-binding activity. In addition,
increased BNP AP-1-binding activity and the presence of c-fos were demonstrated
in wall-stretch-stimulated ventricles compared with unloaded ventricles. The
mixed endothelin-1 ETA/ETB receptor antagonist bosentan and the angiotensin II
(Ang II) type 1 (AT1) receptor antagonist CV-11974 completely inhibited the
wall-stretch-induced increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 and AP-1 activity.
Infusions of ET-1 and Ang II in the absence of wall stretch also stimulated BNP
GATA4-binding activity ( P<0.01). These results show that ET-1 and Ang II are
required for the stimulation of GATA4 and AP-1 DNA-binding activity in response
to direct left ventricular wall stretch.

PMID: 11810204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Biol. 2002 Jan 1;241(1):34-46.

Genetic mosaic analysis reveals that GATA-4 is required for proper
differentiation of mouse gastric epithelium.

Jacobsen CM(1), Narita N, Bielinska M, Syder AJ, Gordon JI, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

During mouse embryogenesis GATA-4 is expressed first in primitive endoderm and
then in definitive endoderm derivatives, including glandular stomach and
intestine. To explore the role of GATA-4 in specification of definitive gastric
endoderm, we generated chimeric mice by introducing Gata4(-/-) ES cells into
ROSA26 morulae or blastocysts. In E14.5 chimeras, Gata4(-/-) cells were
represented in endoderm lining the proximal and distal stomach. These cells
expressed early cytodifferentiation markers, including GATA-6 and ApoJ. However, 
by E18.5, only rare patches of Gata4(-/-) epithelium were evident in the distal
stomach. This heterotypic epithelium had a squamous morphology and did not
express markers associated with differentiation of gastric epithelial cell
lineages. Sonic Hedgehog, an endoderm-derived signaling molecule normally
down-regulated in the distal stomach, was overexpressed in Gata4(-/-) cells. We
conclude that GATA-4-deficient cells have an intrinsic defect in their ability to
differentiate. Similarities in the phenotypes of Gata4(-/-) chimeras and mice
with other genetically engineered mutations that affect gut development suggest
that GATA-4 may be involved in the gastric epithelial response to members of the 
TGF-beta superfamily.

PMID: 11784093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2001 Oct;3(5):911-8.

Effects of thiol antioxidants on hepatocyte growth factor signaling in cardiac
myocytes.

Kitta K(1), Day RM, Remeika J, Blumberg JB, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Antioxidants Research Laboratory and Cell and Molecular Nutrition Program,
Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

We describe here novel antioxidant-sensitive events in which activation kinetics 
are delayed, leading to inhibition of cell signaling. Hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) transiently phosphorylated p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
with a peak at 3-5 min in HL-1 adult cardiac myocytes. Pretreatment of cells with
thiol antioxidants, N-acetylcysteine or alpha-lipoic acid attenuated MAPK
phosphorylation induced by a 3-min incubation with HGF. However, kinetic analysis
revealed that the apparent inhibition of HGF signaling was due to a delay in the 
activation because HGF phosphorylated MAPK with a peak at 5-7 min in cells
treated with thiol antioxidants. This 2-min delay in HGF activation of MAPK
resulted in >5-min delay in phosphorylation of MAPK targets such as p90RSK and
GATA-4. Hydrogen peroxide did not mimic HGF signaling, and HGF did not induce
reactive oxygen species production. Thus, in cardiac myocytes, thiol antioxidants
delay HGF-mediated MAPK activation and suppress subsequent signaling eventsvia
reactive oxygen species-independent mechanism.

PMID: 11761336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8618-25. Epub 2001 Dec 5.

Rho/ROCK pathway contributes to the activation of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase/GATA-4 during myocardial cell hypertrophy.

Yanazume T(1), Hasegawa K, Wada H, Morimoto T, Abe M, Kawamura T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The low molecular weight GTPase Rho mediates a variety of cytoskeleton-dependent 
cell functions and stretch- and G(q) protein-induced hypertrophic responses in
cardiac myocytes. Although ROCK, one of Rho's effectors, has been suggested to
mediate hypertrophic signals, the relationship of Rho/ROCK with downstream
signals is unknown. A zinc finger transcription factor, GATA-4, is activated by
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and is required for the up-regulation
of the endothelin-1 gene during myocardial cell hypertrophy. However, it is
unknown whether Rho/ROCK signals are linked to downstream GATA-4. By transient
transfection assays using a dominant-negative mutant and an activated derivative 
of ROCK-I, we showed that ROCK-I participates in GATA-4-dependent endothelin-1
transcription. Inhibition of the Rho/ROCK pathway by Y-27632, a selective
inhibitor of ROCK, suppressed phenylephrine-stimulated phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and increased the DNA binding activity 
of cardiac GATA-4. Interestingly, latrunculin B, which inhibits actin
polymerization, also prevents phenylephrine-induced responses. These findings
demonstrate that the Rho/ROCK pathway is linked to downstream GATA-4 via the
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases during myocardial cell
hypertrophy. The results also suggest that changes in actin dynamics provide a
convergence point for Rho/ROCK to the downstream signals during this process.

PMID: 11739382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):267-79.

A distant upstream region of the rat multipartite Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger NCX1
gene promoter is sufficient to confer cardiac-specific expression.

Koban MU(1), Brugh SA, Riordon DR, Dellow KA, Yang HT, Tweedie D, Boheler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College School of Medicine, London, UK.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) regulates intracellular calcium homeostasis. We 
report on an upstream region of the rat NCX1 multipartite promoter that is active
in cardiac myocytes. Although inactive in most non-cardiac cell lines, its
activity can be rescued by cotransfection with GATA-4 and -6, but not GATA-5
transcription factors. In transgenic mice and similar to endogenous NCX1 mRNA
expression, the upstream promoter region directs uniform beta-galactosidase
expression in cardiac myocytes from approximately 7.75dpc. In adult mouse hearts,
promoter activity is, however, significantly reduced and heterogeneous, except in
the conduction system (sinoatrial and atrioventricular node, atrioventricular
bundles). The upstream NCX1 promoter region thus directs appropriate spatial and 
temporal control of cardiac expression throughout development.

PMID: 11731239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3585-92. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Defects of the heart, eye, and megakaryocytes in peroxisome proliferator
activator receptor-binding protein (PBP) null embryos implicate GATA family of
transcription factors.

Crawford SE(1), Qi C, Misra P, Stellmach V, Rao MS, Engel JD, Zhu Y, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP) is an
important coactivator for PPARgamma and other nuclear receptors. It has been
identified as an integral component of a multiprotein thyroid hormone
receptor-associated protein/vitamin D(3) receptor-interacting
protein/activator-recruited cofactor complexes required for transcriptional
activity. Here, we show that PBP is critical for the development of placenta and 
for the normal embryonic development of the heart, eye, vascular, and
hematopoietic systems. The primary functional cause of embryonic lethality at
embryonic day11.5 observed with PBP null mutation was cardiac failure because of 
noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium and resultant ventricular dilatation.
There was a paucity of retinal pigment, defective lens formation, excessive
systemic angiogenesis, a deficiency in the number of megakaryocytes, and an
arrest in erythrocytic differentiation. Some of these defects involve PPARgamma
and retinoid-sensitive sites, whereas others have not been recognized in the
PPAR-signaling pathway. Phenotypic changes in four organ systems observed in PBP 
null mice overlapped with those in mice deficient in members of GATA, a family of
transcription factors known to regulate differentiation of megakaryocytes,
erythrocytes, and adipocytes. We demonstrate that PBP interacts with all five
GATA factors analyzed, GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, GATA-4, and GATA-6, and show that 
the binding of GATA-1, GATA-4, and GATA-6 to PBP is not dependent on the nuclear 
receptor recognition sequence motif LXXLL (where L is leucine and X is any amino 
acid) in PBP. Coexpression of PBP with GATA-3 markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity of GATA-3 in nonhematopoietic cells. These observations identify the
GATA family of transcription factors as a new interacting partner of PBP and
demonstrate that PBP is essential for normal development of vital organ systems.

PMID: 11724781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 2001 Aug;128(16):3179-88.

Conotruncal myocardium arises from a secondary heart field.

Waldo KL(1), Kumiski DH, Wallis KT, Stadt HA, Hutson MR, Platt DH, Kirby ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

The primary heart tube is an endocardial tube, ensheathed by myocardial cells,
that develops from bilateral primary heart fields located in the lateral plate
mesoderm. Earlier mapping studies of the heart fields performed in whole embryo
cultures indicate that all of the myocardium of the developed heart originates
from the primary heart fields. In contrast, marking experiments in ovo suggest
that the atrioventricular canal, atria and conotruncus are added secondarily to
the straight heart tube during looping. The results we present resolve this issue
by showing that the heart tube elongates during looping, concomitant with
accretion of new myocardium. The atria are added progressively from the caudal
primary heart fields bilaterally, while the myocardium of the conotruncus is
elongated from a midline secondary heart field of splanchnic mesoderm beneath the
floor of the foregut. Cells in the secondary heart field express Nkx2.5 and
Gata-4, as do the cells of the primary heart fields. Induction of myocardium
appears to be unnecessary at the inflow pole, while it occurs at the outflow pole
of the heart. Accretion of myocardium at the junction of the inflow myocardium
with dorsal mesocardium is completed at stage 12 and later (stage 18) from the
secondary heart field just caudal to the outflow tract. Induction of myocardium
appears to move in a caudal direction as the outflow tract translocates caudally 
relative to the pharyngeal arches. As the cells in the secondary heart field
begin to move into the outflow or inflow myocardium, they express HNK-1 initially
and then MF-20, a marker for myosin heavy chain. FGF-8 and BMP-2 are present in
the ventral pharynx and secondary heart field/outflow myocardium, respectively,
and appear to effect induction of the cells in a manner that mimics induction of 
the primary myocardium from the primary heart fields. Neither FGF-8 nor BMP-2 is 
present as inflow myocardium is added from the primary heart fields. The addition
of a secondary myocardium to the primary heart tube provides a new framework for 
understanding several null mutations in mice that cause defective heart
development.

PMID: 11688566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genes Dev. 2001 Oct 15;15(20):2702-19.

Tissue-specific GATA factors are transcriptional effectors of the small GTPase
RhoA.

Charron F(1), Tsimiklis G, Arcand M, Robitaille L, Liang Q, Molkentin JD, Meloche
S, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Rho-like GTPases play a pivotal role in the orchestration of changes in the actin
cytoskeleton in response to receptor stimulation, and have been implicated in
transcriptional activation, cell growth regulation, and oncogenic transformation.
Recently, a role for RhoA in the regulation of cardiac contractility and
hypertrophic cardiomyocyte growth has been suggested but the mechanisms
underlying RhoA function in the heart remain undefined. We now report that
transcription factor GATA-4, a key regulator of cardiac genes, is a nuclear
mediator of RhoA signaling and is involved in the control of sarcomere assembly
in cardiomyocytes. Both RhoA and GATA-4 are essential for sarcomeric
reorganization in response to hypertrophic growth stimuli and overexpression of
either protein is sufficient to induce sarcomeric reorganization. Consistent with
convergence of RhoA and GATA signaling, RhoA potentiates the transcriptional
activity of GATA-4 via a p38 MAPK-dependent pathway that phosphorylates GATA-4
activation domains and GATA binding sites mediate RhoA activation of target
cardiac promoters. Moreover, a dominant-negative GATA-4 protein abolishes
RhoA-induced sarcomere reorganization. The identification of transcription factor
GATA-4 as a RhoA mediator in sarcomere reorganization and cardiac gene regulation
provides a link between RhoA effects on transcription and cell remodeling.

PMCID: PMC312821
PMID: 11641276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Endocrinology. 2001 Nov;142(11):4693-700.

GATA4 mediates activation of the B-type natriuretic peptide gene expression in
response to hemodynamic stress.

Marttila M(1), Hautala N, Paradis P, Toth M, Vuolteenaho O, Nemer M, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu,
FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland.

To identify the mechanisms that couple hemodynamic stress to alterations in
cardiac gene expression, DNA constructs containing the rat B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) promoter were injected into the myocardium of rats, which underwent
bilateral nephrectomy or were sham-operated. Ventricular BNP mRNA levels were
induced about 4-fold; and the BNP reporter construct containing the proximal 2200
bp, 5-fold, in response to 1-d nephrectomy. Deletion of sequences between bp
-2200 and -114 did not affect basal or inducible activity of the BNP promoter. An
activator protein-1-like site and two tandem GATA elements are located within
this 114-bp sequence. Both deletion and mutation of the AP-1-like motif decreased
basal activity but did not abolish the response to nephrectomy. In contrast,
mutation or deletion of -90 bp GATA-sites abrogated the response to hemodynamic
stress. The importance of these GATA elements to BNP promoter activation was
further confirmed by the corresponding 38-bp oligonucleotide conferring
hemodynamic stress responsiveness to a minimal BNP promoter. In gel mobility
shift assays, nephrectomy increased left ventricular BNP GATA4 binding activity
significantly. In conclusion, GATA elements are necessary and sufficient to
confer transcriptional activation of BNP gene in response to hemodynamic stress.

PMID: 11606434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur Respir J. 2001 Sep;18(3):466-73.

Expression of GATA family of transcription factors in T-cells, monocytes and
bronchial biopsies.

Caramori G(1), Lim S, Ito K, Tomita K, Oates T, Jazrawi E, Chung KF, Barnes PJ,
Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
School of Medicine, London, UK.

GATA-binding proteins are a subfamily of zinc finger transcription factors with
six members (GATA-1-6) that interact with the GATA deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
sequence. This sequence is found in the regulatory regions of many genes
including those encoding T-helper 2 (Th2)-like cytokines, receptors, adhesion
molecules and enzymes, which may be important in the pathogenesis of bronchial
asthma. The expression of GATA-3, 4 and -6 was investigated in peripheral blood
T-lymphocytes and monocytes and bronchial biopsies from 11 normal subjects and 10
steroid-naive asthmatic patients. Using Western blot analysis, T-cells from
asthmatic subjects expressed 5 times the level of GATA-3 compared to that in
normals. Confocal microscopy indicated that GATA-3 expression was both nuclear
and cytoplasmic. GATA DNA binding complex containing GATA-3 was elevated in Th2
cells as determined by electrophorectic mobility shift assay. In contrast,
monocytes from normal and asthmatic subjects expressed GATA-4 and -6 in equal
amounts, but no GATA-3 was found. Using immunohistochemistry in bronchial
biopsies, epithelial cells expressed high levels of GATA-3, GATA-4 and GATA-6
proteins. Comparison of Western blots of bronchial biopsies showed no significant
differences between normal and asthmatic subjects. In conclusion, the increased
expression of GATA-3 in asthmatic T-cells may underlie augmented T-helper 2-like 
cytokines in this disease. However, the unaltered GATA-3 expression in epithelial
cells suggests a distinct role for GATA-3 in these cells unrelated to T-helper
2-like cytokine release. Finally, no evidence was found for an increased
expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in asthma.

PMID: 11589343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(21):7460-9.

The transcription factor GATA4 is activated by extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1- and 2-mediated phosphorylation of serine 105 in cardiomyocytes.

Liang Q(1), Wiese RJ, Bueno OF, Dai YS, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factor GATA4 has been implicated as a
critical regulator of multiple cardiac-expressed genes as well as a regulator of 
inducible gene expression in response to hypertrophic stimulation. Here we
demonstrate that GATA4 is itself regulated by the mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling cascade through direct phosphorylation. Site-directed
mutagenesis and phospho-specific GATA4 antiserum revealed serine 105 as the
primary site involved in agonist-induced phosphorylation of GATA4. Infection of
cultured cardiomyocytes with an activated MEK1-expressing adenovirus induced
robust phosphorylation of serine 105 in GATA4, while a dominant-negative
MEK1-expressing adenovirus blocked agonist-induced phosphorylation of serine 105,
implicating extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) as a GATA4 kinase.
Indeed, bacterially purified ERK2 protein directly phosphorylated purified GATA4 
at serine 105 in vitro. Phosphorylation of serine 105 enhanced the
transcriptional potency of GATA4, which was sensitive to U0126 (MEK1 inhibitor)
but not SB202190 (p38 inhibitor). Phosphorylation of serine 105 also modestly
enhanced the DNA binding activity of bacterially purified GATA4. Finally,
induction of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with an activated MEK1-expressing
adenovirus was blocked with a dominant-negative GATA4-engrailed-expressing
adenovirus. These results suggest a molecular pathway whereby MEK1-ERK1/2
signaling regulates cardiomyocyte hypertrophic growth through the transcription
factor GATA4 by direct phosphorylation of serine 105, which enhances DNA binding 
and transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC99918
PMID: 11585926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biochem J. 2001 Oct 15;359(Pt 2):375-80.

Endothelin-1 induces phosphorylation of GATA-4 transcription factor in the HL-1
atrial-muscle cell line.

Kitta K(1), Clément SA, Remeika J, Blumberg JB, Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
711 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-4 plays a central role in the regulation of
cardiac-muscle gene transcription. The present study demonstrates that
endothelin-1 (ET-1) induces GATA-4 activation and phosphorylation. The treatment 
of HL-1 adult mouse atrial-muscle cells with ET-1 (30 nM) caused a rapid increase
in the DNA binding activity of GATA-4 within 3 min. The activation was associated
with an upward mobility shift of the GATA-4 band on native PAGE in an
electrophoretic- mobility-shift assay. The upward shift of the GATA-4 band also
occurred on SDS/PAGE as monitored by immunoblotting. The in vitro treatment of
nuclear extracts with lambda-protein phosphatase abolished the upward shift,
indicating that GATA-4 was phosphorylated. ET-1 activated the p44/42
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the MAPK kinase (MEK) within 3 min,
and PD98059 (a specific inhibitor of MEK) abolished the ET-1-induced GATA-4
phosphorylation. PMA also caused the rapid activation of MAPK and the
phosphorylation of GATA-4. In contrast, the activation of MAPK by phenylephrine
or H(2)O(2) was weak and did not lead to GATA-4 phosphorylation. Thus ET-1
induces a GATA-4 phosphorylation by activating a MEK-MAPK pathway.

PMCID: PMC1222156
PMID: 11583584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;79(8):673-81.

Regulation of the ANF and BNP promoters by GATA factors: lessons learned for
cardiac transcription.

McBride K(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, QC, Canada.

The identification and molecular cloning of the cardiac transcription factors
GATA-4, -5, and -6 has greatly contributed to our understanding of how
tissue-specific transcription is achieved during cardiac growth and development. 
Through analysis of their interacting partners, it has also become apparent that 
a major mechanism underlying spatial and temporal specificity within the heart as
well as in the response to cardiogenic regulators is the combinatorial
interaction between cardiac-restricted and inducible transcription factors. The
cardiac GATA factors appear to be fundamental contributors to these regulatory
networks. Two of the first targets identified for the cardiac GATA factors were
the natriuretic peptide genes encoding atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP), the major heart secretory products that are also
accepted clinical markers of the diseased heart. Studies using the ANF and BNP
promoters as models of cardiac-specific transcription have unraveled the pivotal 
role that GATA proteins play in cardiac gene expression. We review the current
knowledge on the modulation of the natriuretic peptide promoters by GATA factors,
including examples of combinatorial interactions between GATA proteins and
diverse transcription factors.

PMID: 11558676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2001 Aug;128(15):2953-62.

Rho kinases play an obligatory role in vertebrate embryonic organogenesis.

Wei L(1), Roberts W, Wang L, Yamada M, Zhang S, Zhao Z, Rivkees SA, Schwartz RJ, 
Imanaka-Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Rho-associated kinases (Rho kinases), which are downstream effectors of RhoA
GTPase, regulate diverse cellular functions including actin cytoskeletal
organization. We have demonstrated that Rho kinases also direct the early stages 
of chick and mouse embryonic morphogenesis. We observed that Rho kinase
transcripts were enriched in cardiac mesoderm, lateral plate mesoderm and the
neural plate. Treatment of neurulating embryos with Y27632, a specific inhibitor 
of Rho kinases, blocked migration and fusion of the bilateral heart primordia,
formation of the brain and neural tube, caudalward movement of Hensen's node, and
establishment of normal left-right asymmetry. Moreover, Y27632 induced precocious
expression of cardiac alpha-actin, an early marker of cardiomyocyte
differentiation, coincident with the upregulated expression of serum response
factor and GATA4. In addition, specific antisense oligonucleotides significantly 
diminished Rho kinase mRNA levels and replicated many of the teratologies induced
by Y27632. Thus, our study reveals new biological functions for Rho kinases in
regulating major morphogenetic events during early chick and mouse development.

PMID: 11532918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):42252-8. Epub 2001 Aug 28.

Nkx2-5 activity is essential for cardiomyogenesis.

Jamali M(1), Rogerson PJ, Wilton S, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A
5C1, Canada.

The homeobox transcription factor tinman is essential for heart vessel formation 
in Drosophila. In contrast, mice lacking the murine homologue Nkx2-5 are
defective in cardiac looping but not in cardiac myocyte development. The lack of 
an essential role for Nkx2-5 in cardiomyogenesis in mammalian systems is most
likely the result of genetic redundancy with family members. In this study, we
used a dominant negative mutant of Nkx2-5, created by fusing the repressor domain
of engrailed 2 to the Nkx2-5 homeodomain, termed Nkx/EnR. Expression of Nkx/EnR
inhibited Me(2)SO-induced cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells but not skeletal
myogenesis. Nkx/EnR inhibited expression of cardiomyoblast markers, such as
GATA-4 and MEF2C, but not of mesoderm markers, such as Brachyury T and Wnt5b, or 
of skeletal lineage markers, such as MyoD and Mox1. To identify the minimal
region of Nkx2-5 that can trigger cardiomyogenesis, we analyzed the activity of
various Nkx2-5 deletion mutants. The C-terminal domain was not necessary for the 
ability of Nkx2-5 to induce cardiomyogenesis and loss of this domain did not
enhance myogenesis. Therefore, Nkx2-5 function is essential for commitment of
mesoderm into the cardiac muscle lineage, and the N-terminal region, together
with the homeodomain, is sufficient for cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

PMID: 11526122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Plant Cell Physiol. 2001 Aug;42(8):813-22.

The transcriptional activation domain of the plant-specific Dof1 factor functions
in plant, animal, and yeast cells.

Yanagisawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo, 153-8902 Japan.

Maize Dof1, one of the plant-specific Dof transcription factors, is involved in
light-regulated gene expression. To elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying 
the activity of Dof1, in vivo functional analyses were carried out using
transient expression assays with maize mesophyll protoplasts. The results suggest
that the Dof domain alone, the region conserved among Dof factors, can mediate
interaction with DNA in vivo and distinct Dof1 activities in greening and
etiolated protoplasts. A region rich in basic amino acids was identified as a
nuclear localization signal. Deletion analysis defined the transcriptional
activation domain of 48 amino acids located in the C-terminus of Dof1. This
activation domain was also found to be functional in both human cells and yeast, 
implying that Dof1 may stimulate transcription through a mechanism evolutionarily
conserved among eukaryotes. A computer homology search with known transcription
factors revealed that the activation domain of Dof1 displayed only a limited
similarity to Activation domain II of animal transcription factor GATA-4.
Mutational analysis revealed the critical role of a tryptophan residue within the
activation domain of Dof1, as had been shown in Activation domain II of GATA-4.

PMID: 11522906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Sep;15(9):1636-50.

Modulation of endogenous GATA-4 activity reveals its dual contribution to
Müllerian inhibiting substance gene transcription in Sertoli cells.

Tremblay JJ(1), Robert NM, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université
Laval Research Centre, Ste-Foy, Quebec, Canada.

Secretion of Müllerian inhibiting substance by fetal Sertoli cells is essential
for normal male sex differentiation since it induces regression of the Müllerian 
ducts in the developing male embryo. Proper spatiotemporal expression of the MIS 
gene requires a specific combination of transcription factors, including the zinc
finger factor GATA-4 and the nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor-1, which both 
colocalize with Müllerian inhibiting substance in Sertoli cells. To establish the
molecular mechanisms through which GATA-4 contributes to MIS transcription, we
have generated and characterized novel GATA-4 dominant negative competitors. The 
first one, which consisted solely of the GATA-4 zinc finger DNA-binding domain,
was an efficient competitor of GATA transcription mediated both by direct GATA
binding to DNA and protein-protein interactions involving GATA factors. The
second type of competitor consisted of the same GATA-4 zinc finger DNA-binding
domain but harboring mutations that prevented DNA binding. This second class of
competitors repressed GATA-dependent transactivation by specifically competing
for GATA protein-protein interactions without affecting the DNA-binding activity 
of endogenous GATA factors. These competitors, along with the GATA-4 cofactor
FOG-2 (friend of GATA-2), were used to specifically modulate endogenous GATA-4
activity in Sertoli cells. Our results indicate that GATA-4 contributes to MIS
promoter activity through two distinct mechanisms. Moreover, the GATA competitors
described here should provide invaluable in vitro and in vivo tools for the study
of GATA- dependent transcription and the identification of new target genes.

PMID: 11518812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):38341-4. Epub 2001 Aug 22.

Regulation of transcription by AMP-activated protein kinase: phosphorylation of
p300 blocks its interaction with nuclear receptors.

Yang W(1), Hong YH, Shen XQ, Frankowski C, Camp HS, Leff T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMP-kinase) modulates many metabolic processes in
response to fluctuations in cellular energy status. Although most of its known
targets are metabolic enzymes, it has been proposed that AMP-kinase might also
regulate gene expression. Here we demonstrate that the transcriptional
coactivator p300 is a substrate of AMP-kinase. Phosphorylation of p300 at serine 
89 by AMP-kinase dramatically reduced its interaction, in vitro and in vivo, with
the nuclear receptors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, thyroid
receptor, retinoic acid receptor, and retinoid X receptor, but did not affect its
interaction with the non-nuclear receptor transcription factors E1a, p53, or
GATA4. These findings indicate that the AMP-kinase signaling pathway selectively 
modulates a subset of p300 activities and represent the first example of a
transcriptional component regulated by AMP-kinase. Our results suggest a direct
link between cellular energy metabolism and gene expression.

PMID: 11518699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Genes Dev. 2001 Aug 1;15(15):1998-2009.

Distinct mesodermal signals, including BMPs from the septum transversum
mesenchyme, are required in combination for hepatogenesis from the endoderm.

Rossi JM(1), Dunn NR, Hogan BL, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

Mesodermal signaling is critical for patterning the embryonic endoderm into
different tissue domains. Classical tissue transplant experiments in the chick
and recent studies in the mouse indicated that interactions with the cardiogenic 
mesoderm are necessary and sufficient to induce the liver in the ventral foregut 
endoderm. Using molecular markers and functional assays, we now show that septum 
transversum mesenchyme cells, a distinct mesoderm cell type, are closely apposed 
to the ventral endoderm and contribute to hepatic induction. Specifically, using 
a mouse Bmp4 null mutation and an inhibitor of BMPs, we find that BMP signaling
from the septum transversum mesenchyme is necessary to induce liver genes in the 
endoderm and to exclude a pancreatic fate. BMPs apparently function, in part, by 
affecting the levels of the GATA4 transcription factor, and work in parallel to
FGF signaling from the cardiac mesoderm. BMP signaling also appears critical for 
morphogenetic growth of the hepatic endoderm into a liver bud. Thus, the
endodermal domain for the liver is specified by simultaneous signaling from
distinct mesodermal sources.

PMCID: PMC312750
PMID: 11485993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 5;276(40):37178-85. Epub 2001 Jul 31.

p300 Functions as a coactivator of transcription factor GATA-4.

Dai YS(1), Markham BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-4 plays critical roles in controlling heart development
and cardiac hypertrophy. To understand how GATA-4 functions under diverse
conditions, we sought to identify its coactivators. We tested p300 as a
coactivator in GATA-4-dependent transient transcription assays in NIH3T3 cells
and found that p300 synergistically activated GATA-4-dependent transcription on
both synthetic and natural promoters. Direct physical interactions between the N-
and C-zinc finger domains of GATA-4 and the cysteine/histidine-rich region 3
(C/H3) of p300 were identified in immunoprecipitation and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments. Deletion of the C/H3 region of p300
abolished its coactivator activity indicating that the physical interaction was
required for functional synergy. Through the use of a series of GATA-4 zinc
finger mutants, the amino acids WRR in the C finger were identified as critical
to the interaction. The adenoviral E1A protein or a peptide encoding the C/H3
region of p300 could inhibit GATA-4-dependent transcription, presumably by
competing for p300 binding. Furthermore, deletion of the region of p300 encoding 
the histone acetyltransferase activity abolished its effect on GATA-4-dependent
transcriptional activity. These results establish that p300 acts as a GATA-4
coactivator and that the p300 histone acetyltransferase activity is necessary for
the functional interaction.

PMID: 11481322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biol Reprod. 2001 Aug;65(2):366-74.

Temporal and spatial localization patterns of Gata4 during porcine gonadogenesis.

McCoard SA(1), Wise TH, Fahrenkrug SC, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, RLH U.S. Meat
Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska 68933-0166, USA.
mccoard@email.marc.usda.gov

The zinc finger transcription factor Gata4, is associated with gonadal
development in many species. The present study characterizes temporal and spatial
localization of Gata4 throughout gonadogenesis in porcine embryos.
Immunohistochemical studies illustrated that Gata4 protein is present in the
coelomic epithelium prior to histological differentiation of the nascent
bipotential gonad, marking the future site of both XX and XY porcine gonads. Many
somatic cells of both XX and XY bipotential gonads continue to retain Gata4
immunoreactivity throughout sexual differentiation and subsequent gonadal
development. Testicular cords were evident by 26 days postcoitum. Gata4 was
present in Sertoli cells, identified by virtue of coexpression with Müllerian
inhibiting substance and also interstitial cells including Leydig cells
throughout fetal and postnatal life. Many somatic cells of the differentiating
ovary including follicular cells also contained Gata4 protein throughout fetal
and postnatal life. Gata4 was not present in germ cells, endothelial cells, or
other undifferentiated mesenchymal cells of both XX and XY gonads. A population
of Gata4-positive cells in the dorsal mesentery was continuous with the coelomic 
epithelium of the gonad. This localization pattern led to the hypothesis that a
subpopulation of somatic cells in the dorsal mesentery moves toward the gonad. An
in vitro cell migration assay demonstrated that Gata4-positive cells
preferentially migrate toward explanted gonadal tissue, and morphological
features of the developing gonad supported this hypothesis. This study
illustrates that Gata4 is a very early marker for gonad formation, highlights
species differences in temporal and spatial localization patterns, and suggests a
potential role for Gata4 in the development of both XX and XY porcine gonads.
Further, we suggest that mesenchymal cells of the dorsal mesentery may provide a 
source of somatic cells that migrate and incorporate into the gonad and
contribute to various somatic cell lineages. Overall, the spatial and temporal
localization patterns of Gata4 during porcine gonadogenesis implies a much
earlier and wider role for Gata4 than previously reported in other species.

PMID: 11466202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jul;86(7):3421-9.

Survival of human ovarian follicles from fetal to adult life: apoptosis,
apoptosis-related proteins, and transcription factor GATA-4.

Vaskivuo TE(1), Anttonen M, Herva R, Billig H, Dorland M, te Velde ER, Stenbäck
F, Heikinheimo M, Tapanainen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Oulu, FIN-90220 Oulu,
Finland.

The majority of oocytes present in fetal ovaries are depleted before birth, and
only about 400 will ovulate during the normal fertile life span. Studies on
animals have shown that apoptosis is the mechanism behind oocyte depletion and
follicular atresia. In the present study, we investigated the extent and
localization of apoptosis in human fetal (aged 13-40 weeks) and adult ovaries.
Furthermore, the expression of apoptosis-regulating proteins, bcl-2 and bax, and 
the relationship of transcription factor GATA-4 were studied. Apoptosis was found
in ovarian follicles throughout fetal and adult life. During fetal development,
apoptosis was localized mainly to primary oocytes and was highest between weeks
14-28, decreasing thereafter toward term. Expression of bcl-2 was observed only
in the youngest fetal ovaries (weeks 13-14), and bax was present in the ovaries
throughout the entire fetal period. In adult ovaries, apoptosis was detected in
granulosa cells of secondary and antral follicles, and Bcl-2 and bax were
expressed from primary follicles onwards. During fetal ovarian development,
GATA-4 messenger RNA and protein were localized to the granulosa cells, with
expression being highest in the youngest ovaries and decreasing somewhat toward
term. The expression pattern of GATA-4 suggests that it may be involved in the
mechanisms protecting granulosa cells from apoptosis from fetal to adult life.
The results indicate that depletion of ovarian follicles in the human fetus
occurs through intrinsic mechanisms of apoptosis in oocytes, and later in adult
life the survival of growing follicles may be primarily determined by granulosa
cell apoptosis.

PMID: 11443219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):507-20.

Novel cell lines promote the discovery of genes involved in early heart
development.

Brunskill EW(1), Witte DP, Yutzey KE, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3300, USA.

Clonal cell lines representing early cardiomyocytes would provide valuable
reagents for the dissection of the genetic program of early cardiogenesis. Here
we describe the establishment and characterization of cell lines from the hearts 
of transgenic mice and embryos with SV40 large T antigen expressed in the
heart-forming region. Ultrastructure analysis by transmission electron microscopy
showed the primitive, precontractile nature of the resulting cells, with the
absence of myofilaments, Z lines, and intercalated disks. Immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR, Northern blots, and oligonucleotide microarrays were used to determine
the expression levels of thousands of genes in the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines. The
resulting gene-expression profiles showed the transcription of early
cardiomyocyte genes such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, Tbx5, dHAND, cardiac troponin C, and
SM22-alpha. Furthermore, many genes not previously implicated in early cardiac
development were expressed. Two of these genes, Hic-5, a possible negative
regulator of muscle differentiation, and the transcription enhancing factor TEF-5
were selected and shown by in situ hybridizations to be expressed in the early
developing heart. The results show that the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines can be used
to discover novel genes expressed in the early cardiomyocyte.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):34983-9. Epub 2001 Jul 2.

Calcineurin-GATA4 pathway is involved in beta-adrenergic agonist-responsive
endothelin-1 transcription in cardiac myocytes.

Morimoto T(1), Hasegawa K, Wada H, Kakita T, Kaburagi S, Yanazume T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, 606-8507 Japan.

Increases in the expression of endothelin-1 (ET-1) in cardiac myocytes play a
critical role in the development of heart failure in vivo. Whereas norepinephrine
(NE) is a potent inducer of ET-1 expression in cardiac myocytes, the signaling
pathways that link NE to inducible cardiac ET-1 expression are unknown.
Adrenergic stimulation results in an increase in intracellular calcium levels,
which in turn activates calcineurin. Here, we have shown that stimulation with NE
markedly increased the expression of the ET-1 gene in primary cardiac myocytes
from neonatal rats. This increase was severely attenuated by a beta-adrenergic
antagonist, metoprolol, but not by an alpha-adrenergic antagonist, prazosin.
Consistent with these data, the beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol (ISO)
activated the rat ET-1 promoter activity to an extent that was similar to NE. The
ISO-stimulated increase in promoter activity was significantly inhibited by a
Ca(2+)-antagonist, nifedipine, and an immunosuppressant, cyclosporin A, which
blocks calcineurin. Mutation analysis indicated that the GATA4 binding site is
required for ISO-responsive ET-1 transcription. Stimulation with ISO enhanced the
interaction between NFATc and GATA4 in cardiac myocytes. Consistent with this
interaction, overexpression of GATA4 and NFATc synergistically activated the ET-1
promoter. These findings demonstrate that NE-stimulated ET-1 expression in
cardiac myocytes is mediated predominantly via a beta-adrenergic pathway, and
that calcium-activated calcineurin-GATA4 plays a role in this process.

PMID: 11435416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Circ Res. 2001 Jun 22;88(12):1239-46.

Calcineurin pathway is required for endothelin-1-mediated protection against
oxidant stress-induced apoptosis in cardiac myocytes.

Kakita T(1), Hasegawa K, Iwai-Kanai E, Adachi S, Morimoto T, Wada H, Kawamura T, 
Yanazume T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Jun 22;88(12):1220-2.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) acts not only as a growth-promoting peptide but also as a
potent survival factor against myocardial cell apoptosis. However, the signaling 
pathways leading to myocardial cell protection by ET-1 are poorly understood.
Using a culture system of primary cardiac myocytes derived from neonatal rats, we
show in the present study that ET-1 almost completely blocked the hydrogen
peroxide-induced increase in the percentage of TdT-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end 
labeling-positive myocytes. Apoptosis inhibition by ET-1 was confirmed by
cytofluorometric analysis as well as by examination of the ladder formation,
morphological features, and caspase-3 cleavage. We have found that ET-1 converts 
the nuclear factor of activated T lymphocytes (NFATc) in cardiac myocytes into
high-mobility forms and translocates cytoplasmic NFATc to the nuclei. In
addition, ET-1 stimulates the interaction between NFATc and the
cardiac-restricted zinc-finger protein GATA4 in these cells. The
immunosuppressants cyclosporin A and FK506, which antagonize calcineurin, negated
the inhibitory effect of ET-1 on apoptosis. Calcineurin activation de novo was
sufficient to inhibit hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis. ET-1 induced the
expression of an antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 in cardiac myocytes in a cyclosporin
A-dependent manner, but it did not alter the expression of bax. Cyclosporin A
also attenuated the ET-1-stimulated transcription of the bcl-2 gene in these
cells. These findings demonstrate that the calcineurin pathway is required for
the inhibitory effect of ET-1 on oxidant stress-induced apoptosis in cardiac
myocytes.

PMID: 11420299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Biol. 2001 Jun 15;234(2):390-401.

Purkinje fibers of the avian heart express a myogenic transcription factor
program distinct from cardiac and skeletal muscle.

Takebayashi-Suzuki K(1), Pauliks LB, Eltsefon Y, Mikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Cornell University Medical College, 1300 York
Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

A rhythmic heart beat is coordinated by conduction of pacemaking impulses through
the cardiac conduction system. Cells of the conduction system, including Purkinje
fibers, terminally differentiate from a subset of cardiac muscle cells that
respond to signals from endocardial and coronary arterial cells. A
vessel-associated paracrine factor, endothelin, can induce embryonic heart muscle
cells to differentiate into Purkinje fibers both in vivo and in vitro. During
this phenotypic conversion, the conduction cells down-regulate genes
characteristic of cardiac muscle and up-regulate subsets of genes typical of both
skeletal muscle and neuronal cells. In the present study, we examined the
expression of myogenic transcription factors associated with the switch of the
gene expression program during terminal differentiation of heart muscle cells
into Purkinje fibers. In situ hybridization analyses and immunohistochemistry of 
embryonic and adult hearts revealed that Purkinje fibers up-regulate skeletal and
atrial muscle myosin heavy chains, connexin-42, and neurofilament protein.
Concurrently, a cardiac muscle-specific myofibrillar protein, myosin-binding
protein-C (cMyBP-C), is down-regulated. During this change in transcription,
however, Purkinje fibers continue to express cardiac muscle transcription
factors, such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, and MEF2C. Importantly, significantly higher
levels of Nkx2.5 and GATA4 mRNAs were detected in Purkinje fibers as compared to 
ordinary heart muscle cells. No detectable difference was observed in MEF2C
expression. In culture, endothelin-induced Purkinje fibers from embryonic cardiac
muscle cells dramatically down-regulated cMyBP-C transcription, whereas
expression of Nkx2.5 and GATA4 persisted. In addition, myoD, a skeletal muscle
transcription factor, was up-regulated in endothelin-induced Purkinje cells,
while Myf5 and MRF4 transcripts were undetectable in these cells. These results
show that during and after conversion from heart muscle cells, Purkinje fibers
express a unique myogenic transcription factor program. The mechanism underlying 
down-regulation of cardiac muscle genes and up-regulation of skeletal muscle
genes during conduction cell differentiation may be independent from the
transcriptional control seen in ordinary cardiac and skeletal muscle cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11397008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):28029-36. Epub 2001 May 29.

Friend of GATA 2 physically interacts with chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-TF2 (COUP-TF2) and COUP-TF3 and represses COUP-TF2-dependent activation 
of the atrial natriuretic factor promoter.

Huggins GS(1), Bacani CJ, Boltax J, Aikawa R, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Cardiac
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA. huggins@cvlab.harvard.edu

Friend of GATA (FOG)-2 is a multi-zinc finger transcriptional corepressor protein
that binds specifically to GATA4. Gene targeting studies have demonstrated that
FOG-2 is required for normal cardiac morphogenesis, including the development of 
the coronary vasculature, left ventricular compact zone, and heart valves. To
better understand the molecular mechanisms by which FOG-2 regulates these cardiac
developmental programs, we screened a mouse day 11 embryo library using a yeast
two-hybrid interaction trap with the fifth and sixth zinc fingers of FOG-2 as
bait. Using this approach, we isolated clones encoding the orphan nuclear
receptors chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF) 2
and COUP-TF3. COUP-TF2-null embryos die during embryonic development with
defective angiogenesis and cardiac defects, a pattern that partly resembles the
FOG-2-null phenotype. The interaction between COUP-TF2 and FOG-2 in mammalian
cells was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of these proteins from transfected 
COS-7 cells. The sites of binding interaction between COUP-TF2 and FOG-2 were
mapped to zinc fingers 5 and 6 and fingers 7 and 8 of FOG-2 and to the carboxyl
terminus of the COUP-TF proteins. Binding to COUP-TF2 was specific because FOG-2 
did not interact with the ligand-binding domains of retinoid X receptor alpha,
glucocorticoid receptor, and peroxisome proliferating antigen receptor gamma,
which are related to the COUP-TF proteins. Full-length FOG-2 markedly enhanced
transcriptional repression by GAL4-COUP-TF2(117-414), but not by a COUP-TF2
repression domain mutant. Moreover, FOG-2 repressed COUP-TF2dependent synergistic
activation of the atrial natriuretic factor promoter by both GATA4 and the
FOG-2-independent mutant GATA4-E215K. Taken together, these findings suggest that
FOG-2 functions as a corepressor for both GATA and COUP-TF proteins.

PMID: 11382775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):28586-97. Epub 2001 May 29.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta regulates GATA4 in cardiac myocytes.

Morisco C(1), Seta K, Hardt SE, Lee Y, Vatner SF, Sadoshima J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

Inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is critical for
transcription of atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) by beta-adrenergic receptors in 
cardiac myocytes. We examined the mechanism by which GSK3beta regulates ANF
transcription. Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors induced nuclear
accumulation of GATA4, whereas beta-adrenergic ANF transcription was suppressed
by dominant negative GATA4, suggesting that GATA4 plays an important role in
beta-adrenergic ANF transcription. Interestingly, GATA4-mediated transcription
was markedly attenuated by GSK3beta. GSK3beta physically associates with GATA4
and phosphorylates GATA4 in vitro. Overexpression of GSK3beta suppressed both
basal and beta-adrenergic increases in nuclear expression of GATA4, whereas
inhibition of GSK3beta by LiCl caused nuclear accumulation of GATA4, suggesting
that GSK3beta negatively regulates nuclear expression of GATA4. The nuclear
exportin Crm1 reduced nuclear expression of GATA4, and the reduction was enhanced
by GSK3beta but not by kinase-inactive GSK3beta. Leptomycin B, an inhibitor for
Crm1, increased basal nuclear GATA4 and suppressed GSK3beta-induced decreases in 
nuclear GATA4. These results suggest that GSK3beta negatively regulates nuclear
expression of GATA4 by stimulating Crm1-dependent nuclear export. Inhibition of
GSK3beta by beta-adrenergic stimulation abrogates GSK3beta-induced nuclear export
of GATA4, causing nuclear accumulation of GATA4, which may represent an important
signaling mechanism mediating cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 11382772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30245-53. Epub 2001 May 16.

The transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 regulate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in
vitro and in vivo.

Liang Q(1), De Windt LJ, Witt SA, Kimball TR, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 are important
regulators of basal and inducible gene expression in cardiac and smooth muscle
cell types. Here we demonstrate a direct functional role for GATA4 and GATA6 as
regulators of cardiomyocyte hypertrophic growth and gene expression. To model the
increase in endogenous GATA4 and GATA6 transcriptional activity that occurs in
response to hypertrophic stimulation, each factor was overexpressed in
cardiomyocytes using recombinant adenovirus. Overexpression of either GATA4 or
GATA6 was sufficient to induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy characterized by
enhanced sarcomeric organization, a greater than 2-fold increase in cell surface 
area, and a significant increase in total protein accumulation. In vivo,
transgenic mice with 2.5-fold overexpression of GATA4 within the adult heart
demonstrated a slowly progressing increase in heart to body weight ratio,
histological features of cardiomyopathy, and activation of hypertrophy-associated
genes, suggesting that GATA factors are sufficient regulators of cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy in vitro and in vivo. To evaluate the requirement of GATA factors as 
downstream transcriptional mediators of hypertrophy, a dominant negative
GATA4-engrailed repressor fusion-encoding adenovirus was generated. Expression of
GATA4-engrailed blocked GATA4- and GATA6-directed transcriptional responses and
agonist-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, demonstrating that cardiac-expressed
GATA factors are necessary mediators of this process.

PMID: 11356841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Jpn Circ J. 2001 May;65(5):353-8.

Molecular mechanism of cardiac hypertrophy and development.

Komuro I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan. komuro-tky@umin.ac.jp

Congestive heart failure is a major issues for cardiologists and to fully
understand heart failure, it is important to understand the mechanism of the
development of cardiac hypertrophy. Hemodynamic overload, namely mechanical
stress, is a major cause of cardiac hypertrophy and to dissect the signaling
pathways from mechanical stress to cardiac hypertrophy, an in-vitro device by
which mechanical stress can be imposed on cardiac myocytes of neonatal rats
cultured in serum-free conditions has been developed. Passively stretching
cardiac myocytes cultured on silicone membranes induced various hypertrophic
responses, such as activation of the phosphorylation cascades of many protein
kinases, expression of specific genes and an increase in protein synthesis.
During this process, secretion and production of vasoactive peptides, such as
angiotensin II and endothelin-1, were increased and they played critical roles in
the induction of these hypertrophic responses. Candidates for the
'mechanoreceptor' that receives the mechanical stress and converts it into
intracellular biochemical signals have been recently demonstrated. Gene therapy
and cell transplantation are hopeful strategies for the treatment of heart
failure and require an understanding of how normal cardiac myocytes are
differentiated. A key gene that plays a critical role in cardiac development has 
been isolated. The cardiac homeobox-containing gene Csx is expressed in the heart
and the heart progenitor cells from the very early developmental stage, and
targeted disruption of the murine Csx results in embryonic lethality because of
the abnormal looping morphogenesis of the primary heart tube. With a cardiac zinc
finger protein GATA4, Csx induces cardiomyocyte differentiation of
teratocarcinoma cells as well as upregulation of cardiac genes. Mutations of
human CSX cause various congenital heart diseases including atrial septal defect,
ventricular septal defect, tricuspid valve abnormalities and atrioventricular
block.

PMID: 11348034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):412-6.

GATA DNA-binding protein expressed in mouse I-10 Leydig testicular tumor cells.

Nakagawa R(1), Sakai Y, Takashima A, Terada T, Kobayashi A, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Osaka University, Osaka,
Suita, 565-0871, Japan.

A nuclear extract of the mouse I-10 Leydig tumor cell line was analyzed by gel
mobility shift assay with a combination of antibodies for various mammalian GATA 
proteins. Antibodies for GATA-4 caused a super-shift of the DNA-protein complex, 
which is formed through GATA-4 binding to an oligonucleotide with a typical GATA 
motif, while ones for GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, and GATA-6 did not. These results
indicated that I-10 cells express GATA-4 protein. Western blotting analysis of
cellular proteins also demonstrated the presence of GATA-4 protein, the size of
which corresponds to that of the rat orthologous protein transiently expressed in
Cos-1 cells. A significant level of GATA-4 expression in I-10 cells would be
advantageous for studying the roles of this protein, especially in view of
gonadal function. We further examined the binding site preference of GATA-4
expressed in I-10 cells. GATA-4 showed broad sequence specificity similar to
GATA-6, the order of binding core site preference being GATA > GATT > GATC, and
adenine was favored on both sides of the core for strong binding. Thus the
conserved zinc finger domain of GATA proteins is suggested to contribute to the
binding sequence preference. GATA-4 expressed in I-10 cells was not susceptible
to proteolysis coupled with cAMP signaling.

PMID: 11327717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Lab Invest. 2001 Apr;81(4):517-26.

Comparison of serous and mucinous ovarian carcinomas: distinct pattern of allelic
loss at distal 8p and expression of transcription factor GATA-4.

Lassus H(1), Laitinen MP, Anttonen M, Heikinheimo M, Aaltonen LA, Ritvos O,
Butzow R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland.

Using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), we have previously demonstrated
frequent loss of 8p, especially its distal part, in ovarian carcinoma. To compare
the deletion map of distal 8p in serous and mucinous ovarian carcinomas, we
performed allelic analysis with 18 polymorphic microsatellite markers at
8p21-p23. In serous carcinoma, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was detected in 67%
of the samples, and the majority of the carcinomas showed loss of all or most of 
the informative markers. In contrast, only 21% of mucinous carcinomas showed
allelic loss, with only one or two loci showing LOH in each sample. In serous
carcinomas, LOH was associated with higher grade tumors. Three distinct minimal
common regions of loss could be defined in serous carcinomas (at 8p21.1,
8p22-p23.1, and 8p23.1). Expression of a transcription factor gene, GATA4,
located at one of these regions (8p23.1) was studied in serous and mucinous
ovarian carcinomas by Northern blotting and immunohistochemical staining of tumor
microarray. Expression was found to be lost in most serous carcinomas but
retained in the majority of mucinous carcinomas. Our results suggest distinct
pathogenetic pathways in serous and mucinous ovarian carcinomas and the presence 
of more than one tumor suppressor gene at 8p involved in the tumorigenesis of
serous carcinoma.

PMID: 11304571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 1;15(7):839-44.

Proper coronary vascular development and heart morphogenesis depend on
interaction of GATA-4 with FOG cofactors.

Crispino JD(1), Lodish MB, Thurberg BL, Litovsky SH, Collins T, Molkentin JD,
Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-family transcription factors are critical to the development of diverse
tissues. In particular, GATA-4 has been implicated in formation of the vertebrate
heart. As the mouse Gata-4 knock-out is early embryonic lethal because of a
defect in ventral morphogenesis, the in vivo function of this factor in heart
development remains unresolved. To search for a requirement for Gata4 in heart
development, we created mice harboring a single amino acid replacement in GATA-4 
that impairs its physical interaction with its presumptive cardiac cofactor
FOG-2. Gata4(ki/ki) mice die just after embryonic day (E) 12.5 exhibiting
features in common with Fog2(-/-) embryos as well as additional semilunar cardiac
valve defects and a double-outlet right ventricle. These findings establish an
intrinsic requirement for GATA-4 in heart development. We also infer that GATA-4 
function is dependent on interaction with FOG-2 and, very likely, an additional
FOG protein for distinct aspects of heart formation.

PMCID: PMC312667
PMID: 11297508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 2;20(7):1715-25.

Transcriptional repression and developmental functions of the atypical vertebrate
GATA protein TRPS1.

Malik TH(1), Shoichet SA, Latham P, Kroll TG, Peters LL, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham & Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Known vertebrate GATA proteins contain two zinc fingers and are required in
development, whereas invertebrates express a class of essential proteins
containing one GATA-type zinc finger. We isolated the gene encoding TRPS1, a
vertebrate protein with a single GATA-type zinc finger. TRPS1 is highly conserved
between Xenopus and mammals, and the human gene is implicated in dominantly
inherited tricho-rhino-phalangeal (TRP) syndromes. TRPS1 is a nuclear protein
that binds GATA sequences but fails to transactivate a GATA-dependent reporter.
Instead, TRPS1 potently and specifically represses transcriptional activation
mediated by other GATA factors. Repression does not occur from competition for
DNA binding and depends on a C-terminal region related to repressive domains
found in Ikaros proteins. During mouse development, TRPS1 expression is prominent
in sites showing pathology in TRP syndromes, which are thought to result from
TRPS1 haploinsufficiency. We show instead that truncating mutations identified in
patients encode dominant inhibitors of wild-type TRPS1 function, suggesting an
alternative mechanism for the disease. TRPS1 is the first example of a GATA
protein with intrinsic transcriptional repression activity and possibly a
negative regulator of GATA-dependent processes in vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC145487
PMID: 11285235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Artif Organs. 2001 Mar;25(3):187-93.

Development of regenerative cardiomyocytes from mesenchymal stem cells for
cardiovascular tissue engineering.

Fukuda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. kfukuda@mc.med.keio.ac.jp

We have isolated a cardiomyogenic (CMG) cell line from murine bone marrow stroma.
Stromal cells were immortalized, treated with 5-azacytidine, and spontaneous
beating cells were repeatedly screened for. The cells showed a fibroblast-like
morphology. However, this morphology changed after 5-azacytidine treatment in
about 30% of the cells, which connected with adjoining cells after 1 week, formed
myotube-like structures and began spontaneous beating after 2 weeks, and beat
synchronously after 3 weeks. These cells expressed atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). Electron microscopy revealed a
cardiomyocyte-like ultrastructure including typical sarcomeres and atrial
granules. They had sinus node-like or ventricular cell-like action potentials.
Analysis of the isoform of contractile protein genes, such as myosin and
alpha-actin, indicated that their phenotype was similar to fetal ventricular
cardiomyocytes. These cells expressed Nkx2.5, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF2-C mRNA
before 5-azacytidine treatment, and expressed MEF2-A and MEF2-D after treatment. 
This new cell line provides a powerful model for the study of cardiomyocyte
transplantation.

PMID: 11284885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):11439-45. Epub 2001 Jan 22.

Cooperative activation by GATA-4 and YY1 of the cardiac B-type natriuretic
peptide promoter.

Bhalla SS(1), Robitaille L, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Université de Montréal, 110 des Pins Ouest,
Montréal QC, H2W 1R7, Canada.

YY1, a multifunctional protein essential for embryonic development, is a known
repressor or activator of transcription. In cardiac and skeletal myocytes, YY1
has been described essentially as a negative regulator of muscle-specific genes. 
In this study, we report that YY1 is a transcriptional activator of the B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene, which encodes one of the heart major secretory
products. YY1 binds an element within the proximal cardiac BNP promoter, in close
proximity to the high affinity binding sites for the zinc finger GATA proteins.
We show that YY1 cooperates with GATA-4 to synergistically activate BNP
transcription. Structure-function analysis revealed that the DNA binding domain
of YY1 is sufficient for cooperative interaction with GATA-4, likely through
corecruitment of the CREB-binding protein coactivator. The results suggest that
YY1 and GATA factors are components of transcriptionally active complexes present
in cardiac and other GATA-containing cells.

PMID: 11279028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biol Reprod. 2001 Apr;64(4):1191-9.

Nuclear receptor Dax-1 represses the transcriptional cooperation between GATA-4
and SF-1 in Sertoli cells.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, CHUL Research Centre and Centre for
Research in Biology of Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Laval University, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1V 4G2.

A crucial step in mammalian sex differentiation is the regression of the
Müllerian ducts in males. This is achieved through the action of Müllerian
inhibiting substance (MIS), a key hormone produced by fetal Sertoli cells. Proper
spatiotemporal expression of the MIS gene requires the concerted action of
several transcription factors that include Sox9, SF-1, WT-1, GATA-4, and Dax-1.
Indeed, SF-1 contributes to MIS gene expression by transcriptionally cooperating 
with other factors such as GATA-4 and WT-1. Dax-1 is coexpressed with SF-1 in
many tissues, including the gonads, where it acts as a negative modulator of
SF-1-dependent transcription. We now report that Dax-1 can repress MIS
transcription in Sertoli cells by disrupting transcriptional synergism between
GATA-4 and SF-1. Dax-1-mediated repression of GATA-4/SF-1 synergism did not
involve direct repression of GATA-dependent transactivation, but rather, it
occurred through a direct protein-protein interaction with DNA-bound SF-1. It is 
interesting that SF-1, Dax-1, and GATA factors are coexpressed in several tissues
such as the pituitary, the adrenals, and the gonads. Because we have shown that
other GATA family members also have the ability to synergize with SF-1, Dax-1
repression of GATA/SF-1 synergism may represent an important mechanism for
fine-tuning the regulation of SF-1-dependent genes in multiple target tissues.

PMID: 11259267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Apr 1;99(4):314-9.

Submicroscopic 8pter deletion, mild mental retardation, and behavioral problems
caused by a familial t(8;20)(p23;p13).

de Vries BB(1), Lees M, Knight SJ, Regan R, Corney D, Flint J, Barnicoat A,
Winter RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health,
London, UK.

Microscopically visible distal 8p deletions have been associated with growth and 
mental impairment, minor facial anomalies, congenital heart defects, and
behavioral problems. We report two cousins with mild retardation and behavioral
problems, including inappropriate sexual behavior and pyromania. Familial
learning difficulties on the grandfather's side incompatible with Mendelian
inheritance prompted telomere screening, which detected a submicroscopic terminal
8p deletion of < 5.1 Mb. The cousins' mothers both carried a t(8;20)(p23;p13)
balanced translocation. The frequently observed microcephaly in patients with
microscopically visible deletions of 8pter is lacking in both cousins, suggesting
that the gene(s) causing the microcephaly is centromeric to the deleted region.
The absence of cardiac defects in the cousins confirms the more proximal location
of gene(s) causing these abnormalities in other reported cases with
microscopically visible 8pter deletions and supports involvement of the GATA4
gene. Moreover, the current cases predict the presence of a putative gene(s)
involved in behavior in the most telomeric 5.1 Mb of the p-arm of chromosome 8.
This first clinical report of a submicroscopic subtelomeric 8p deletion gives
more insight into the so-called 8p- syndrome and demonstrates the difficulty in
making a clinical diagnosis for a submicroscopic 8pter deletion in an individual 
patient with mental retardation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11251999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2000 Spring;2(1):65-71.

Redox regulation of cardiac muscle calcium signaling.

Morad M(1), Suzuki YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Sciences and Department of Pharmacology,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
moradm@gunet.georgetown.edu

Signal transduction for cardiac muscle contraction is regulated by the
Ca2+-induced Ca2+-release mechanism. Redox reactions by biological oxidants and
antioxidants have been shown to alter the kinetics of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release. 
We postulate that altered kinetics of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release may divert the
contractile pool of Ca2+ to elicit excitation-transcription coupling. We provide 
evidence that redox reactions regulate excitation-transcription coupling by
showing that membrane depolarization may activate the GATA4 transcription factor 
only when the cells are pretreated with hydrogen peroxide. Therefore, redox
regulation of the ryanodine receptor may serve as a mechanism to determine
whether the contractile pool of Ca2+ should signal gene transcription during
excitation-contraction coupling.

PMID: 11232602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Antioxid Redox Signal. 1999 Summer;1(2):233-8.

Modulation of angiotensin II signaling for GATA4 activation by homocysteine.

Suzuki YJ(1), Shi SS, Blumberg JB.

Author information: 
(1)Antioxidants Research Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.
SUZUKI_LP@HNRC.TUFTS.EDU

Homocysteine (Hcy) is a redox active thiol-containing compound with pro-oxidant
and pathogenic properties in the cardiovascular system. Angiotensin II (Ang II)
also plays important roles in age-associated cardiovascular disease. Recently,
the GATA4 transcription factor was recognized as a mediator of heart failure. We 
investigated the interrelationship of these elements in NIH/3T3 fibroblasts and
found that Ang II induces GATA4 activity and Hcy alters Ang II signaling.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays determined that treatment of cells with Ang
II induced DNA binding activity to the GATA consensus sequence. This activation
was transient with a peak occurring at 30 min. Supershift analysis revealed the
GATA binding protein as GATA4. Ang II also induced NFAT activity with similar
kinetics. Pretreatment of cells with Hcy (100 microM) delayed the peak of Ang
II-induced NFAT and GATA activation to 60 min. Ang II-mediated activation of
c-fos serum response factor (SRF) was similarly delayed by Hcy. These results
suggest the pathogenic mechanism of Hcy action may be mediated in part via
modulation of Ang II-signaling for gene transcription.

PMID: 11228750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Endocrinology. 2001 Mar;142(3):977-86.

GATA factors differentially activate multiple gonadal promoters through conserved
GATA regulatory elements.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, CHUL Research Center, Laval
University, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1V 4G2.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2001 Mar;142(3):974-6.

The GATA factors are a group of transcriptional regulators that play essential
roles in cell differentiation, organ morphogenesis, and tissue-specific gene
expression during development. The six vertebrate GATA factors are expressed in a
broad spectrum of tissues, including the hemopoietic system, heart, gut, brain,
placenta, pituitary, and gonads. Interestingly, GATA-like DNA-binding proteins
are found in the gonads of several species, ranging from lower invertebrates to
humans, thus supporting an evolutionary conserved and crucial role for these
factors in gonadal development and function. Indeed, GATA factors are expressed
from the onset of gonadal development and are later found in multiple cell
lineages of both the testis and ovary. We now report that GATA-4 differentially
activates transcription of several genes expressed in the gonads that encode
either steroidogenic enzymes (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and
aromatase), hormones (inhibin alpha and Müllerian inhibiting substance) and a
transcription factor (SF-1) known to be essential for gonadal development and
function. Thus, our results identify GATA-4 as an important regulator of gonadal 
gene transcription where its specificity of action is mediated through
synergistic interactions with other transcription factors such as SF-1.

PMID: 11181509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Endocrinology. 2001 Mar;142(3):974-6.

Editorial: gonadal-specific transcription factors--gata (go) 4 it!

Hales DB.

Comment on
    Endocrinology. 2001 Mar;142(3):977-86.

PMID: 11181508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mech Dev. 2001 Feb;100(2):263-73.

Bone morphogenetic protein function is required for terminal differentiation of
the heart but not for early expression of cardiac marker genes.

Walters MJ(1), Wayman GA, Christian JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, School of Medicine, Portland 97201-3098, USA.

To examine potential roles for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in
cardiogenesis, we used intracellular BMP inhibitors to disrupt this signaling
cascade in Xenopus embryos. BMP-deficient embryos showed endodermal defects, a
reduction in cardiac muscle-specific gene expression, a decrease in the number of
cardiomyocytes and cardia bifida. Early expression of markers of endodermal and
precardiac fate, however, was not perturbed. Heart defects were observed even
when BMP signal transduction was blocked only in cells that contribute primarily 
to endodermal, and not cardiac fates, suggesting a non-cell autonomous function. 
Our results suggest that BMPs are not required for expression of early
transcriptional regulators of cardiac fate but are essential for migration and/or
fusion of the heart primordia and cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMID: 11165483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood. 2001 Feb 15;97(4):946-51.

Regulation of human coagulation factor X gene expression by GATA-4 and the Sp
family of transcription factors.

Hung HL(1), Pollak ES, Kudaravalli RD, Arruda V, Chu K, High KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Serine protease factor Xa plays a critical role in the coagulation cascade.
Zymogen factor X is synthesized and modified in the liver. To understand the
mechanisms governing the liver-specific expression of factor X, the proximal
promoter of human factor X was previously characterized. Two crucial cis elements
at -73 and -128 and their cognate binding proteins, HNF-4 and NF-Y, respectively,
were identified. In this report, studies are extended to 3 additional cis
elements within the factor X promoter. Using gel mobility shift assays, the
liver-enriched protein GATA-4 was identified as the protein binding to the GATA
element at -96. GATA-4 transactivates the factor X promoter 28-fold in transient 
transfection experiments. It was also determined that the Sp family of
transcription factors binds 2 DNase I-footprinted sites at -165 and -195.
Disruption of Sp protein binding at either site reduces the promoter activity by 
half. Simultaneous disruption of both sites reduces the promoter activity 8-fold.
This is the first report indicating the involvement of GATA-4 in the regulation
of clotting factor expression. These observations provide novel insight into
mechanisms by which the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors are regulated.

PMID: 11159521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biol Reprod. 2001 Feb;64(2):689-95.

Specific staining of Sertoli cell nuclei and evaluation of Sertoli cell number
and proliferative activity in Meishan and White Composite boars during the
neonatal period.

McCoard SA(1), Lunstra DD, Wise TH, Ford JJ.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, RLH US Meat Animal Research Center, Reproduction Research Unit,
P.O. Box 166, State Spur 18D, Clay Center, NE 68933, USA.
mccoard@email.marc.usda.gov

The positive relationship between Sertoli cell number and testicular size
emphasizes the importance of determining factors involved in the regulation of
the Sertoli cell population. Based on data from other species and indirect
evidence in the boar, it is generally accepted that porcine Sertoli cells
proliferate rapidly throughout the early postnatal period. However, direct
evaluation of Sertoli cell number and the proliferative activity of Sertoli cells
during the early postnatal period in boars have not been reported. Stereological 
enumeration of Sertoli cells is a labor-intensive process and would be greatly
facilitated by a marker for these cells especially in the sexually mature male.
Thus, the first objective of this study was to determine if expression of the
transcription factor GATA-4 is an effective marker for fetal, postnatal, and
adult Sertoli cells to facilitate enumeration procedures. The second objective
was to evaluate the proliferative activity and growth of the Sertoli cell
population in neonatal White Composite and Meishan boars, known to differ in
mature testis size and Sertoli cell number, to determine the importance of this
developmental period for the adult Sertoli cell population. GATA-4 was abundantly
expressed by Sertoli cells throughout fetal and prepubertal stages of development
and specifically stained both type A and B Sertoli cell nuclei in the sexually
mature boar. Immunoreactivity was never observed in the germ cells regardless of 
their stage of development, illustrating that GATA-4 is a useful marker for both 
developing and adult Sertoli cells in the boar. Testicular size did not differ
between breeds on Day 1 postpartum, but by 14 days postpartum White Composite
boars had significantly larger testes compared to Meishan boars (P: < 0.001).
Similarly, Sertoli cell number did not differ between breeds at 1 day postpartum;
however, at 14 days postpartum White Composite boars had a significantly larger
Sertoli cell population compared to Meishan boars (P: < 0.05). Surprisingly,
despite having more Sertoli cells than Meishan boars at 14 days postpartum, the
proportion of actively proliferating Sertoli cells in the White Composite boars
was almost 50% less than the Meishan boars. This result illustrates that rapid
rates of Sertoli cell proliferation probably occurred prior to 14 days postpartum
in the White Composite boars. Collectively, these results illustrate that the
relationship between testicular size and Sertoli cell number is manifested very
early in the postnatal period for these two breeds. The substantial difference in
the size of the Sertoli cell population and their proliferative activity between 
Meishan and White Composite boars during the early postnatal period emphasizes
the importance of this early period for the establishment of the Sertoli cell
population and subsequent adult testicular size.

PMID: 11159374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(4):1036-44.

Serum response factor-GATA ternary complex required for nuclear signaling by a
G-protein-coupled receptor.

Morin S(1), Paradis P, Aries A, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développment et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Endothelins are a family of biologically active peptides that are critical for
development and function of neural crest-derived and cardiovascular cells. These 
effects are mediated by two G-protein-coupled receptors and involve
transcriptional regulation of growth-responsive and/or tissue-specific genes. We 
have used the cardiac ANF promoter, which represents the best-studied
tissue-specific endothelin target, to elucidate the nuclear pathways responsible 
for the transcriptional effects of endothelins. We found that cardiac-specific
response to endothelin 1 (ET-1) requires the combined action of the serum
response factor (SRF) and the tissue-restricted GATA proteins which bind over
their adjacent sites, within a 30-bp ET-1 response element. We show that SRF and 
GATA proteins form a novel ternary complex reminiscent of the well-characterized 
SRF-ternary complex factor interaction required for transcriptional induction of 
c-fos in response to growth factors. In transient cotransfections, GATA factors
and SRF synergistically activate atrial natriuretic factor and other
ET-1-inducible promoters that contain both GATA and SRF binding sites. Thus, GATA
factors may represent a new class of tissue-specific SRF accessory factors that
account for muscle- and other cell-specific SRF actions.

PMCID: PMC99558
PMID: 11158291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Circulation. 2001 Feb 6;103(5):730-5.

Pressure overload increases GATA4 binding activity via endothelin-1.

Hautala N(1), Tokola H, Luodonpää M, Puhakka J, Romppanen H, Vuolteenaho O,
Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Physiology, Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The signaling cascades responsible for the activation of
transcription factors in the hypertrophic growth of cardiac myocytes during
hemodynamic overload are largely unknown. Several of the genes upregulated in the
hypertrophied heart, including B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene, are
controlled by the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription factor GATA4.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An in vivo model of intravenous administration of
arginine(8)-vasopressin (AVP) for up to 4 hours in conscious normotensive rats
was used to study the signaling mechanisms for GATA activation in response to
pressure overload. Gel mobility shift assays were used to analyze the
trans-acting factors that interact with the GATA motifs of the BNP promoter.
AVP-induced increase in mean arterial pressure was followed by a significant
increase in the BNP and c-fos mRNA levels in both the endocardial and epicardial 
layers of the left ventricle, whereas GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels remained
unchanged. Pressure overload within 15 to 60 minutes produced an increase in left
ventricular BNP GATA4 but not GATA5 and GATA6 binding activity, and at 30 minutes
a 2.2-fold increase (P:<0.001) in GATA4 binding was noted. The mixed endothelin-1
ET(A)/ET(B) receptor antagonist bosentan but not the angiotensin II type 1
receptor antagonist losartan completely inhibited the pressure overload-induced
increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 binding activity. Bosentan alone had no
statistically significant effect on GATA4 binding activity of the left ventricle 
in conscious animals.
CONCLUSIONS: ET-1 is a signaling molecule that rapidly upregulates GATA4 DNA
binding activity in response to pressure overload in vivo.

PMID: 11156886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):167-80.

Maternal VegT is the initiator of a molecular network specifying endoderm in
Xenopus laevis.

Xanthos JB(1), Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

During cleavage stages, maternal VegT mRNA and protein are localized to the
Xenopus embryo's vegetal region from which the endoderm will arise and where
several zygotic gene transcripts will be localized. Previous loss-of-function
experiments on this T-box transcription factor suggested a role for VegT in
Xenopus endoderm formation. Here, we test whether VegT is required to initiate
endoderm formation using a loss of function approach. We find that the endodermal
genes, Bix1, Bix3, Bix4, Milk (Bix2), Mix.1, Mix.2, Mixer, Xsox17 alpha, Gata4,
Gata5, Gata6 and endodermin, as well as the anterior endodermal genes Xhex and
cerberus, and the organizer specific gene, Xlim1, are downstream of maternal
VegT. We also find that the TGF beta s, Xnr1, Xnr2, Xnr4 and derrière rescue
expression of these genes, supporting the idea that cell interactions are
critical for proper endoderm formation. Additionally, inhibitory forms of Xnr2
and Derrière blocked the ability of VegT mRNA injection to rescue VegT-depleted
embryos. Furthermore, a subset of endodermal genes was rescued in VegT-depleted
vegetal masses by induction from an uninjected vegetal mass. Finally, we begin to
establish a gene hierarchy downstream of VegT by testing the ability of Mixer and
Gata5 to rescue the expression of other endodermal genes. These results identify 
VegT as the maternal regulator of endoderm initiation and illustrate the
complexity of zygotic pathways activated by VegT in the embryo's vegetal region.

PMID: 11124113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):G58-67.

GATA family transcription factors activate lactase gene promoter in intestinal
Caco-2 cells.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Santiago NA, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors regulate tissue-specific patterns of
gene expression during development. We have characterized the interaction between
GATA proteins and the lactase gene promoter. Nuclear protein bound to the lactase
gene GATA region cis element (-97 to -73) was analyzed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and supershift assays with GATA antibodies. Lactase 
promoter activities were assayed in Caco-2 cells transfected with wild-type and
mutated luciferase promoter-reporter constructs and GATA-4/5/6 expression
constructs. EMSA with the GATA region probe yields a specific DNA-protein complex
that requires the GATA factor binding site WGATAR. The complex is recognized by
GATA-4- and GATA-6-specific antibodies. GATA-4/5/6 expression constructs are able
to activate transcription driven by the wild-type promoter, but not by a promoter
in which the GATA binding site is mutated, in Caco-2 and nonintestinal QT6 cells.
GATA factor binding to the lactase cis element correlates with functional
promoter activation. We conclude that each of the GATA family zinc finger
proteins expressed in the intestine, GATA-4, -5, and -6, can interact with the
lactase promoter GATA element and can function to activate the promoter in Caco-2
cells.

PMID: 11123198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;14(3):399-408.

Assessment of seminiferous tubule function (anti-müllerian hormone).

Rey R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, Hospital de Niños R. Gutiérrez,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. rodolforey@infovia.com.ar

Anti-müllerian hormone (AMH) is specifically produced by Sertoli cells in the
male. The testes express a high level of AMH from early fetal life, driven by the
transcription factors SOX9, SF1, WT1 and GATA4, until puberty, when AMH is
downregulated by testosterone and meiosis. When androgen negative effect is
absent, follicle-stimulating hormone increases the secretion of AMH. Serum AMH
determination is useful in the evaluation of children with non-palpable gonads,
with or without ambiguous genitalia. It signals the existence of functional
testicular tissue and allows a distinction to be made between gonadal dysgenesis 
and dissociated tubular-interstitial dysfunction. Serum AMH is a useful marker in
the follow-up of male patients with precocious puberty or hypogonadotrophic
hypogonadism, as well as of patients with sex cord stromal tumours of the gonads.
Finally, AMH determination on the seminal plasma of men with non-obstructive
azoospermia may be used as a marker of the existence of testicular spermatozoa
when intracytoplasmic sperm injection is considered.

Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 11097782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Nov;14(11):1820-35.

GATA-1 and GATA-4 transactivate inhibin/activin beta-B-subunit gene transcription
in testicular cells.

Feng ZM(1), Wu AZ, Zhang Z, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We have recently demonstrated that a testicular GATA-binding protein, GATA-1,
up-regulates the transcription of inhibin alpha-subunit gene through interaction 
with GATA motifs in the promoter region in MA-10, a mouse Leydig tumor cell line.
In this study, we showed that both GATA-1 and GATA-4 also transactivated the
transcription from the promoter for the 4.8-kb inhibin/activin beta-B-subunit
gene transcripts, beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter, in two testicular cell lines,
MA-10 and MSC-1, which is a mouse Sertoli cell line. The abilities of GATA-1 and 
GATA-4 interacting with GATA and/or GATA-like sequences to transactivate the
beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter were next examined by mutation analysis. Mutations
of GATA or GATA-like sequences caused no apparent effect or only a small decrease
in the basal transcriptional activity of this promoter. However, mutation of the 
GATA motif at -65 markedly decreased 60-70% of the effect of GATA-1 on the
transactivation of beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter in both MA-10 and MSC-1 cells. In
addition, mutation of the GATA motif in MSC-1 cells also reduced 40-50% of the
effect of GATA-4 to transactivate this promoter. Interestingly, mutation of GATT 
at -42 caused a 70-90% increase in the transactivation of beta-B(4.8)-subunit
promoter by GATA-1 or GATA-4. No significant change in the promoter activity was 
observed when GATT at -177 or GATC at -201 was mutated. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay confirmed the above observations that these GATA-binding proteins
interacted with the GATA motif at -65 and GATT at -42, but not with GATC at -201 
or GATT at -177. Serial deletion from the 5'-end of the basal promoter, from -226
to -90, markedly decreased the basal transcription, but increased the effect of
GATA-1 on transactivation of the beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter. In summary, our
observations suggest that the two GATA-binding proteins transactivate the
beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter in testicular cells via complicated mechanisms. Both
GATA-1 and GATA-4 factors act through the GATA motif at -65 and GATT at -42 to
positively and negatively regulate the transcription from this promoter,
respectively. Furthermore, GATA-1 may also interact directly or indirectly with
DNA sequences at -180 to -90 to regulate the beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter.

PMID: 11075815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Oct;85(10):3925-31.

Expression of transcription factor GATA-4 during human testicular development and
disease.

Ketola I(1), Pentikäinen V, Vaskivuo T, Ilvesmäki V, Herva R, Dunkel L,
Tapanainen JS, Toppari J, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

GATA-4 is a highly conserved transcription factor that plays a critical role in
regulating embryonic morphogenesis and cellular differentiation. Given the
emerging role of GATA-4 in the development and function of murine gonads, we have
now studied its role in human testis. We find that GATA-4 is expressed from early
human fetal testicular development to adulthood. This transcription factor is
evident in Sertoli cells through fetal and postnatal development. Expression of
GATA-4 in Sertoli cells peaks at 19-22 weeks gestation at the time of high
circulating fetal FSH. In Leydig cells, GATA-4 is expressed during fetal period
and after puberty, coinciding with the periods of active androgen synthesis in
the testis; this suggests a link between GATA-4 and steroidogenesis. Also, fetal 
germ cells and prepubertal spermatogonia express GATA-4, and it is down-regulated
in these cells after puberty. As hormonal regulation of GATA-4 in human testis
was not possible to study directly, we used testicular samples from patients who 
had endocrine abnormalities or were hormonally treated. Testicular expression of 
GATA-4 in hCG-treated cryptorchidism does not differ from that in controls. In
androgen resistance, GATA-4 expression in Sertoli and germ cells is weak or
totally absent. GATA-4 protein is abundantly present in Sertoli and Leydig cell
tumors, suggesting a relationship to tumorigenesis or tumor progression in
somatic cell-derived testicular neoplasms.

PMID: 11061558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2000 Nov;127(22):4915-23.

Repressive and restrictive mesodermal interactions with gut endoderm: possible
relation to Meckel's Diverticulum.

Bossard P(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
PA 19111, USA.

The midgut and hindgut endoderm of the mouse embryo give rise to the intestinal
epithelium, yet it is not known how the intestinal program is chosen in contrast 
to other endoderm-derived cell types. Previous tissue explant studies with
embryos at 8.5 to 11.5 days gestation (d) showed that when the gut mesoderm is
removed from the prospective intestinal endoderm, the endoderm activates the
expression of liver-specific genes such as serum albumin, demonstrating the
endoderm's pluripotence. This reversible repression of liver genes does not
affect the expression of the endodermal transcription factors HNF3 and GATA4, nor
these factors' ability to engage target sites in chromatin. We have now found
that at 13.5 d, the mesoderm gains a second inhibitory activity, resulting in the
irreversible loss of expression of HNF3 (Foxa2) and GATA factors in the endoderm 
and the absence of factors binding to their target sites in chromatin. The second
inhibitory activity causes the endoderm to lose the potential to activate a liver
gene, and this restriction precedes the normal cytodifferentiation of the
intestinal epithelium. In summary, two inhibitory interactions with mesoderm
successively restrict the developmental potential of the gut endoderm, leading to
intestinal differentiation. We also observed rare gut bud structures in
midgestation embryos that appear to represent murine examples of Meckel's
Diverticulum, a congenital abnormality in human development. The absence of
restrictive mesodermal interactions could explain how Meckel's diverticula
express diverse non-intestinal, endoderm-derived cell types.

PMID: 11044405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):38949-52.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6. Ubiquitously
expressed regulators of tissue-specific gene expression.

Molkentin JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. molkj0@chmcc.org

PMID: 11042222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):4570-80. Epub 2000 Oct 20.

Characterization of homo- and heterodimerization of cardiac Csx/Nkx2.5
homeoprotein.

Kasahara H(1), Usheva A, Ueyama T, Aoki H, Horikoshi N, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
hkasahar@caregroup.harvard.edu

Csx/Nkx2.5 is an evolutionarily conserved homeodomain (HD)-containing
transcription factor that is essential for early cardiac development. We found
that the HD of Csx/Nkx2.5 binds as a monomer as well as a dimer to its DNA
binding sites in the promoter of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene, an in 
vivo target gene of Csx/Nkx2.5. Csx/Nkx2.5 physically interacts with each other
in vitro as well as in cells, and the HD is critical for homodimerization.
Lys(193) and Arg(194), located at the COOH-terminal end of HD, are essential for 
dimerization. Lys(193) is also required for a specific interaction with the zinc 
finger transcription factor GATA4. Csx/Nkx2.5 can heterodimerize with other NK2
homeodomain proteins, Nkx2.3 and Nkx2.6/Tix, with different affinities. A single 
missense mutation, Ile(183) to Pro in the HD of Csx/Nkx2.5, preserved
homodimerization function, but totally abolished DNA binding. Ile(183) --> Pro
mutant acts in an inhibitory manner on wild type Csx/Nkx2.5 transcriptional
activity through the ANF promoter in 10T1/2 cells. However, Ile(183) --> Pro
mutant does not inhibit wild type Csx/Nkx2.5 function on the ANF promoter in
cultured neonatal cardiac myocytes, possibly due to failure of dimerization in
the presence of the target DNA. These results suggest that complex
protein-protein interactions of Csx/Nkx2.5 play a role in its transcriptional
regulatory function.

PMID: 11042197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1026-33.

GATA-4 and serum response factor regulate transcription of the muscle-specific
carnitine palmitoyltransferase I beta in rat heart.

Moore ML(1), Wang GL, Belaguli NS, Schwartz RJ, McMillin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical School, University of
Texas-Houston Health Science Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins is dependent
on nuclear transcription factors that act on genes encoding key components of
mitochondrial transcription, replication, and heme biosynthetic machinery.
Cellular factors that target expression of proteins to the heart have been well
characterized with respect to excitation-contraction coupling. No information
currently exists that examines whether parallel transcriptional mechanisms
regulate nuclear encoded expression of heart-specific mitochondrial isoforms. The
muscle CPT-Ibeta isoform in heart is a TATA-less gene that uses Sp-1 proteins to 
support basal expression. The rat cardiac fatty acid response element
(-301/-289), previously characterized in the human gene, is responsive to oleic
acid following serum deprivation. Deletion and mutational analysis of the
5'-flanking sequence of the carnitine palmitoyltransferase Ibeta (CPT-Ibeta) gene
defines regulatory regions in the -391/+80 promoter luciferase construct. When
deleted or mutated constructs were individually transfected into cardiac
myocytes, CPT-I/luciferase reporter gene expression was significantly depressed
at sites involving a putative MEF2 sequence downstream from the fatty acid
response element and a cluster of heart-specific regulatory regions flanked by
two Sp1 elements. Each site demonstrated binding to cardiac nuclear proteins and 
competition specificity (or supershifts) with oligonucleotides and antibodies.
Individual expression vectors for Nkx2.5, serum response factor (SRF), and GATA4 
enhanced CPT-I reporter gene expression 4-36-fold in CV-1 cells. Although
cotransfection of Nkx and SRF produced additive luciferase expression, the
combination of SRF and GATA-4 cotransfection resulted in synergistic activation
of CPT-Ibeta. The results demonstrate that SRF and the tissue-restricted isoform,
GATA-4, drive robust gene transcription of a mitochondrial protein highly
expressed in heart.

PMID: 11038368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4345-60.

A role for GATA5 in Xenopus endoderm specification.

Weber H(1), Symes CE, Walmsley ME, Rodaway AR, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, The Randall Institute, King's College
London, London WC2B 5RL, UK.

The endoderm gives rise to the gut and tissues that develop as outgrowths of the 
gut tube, including the lungs, liver and pancreas. Here we show that GATA5, a
zinc-finger transcription factor, is expressed in the yolk-rich vegetal cells of 
Xenopus embryos from the early gastrula stage onwards, when these cells become
committed to form endoderm. At mid-gastrula stages, GATA5 is restricted to the
sub-blastoporal endoderm and is the first molecular marker for this subset of
endodermal cells so far identified. We show that GATA4 and GATA5 are potent
inducers of endodermal marker genes in animal cap assays, while other GATA
factors induce these genes only weakly, if at all. When injected into the dorsal 
marginal zone, GATA5 respecifies prospective mesoderm towards an endodermal fate,
thereby disrupting the convergence and extension movements normally undergone by 
the dorsal mesoderm. The resulting phenotype is very similar to those seen after 
injection of dominant negative versions of the FGF-receptor or the T-box
transcription factor, Xbra and can be rescued by eFGF. The ability of GATA5 to
respecify ectodermal and mesodermal cells towards endoderm suggests an important 
role for GATA5 in the formation of this germlayer. In animal cap assays, GATA5 is
induced by concentrations of activin above those known to induce dorsal mesoderm 
and heart, in an FGF-independent manner. These data indicate that the emerging
view for endodermal induction in general, namely that it is specified by high
levels of TGF-beta in the absence of FGF signalling, is specifically true for
sub-blastoporal endoderm.

PMID: 11003835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7550-8.

Cardiac tissue enriched factors serum response factor and GATA-4 are mutual
coregulators.

Belaguli NS(1), Sepulveda JL, Nigam V, Charron F, Nemer M, Schwartz RJ.

Collaborators: Schwartz RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Combinatorial interaction among cardiac tissue-restricted enriched transcription 
factors may facilitate the expression of cardiac tissue-restricted genes. Here we
show that the MADS box factor serum response factor (SRF) cooperates with the
zinc finger protein GATA-4 to synergistically activate numerous myogenic and
nonmyogenic serum response element (SRE)-dependent promoters in CV1 fibroblasts. 
In the absence of GATA binding sites, synergistic activation depends on binding
of SRF to the proximal CArG box sequence in the cardiac and skeletal alpha-actin 
promoter. GATA-4's C-terminal activation domain is obligatory for synergistic
coactivation with SRF, and its N-terminal domain and first zinc finger are
inhibitory. SRF and GATA-4 physically associate both in vivo and in vitro through
their MADS box and the second zinc finger domains as determined by protein A
pullout assays and by in vivo one-hybrid transfection assays using Gal4 fusion
proteins. Other cardiovascular tissue-restricted GATA factors, such as GATA-5 and
GATA-6, were equivalent to GATA-4 in coactivating SRE-dependent targets. Thus,
interaction between the MADS box and C4 zinc finger proteins, a novel regulatory 
paradigm, mediates activation of SRF-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC86307
PMID: 11003651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;85(9):3476-83.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 and a GATA family cofactor, FOG-2, are
expressed in human ovary and sex cord-derived ovarian tumors.

Laitinen MP(1), Anttonen M, Ketola I, Wilson DB, Ritvos O, Butzow R, Heikinheimo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Haartman Institute, Helsinki,
Finland.

Previous studies have implicated transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the
regulation of murine ovarian development and function. In rodents, GATA-4 is
expressed in granulosa cells of primary and early antral follicles, whereas
GATA-6 is expressed in granulosa cells of late antral follicles and luteal
glands. Both transcription factors can be detected in lesser amounts in theca
cells and interstitial cells. We have now examined the expression of GATA-4 and
GATA-6 in human ovaries, human granulosa-luteal (GL) cells and sex cord-derived
tumors. We show by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry that GATA-4 and
GATA-6 messenger RNA (mRNA) and GATA-4 protein are present in granulosa and theca
cells in both preantral and antral follicles. Both human ovarian tissue samples
and freshly isolated GL cells derived from preovulatory follicles of
gonadotropin-treated women express GATA-4, GATA-6, and FOG-2 transcripts, and
GATA-6 mRNA expression in GL cell cultures is stimulated by human CG and
8-bromo-cAMP. The vast majority of granulosa and theca cell tumors examined
expressed GATA-4 and GATA-6. We also found that mRNA for FOG-2, a recently
discovered regulator of GATA-4, is coexpressed with GATA-4 in human ovary
samples, normal granulosa cells, and in sex cord-derived tumors. Our results
demonstrate that GATA-4, GATA-6, and FOG-2 are expressed in human ovary and in
granulosa and theca cell tumors. Our findings support a role for GATA-binding
proteins in human ovarian folliculogenesis. Moreover, these data suggest that
GATA factors may contribute to the phenotypes of sex cord-derived ovarian tumors.

PMID: 10999851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2000 Jun;115(6):337-44.

[Differentiation of cardiomyocyte].

[Article in Japanese]

Oka T(1), Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan.

In the recent decade, remarkable progress has been made in the field of cardiac
development through the use of molecular, biological and genetic techniques.
Several genes that regulate this process have been cloned, and their functions
have been analyzed in vivo and in vitro. Cardiac-specific transcription factors, 
including Csx/Nkx-2.5, GATA4, MEF2 and dHAND/eHAND, play central roles in cardiac
development. Loss-of-function of gain-of-function studies have revealed that
these factors regulate heart morphogenesis and cardiac-specific gene expressions.
Cardiac-specific genes, including MLC2v, cardiac alpha-actin and ANP, have
specific binding sequences for transcription factors in their promoter regions
and expressions of these genes are regulated by binding of transcription factors.
In addition to the transcription factors, growth factors secreted from ectoderm
and endoderm play important roles in induction of cardiomyocytes. Decapentaplegic
and bone morphogenetic proteins, members of the transforming growth factor-beta
superfamily, induce the expression of cardiac-specific transcription factors in
the precardiac mesodrem and are indispensable to cardiomyocyte differentiation.
We think that understanding the genetic cascade of cardiomyocyte differentiation 
will open the gate for cardiomyogenesis from non-cardiac cells.

PMID: 10948566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35291-6.

Functional analyses of three Csx/Nkx-2.5 mutations that cause human congenital
heart disease.

Zhu W(1), Shiojima I, Hiroi Y, Zou Y, Akazawa H, Mizukami M, Toko H, Yazaki Y,
Nagai R, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

A homeodomain-containing transcription factor Csx/Nkx-2.5 is an important
regulator of cardiogenesis in mammals. Three different mutants, Gln170ter
(designated A) and Thr178Met (designated B) in the helix 2 of the homeodomain and
Gln198ter mutation (designated C) just after homeodomain, have been reported to
cause atrial septal defect with atrial ventricular block. We here examined the
functions of these three mutants of Csx/Nkx-2.5. The atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) promoter was activated by wild type Csx/Nkx-2.5 (WT, approximately 8-fold),
B ( approximately 2-fold), and C ( approximately 6-fold) but not by A. When A, B,
or C was cotransfected into COS-7 cells with the same amount of WT, WT-induced
activation of the ANP promoter was attenuated by A and B (A > B), whereas C
further enhanced the activation. Immunocytochemical analysis using anti-Myc tag
antibody indicated that transfected Myc-tagged WT, B, and C were localized in the
nucleus of both COS-7 cells and cardiomyocytes of neonatal rats, whereas A was
distributed diffusely in the cytoplasm and nucleus in COS-7 cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that Csx/Nkx-2.5-binding sequences
were bound strongly by WT and C, weakly by B, but not by A. Immunoprecipitation
and GST pull-down assay revealed that WT and all mutants interacted with GATA-4. 
The synergistic activation of the ANP promoter by WT and GATA-4 was further
enhanced by C but was inhibited by A and B. In the cultured cardiomyocytes,
overexpression of C but not WT, A, or B, induced apoptosis. These results suggest
that although the three mutants induce the same cardiac phenotype,
transactivation ability and DNA binding ability are different among the three
mutants and that apoptosis may be a cause for C-induced cardiac defect.

PMID: 10948187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jul;28(3):184-8.

Distinct expression of CDX2 and GATA4/5, development-related genes, in human
gastric cancer cell lines.

Bai Y(1), Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Yagi OK, Kikuchi Y, Saito N, Takeshita K, Iwai
T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

CDX2 is a tumor-suppressor homeobox gene involved in colon carcinogenesis, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. Although GATA4, -5 and, -6 transcription
factors have distinct functions in the regulation of gastrointestinal epithelial 
cell differentiation, there have been no reports regarding GATA4/5/6 alterations 
in gastrointestinal carcinomas. By using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay, we studied the expression of gut
development-related genes CDX2/1 and GATA4/5/6 in 11 human gastric cancer cell
lines. The expression of CDX2 appeared to progressively decrease with the
transition from well differentiated to poorly differentiated cancer cell lines.
CDX1 was below detectable levels in all cell lines. The expression of GATA4 and
GATA5 was undetectable in four and six cell lines, respectively, whereas the
majority of the cell lines expressed GATA6 abundantly. These results suggest that
CDX2 and GATA4/5 may be associated with the carcinogenesis of the stomach. Mol.
Carcinog. 28:184-188, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10942535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3865-76.

Serrate and Notch specify cell fates in the heart field by suppressing
cardiomyogenesis.

Rones MS(1), McLaughlin KA, Raffin M, Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Notch signaling mediates numerous developmental cell fate decisions in organisms 
ranging from flies to humans, resulting in the generation of multiple cell types 
from equipotential precursors. In this paper, we present evidence that activation
of Notch by its ligand Serrate apportions myogenic and non-myogenic cell fates
within the early Xenopus heart field. The crescent-shaped field of heart mesoderm
is specified initially as cardiomyogenic. While the ventral region of the field
forms the myocardial tube, the dorsolateral portions lose myogenic potency and
form the dorsal mesocardium and pericardial roof (Raffin, M., Leong, L. M.,
Rones, M. S., Sparrow, D., Mohun, T. and Mercola, M. (2000) Dev. Biol., 218,
326-340). The local interactions that establish or maintain the distinct
myocardial and non-myocardial domains have never been described. Here we show
that Xenopus Notch1 (Xotch) and Serrate1 are expressed in overlapping patterns in
the early heart field. Conditional activation or inhibition of the Notch pathway 
with inducible dominant negative or active forms of the RBP-J/Suppressor of
Hairless [Su(H)] transcription factor indicated that activation of Notch feeds
back on Serrate1 gene expression to localize transcripts more dorsolaterally than
those of Notch1, with overlap in the region of the developing mesocardium.
Moreover, Notch pathway activation decreased myocardial gene expression and
increased expression of a marker of the mesocardium and pericardial roof, whereas
inhibition of Notch signaling had the opposite effect. Activation or inhibition
of Notch also regulated contribution of individual cells to the myocardium.
Importantly, expression of Nkx2. 5 and Gata4 remained largely unaffected,
indicating that Notch signaling functions downstream of heart field
specification. We conclude that Notch signaling through Su(H) suppresses
cardiomyogenesis and that this activity is essential for the correct
specification of myocardial and non-myocardial cell fates.

PMID: 10934030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Circ Res. 2000 Aug 4;87(3):189-94.

Opioid peptide gene expression primes cardiogenesis in embryonal pluripotent stem
cells.

Ventura C(1), Maioli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Biochemistry, Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Research, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
chim_med@ssmain.uniss.it

Zinc finger-containing transcription factor GATA-4 and homeodomain Nkx-2.5 govern
crucial developmental fates and have been found to promote cardiogenesis in
embryonic cells exposed to the differentiating agent DMSO. Nevertheless,
intracellular activators of these transcription factors are largely unknown. In
this study, pluripotent P19 cells expressed the prodynorphin gene, an opioid gene
encoding for the dynorphin family of opioid peptides. P19 cells were also able to
synthesize and secrete dynorphin B, a biologically active end product of the
prodynorphin gene. DMSO-primed GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5 gene expression was preceded by
a marked increase in prodynorphin gene expression and dynorphin B synthesis and
secretion. The DMSO effect occurred at the transcriptional level. In the absence 
of DMSO, dynorphin B triggered GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5 gene expression and led to the 
appearance of both alpha-myosin heavy chain and myosin light chain-2V
transcripts, two markers of cardiac differentiation. Moreover, dynorphin
B-exposed cells were positively stained in the presence of MF 20, a mouse
monoclonal antibody raised against the alpha-myosin heavy chain. Opioid receptor 
antagonism and inhibition of opioid gene expression by a prodynorphin antisense
phosphorothioate oligonucleotide blocked DMSO-induced cardiogenesis, suggesting
an autocrine role of an opioid gene in developmental decisions.

PMID: 10926868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Circulation. 2000 Jul 25;102(4):432-7.

Deletion of a 5-cM region at chromosome 8p23 is associated with a spectrum of
congenital heart defects.

Giglio S(1), Graw SL, Gimelli G, Pirola B, Varone P, Voullaire L, Lerzo F, Rossi 
E, Dellavecchia C, Bonaglia MC, Digilio MC, Giannotti A, Marino B, Carrozzo R,
Korenberg JR, Danesino C, Sujansky E, Dallapiccola B, Zuffardi O.

Author information: 
(1)Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cytogenetic evidence suggests that the haploinsufficiency of > or =1 
gene located in 8p23 behaves as a dominant mutation, impairing heart
differentiation and leading to a wide spectrum of congenital heart defects
(CHDs), including conotruncal lesions, atrial septal defects, atrioventricular
canal defects, and pulmonary valve stenosis. An 8p heart-defect-critical region
was delineated, and the zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 was considered a
likely candidate for these defects. We narrowed this region and excluded a major 
role of GATA4 in these CHDs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 12 patients (7 had CHD and 5 did not) with distal
8p deletions from 9 families by defining their chromosome rearrangements at the
molecular level by fluorescent in situ hybridization and short-tandem repeat
analysis. Subjects with 8p deletions distal to D8S1706, at approximately 10 cM
from the 8p telomere, did not have CHD, whereas subjects with a deletion that
included the more proximal region suffered from the spectrum of heart defects
reported in patients with 8p distal deletions. The 5-cM critical region is
flanked distally by D8S1706 and WI-8327, both at approximately 10 cM, and
proximally by D8S1825, at 15 cM. Neither GATA4 nor angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT2; a gene
in 8p23 involved in blood vessel formation) were found to be deleted in some of
the critical patients. We also found that CHDs are not related to the parental
origin of deletion.
CONCLUSIONS: Haploinsufficiency for a gene between WI-8327 and D8S1825 is
critical for heart development. A causal relationship does not seem to exist
between GATA4 and ANGPT2 haploinsufficiency and CHDs.

PMID: 10908216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):353-6.

A syndrome of tricuspid atresia in mice with a targeted mutation of the gene
encoding Fog-2.

Svensson EC(1), Huggins GS, Lin H, Clendenin C, Jiang F, Tufts R, Dardik FB,
Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Tricuspid atresia (TA) is a common form of congenital heart disease, accounting
for 1-3% of congenital cardiac disorders. TA is characterized by the congenital
agenesis of the tricuspid valve connecting the right atrium to the right
ventricle and both an atrial septal defect (ASD) and a ventricular septal defect 
(VSD). Some patients also have pulmonic stenosis, persistence of a left-sided
superior vena cava or transposition of the great arteries. Most cases of TA are
sporadic, but familial occurrences with disease in multiple siblings have been
reported. Gata4 is a zinc-finger transcription factor with a role in early
cardiac development. Gata4-deficient mice fail to form a ventral heart tube and
die of circulatory failure at embryonic day (E) 8.5 (refs 6,7). Zfpm2 (also known
as Fog-2) is a multi-zinc-finger protein that is co-expressed with Gata4 in the
developing heart beginning at E8.5 (refs 8-10). Zfpm2 interacts specifically with
the N-terminal zinc finger of Gata4 and represses Gata4-dependent transcription. 
Here we use targeted mutagenesis to explore the role of Zfpm2 in normal cardiac
development. Zfpm2-deficient mice died of congestive heart failure at E13 with a 
syndrome of tricuspid atresia that includes an absent tricuspid valve, a large
ASD, a VSD, an elongated left ventricular outflow tract, rightward displacement
of the aortic valve and pulmonic stenosis. These mice also display hypoplasia of 
the compact zone of the left ventricle. Our findings indicate the importance of
Zfpm2 in the normal looping and septation of the heart and suggest a genetic
basis for the syndrome of tricuspid atresia.

PMID: 10888889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 1;223(1):169-80.

Ventricular expression of tbx5 inhibits normal heart chamber development.

Liberatore CM(1), Searcy-Schrick RD, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, The Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box gene tbx5 is expressed in the developing heart, forelimb, eye, and
liver in vertebrate embryos during critical stages of morphogenesis and
patterning. In humans, mutations in the TBX5 gene have been associated with
Holt-Oram syndrome, which is characterized by developmental anomalies in the
heart and forelimbs. In chicken and mouse embryos, tbx5 expression is initiated
at the earliest stages of heart formation throughout the heart primordia and is
colocalized with other cardiac transcription factors such as nkx-2.5 and GATA4.
As the heart differentiates, tbx5 expression is restricted to the posterior
sinoatrial segments of the heart, consistent with the timing of atrial chamber
determination. The correlation between tbx5 expression and atrial lineage
determination was examined in retinoic acid (RA)-treated chicken embryos. tbx5
expression is maintained throughout the hearts of RA-treated embryos under
conditions that also expand atrial-specific gene expression. The downstream
effects of persistent tbx5 expression in the ventricles were examined directly in
transgenic mice. Embryos that express tbx5 driven by a beta-myosin heavy chain
promoter throughout the primitive heart tube were generated. Loss of
ventricular-specific gene expression and retardation of ventricular chamber
morphogenesis were observed in these embryos. These studies provide direct
evidence for an essential role for tbx5 in early heart morphogenesis and
chamber-specific gene expression.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10864469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Reprod Dev. 2000 Jun;56(2):124-38.

GATA-1 is a potential repressor of anti-Müllerian hormone expression during the
establishment of puberty in the mouse.

Beau C(1), Rauch M, Joulin V, Jégou B, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)GERM/INSERM U. 435, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, Bretagne, France.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), also known as Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS),
is one of the earliest and best-known markers of Sertoli cell differentiation and
is expressed until around puberty. The present study is aimed at the better
understanding of the molecular pathways involved in testicular development and
establishment of adult functions with regards to AMH regulation. We found, within
the mouse AMH promoter, putative GATA motifs (A/T)GATA(A/G), known to be
specifically bound by members of the GATA transcription factor family. We then
carried out RNase protection assays and immunohistochemical techniques aimed at
comparing precisely the chronological expression patterns of AMH and GATA-1, this
latter being expressed in the testis after birth. Using both approaches we found 
an inverse and close relationship between AMH and GATA-1 mRNA and protein
expression during the pre-pubertal period. These results allowed us to define a
transitory 4-5-day period, starting from 3 dpp when both proteins are
heterogeneously expressed in Sertoli cells and showed that the appearance of
GATA-1 is associated with the decrease of AMH expression in these cells.
Furthermore DNA-protein interaction in in vitro studies showed first that GATA-1 
binds with various affinities on sites found in the AMH promoter and second that 
the proximity of the two strongest affinity sites leads to a synergistic binding 
effect. Altogether, the present study suggests that GATA-1 participates in AMH
gene repression during the pre-pubertal period.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10813843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 7;275(27):20762-9.

A functionally conserved N-terminal domain of the friend of GATA-2 (FOG-2)
protein represses GATA4-dependent transcription.

Svensson EC(1), Huggins GS, Dardik FB, Polk CE, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

GATA4 is a transcriptional activator of cardiac-restricted promoters and is
required for normal cardiac morphogenesis. Friend of GATA-2 (FOG-2) is a
multizinc finger protein that associates with GATA4 and represses GATA4-dependent
transcription. To better understand the transcriptional repressor activity of
FOG-2 we performed a functional analysis of the FOG-2 protein. The results
demonstrated that 1) zinc fingers 1 and 6 of FOG-2 are each capable of
interacting with evolutionarily conserved motifs within the N-terminal zinc
finger of mammalian GATA proteins, 2) a nuclear localization signal (RKRRK)
(amino acids 736-740) is required to program nuclear targeting of FOG-2, and 3)
FOG-2 can interact with the transcriptional co-repressor, C-terminal-binding
protein-2 via a conserved sequence motif in FOG-2 (PIDLS). Surprisingly, however,
this interaction with C-terminal-binding protein-2 is not required for
FOG-2-mediated repression of GATA4-dependent transcription. Instead, we have
identified a novel N-terminal domain of FOG-2 (amino acids 1-247) that is both
necessary and sufficient to repress GATA4-dependent transcription. This
N-terminal repressor domain is functionally conserved in the related protein,
Friend of GATA1. Taken together, these results define a set of evolutionarily
conserved mechanisms by which FOG proteins repress GATA-dependent transcription
and thereby form the foundation for genetic studies designed to elucidate the
role of FOG-2 in cardiac development.

PMID: 10801815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. EMBO J. 2000 May 2;19(9):2046-55.

GATA-dependent recruitment of MEF2 proteins to target promoters.

Morin S(1), Charron F, Robitaille L, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC, H2W 1R7,
Canada.

The myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) proteins are MADS-box transcription factors 
that are essential for differentiation of all muscle lineages but their
mechanisms of action remain largely undefined. In mammals, the earliest site of
MEF2 expression is the heart where the MEF2C isoform is detectable as early as
embryonic day 7.5. Inactivation of the MEF2C gene causes cardiac developmental
arrest and severe downregulation of a number of cardiac markers including atrial 
natriuretic factor (ANF). However, most of these promoters contain no or low
affinity MEF2 binding sites and they are not significantly activated by any MEF2 
proteins in heterologous cells suggesting a dependence on a cardiac-enriched
cofactor for MEF2 action. We provide evidence that MEF2 proteins are recruited to
target promoters by the cell-specific GATA transcription factors, and that MEF2
potentiates the transcriptional activity of this family of tissue-restricted zinc
finger proteins. Functional MEF2/GATA-4 synergy involves physical interaction
between the MEF2 DNA-binding domain and the carboxy zinc finger of GATA-4 and
requires the activation domains of both proteins. However, neither MEF2 binding
sites nor MEF2 DNA binding capacity are required for transcriptional synergy. The
results unravel a novel pathway for transcriptional regulation by MEF2 and
provide a molecular paradigm for elucidating the mechanisms of action of MEF2 in 
muscle and non-muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC305697
PMID: 10790371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 5;275(18):13721-6.

Phosphorylation of GATA-4 is involved in alpha 1-adrenergic agonist-responsive
transcription of the endothelin-1 gene in cardiac myocytes.

Morimoto T(1), Hasegawa K, Kaburagi S, Kakita T, Wada H, Yanazume T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The expression of endothelin-1 (ET-1) in cardiac myocytes is markedly induced
during the development of heart failure in vivo and by stimulation with the
alpha(1)-adrenergic agonist phenylephrine in culture. Although recent studies
have suggested a role for cardiac-specific zinc finger GATA factors in the
transcriptional pathways that modulate cardiac hypertrophy, it is unknown whether
these factors are also involved in cardiac ET-1 transcription and if so, how
these factors are modulated during this process. Using transient transfection
assays in primary cardiac myocytes from neonatal rats, we show here that the GATA
element in the rat ET-1 promoter was required for phenylephrine-stimulated ET-1
transcription. Cardiac GATA-4 bound the ET-1 GATA element and activated the ET-1 
promoter in a sequence-specific manner. Stimulation by phenylephrine caused
serine phosphorylation of GATA-4 and increased its ability to bind the ET-1 GATA 
element. Inhibition of the extracellularly responsive kinase cascade with
PD098059 blocked the phenylephrine-induced increase in the DNA binding ability
and the phosphorylation of GATA-4. These findings demonstrate that serine
phosphorylation of GATA-4 is involved in alpha(1)-adrenergic agonist-responsive
transcription of the ET-1 gene in cardiac myocytes and that extracellularly
responsive kinase 1/2 activation plays a role upstream of GATA-4.

PMID: 10788492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19949-54.

The gene encoding the mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 is differentially
regulated by GATA-6 and GATA-4 in the visceral endoderm.

Morrisey EE(1), Musco S, Chen MY, Lu MM, Leiden JM, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Gene targeting studies have demonstrated that the zinc finger transcription
factor GATA-6 lies upstream in a transcriptional cascade that controls
differentiation of the visceral endoderm. To understand the function of GATA-6 in
the visceral endoderm and to identify genes regulated by GATA-6 in this tissue,
subtractive hybridization was performed using template cDNAs derived from
differentiated wild-type embryonic stem (ES) cells and GATA-6(-/-) ES cells,
respectively. These analyses revealed that the gene encoding Dab2, a
mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein, is differentially expressed in wild-type and
GATA-6-deficient ES cells. Consistent with these findings, Dab2 is expressed in
the visceral endoderm of wild-type embryos but not in the visceral endoderm of
GATA-6-deficient embryos. Cotransfection experiments demonstrate that the human
Dab2 promoter can be transactivated by forced expression of GATA-6 in NIH-3T3
cells. In contrast, forced expression of GATA-4 does not transactivate the human 
Dab2 promoter and Dab2 is expressed in the visceral endoderm of GATA-4 null
embryos. Surprisingly, the specificity of GATA-6-induced transactivation of the
Dab2 promoter is not mediated through its zinc finger DNA-binding domain. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that the mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 
is a downstream target of GATA-6 in the visceral endoderm. Moreover, these data
demonstrate that molecular mechanisms have evolved that direct, and distinguish, 
the functional specificity of GATA family members when they are developmentally
coexpressed.

PMID: 10779506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):311-20.

HNF3beta and GATA-4 transactivate the liver-enriched homeobox gene, Hex.

Denson LA(1), McClure MH, Bogue CW, Karpen SJ, Jacobs HC.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. lee.denson@yale.edu

The orphan homeobox gene, Hex, has a limited domain of expression which includes 
the developing and adult mouse liver. Hex is expressed in the developing liver
coincident with the forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Hepatocyte
Nuclear Factor 3beta (HNF3beta). Although preliminary characterization of the
mouse Hex promoter has recently been reported, the identity of the molecular
regulators that drive liver expression is not known. We hypothesized that
putative HNF3beta and GATA-4 elements within the Hex promoter would confer
liver-enriched expression. A series of Hex promoter-driven luciferase reporter
constructs were transfected in liver-derived HepG2 and fibroblast-like Cos
cells+/-HNF3beta or GATA expression plasmids. The Hex promoter region from nt
-235/+22 conferred basal activity in both HepG2 and Cos cells, with the region
from -103/+22 conferring liver-enriched activity. HNF3beta and GATA-4
transactivated the promoter via response elements located within nt -103/+22,
whereas Sp1 activated the -235/+22 construct. Mutation of the HNF3 element
significantly reduced promoter activity in HepG2 cells, whereas this element in
isolation conferred HNF3beta responsiveness to a heterologous promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed to confirm transcription
factor:DNA binding. We conclude that HNF3beta and GATA-4 contribute to
liver-enriched expression of Hex.

PMID: 10767553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Endocrinology. 2000 Apr;141(4):1345-55.

Steroidogenic factor-1 influences protein-deoxyribonucleic acid interactions
within the cyclic adenosine 3,5-monophosphate-responsive regions of the murine
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Wooton-Kee CR(1), Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Kentucky 40292, USA.

De novo synthesis of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) in
response to trophic hormonal stimulation of steroidogenic cells is required for
the delivery of cholesterol from the mitochondrial outer membrane to the
mitochondrial inner membrane and the cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme. 
StAR expression is transcriptionally regulated by cAMP-mediated mechanisms, and
we have identified a 45-bp region within the mouse promoter that is important for
cAMP responsiveness of the gene. This region, located between -105 and -60 of the
start site of transcription, contains a SF-1-binding site, a highly conserved
C/EBPbeta-AP-1-nuclear receptor half-site sequences (CAN region), and a
GATA-4-binding site. The SF-1 element and CAN region are required for full basal 
activity, whereas the GATA-4 element may account for 20% of the cAMP response in 
MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells. A cAMP-dependent protein-DNA complex was observed
with the CAN region and mutation of a nonconsensus AP-1 site within this region
greatly diminished promoter strength. Complex protein-DNA interactions within the
cAMP response region (-105/-60) were shown to require the SF-1 element (-95),
suggesting that SF-1 is required for protein-DNA interaction at the CAN (-79)
region and maximal activity of the promoter.

PMID: 10746638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 1;60(5):1341-7.

A minimal critical region of the 8p22-23 amplicon in esophageal adenocarcinomas
defined using sequence tagged site-amplification mapping and quantitative
polymerase chain reaction includes the GATA-4 gene.

Lin L(1), Aggarwal S, Glover TW, Orringer MB, Hanash S, Beer DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor 48109,
USA.

The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinomas has increased greatly over the past
20 years. The genetic alterations associated with this disease, however, remain
largely unknown. We identified recently a novel amplicon at 8p22-23 in esophageal
adenocarcinomas using the restriction landmark genomic scanning two-dimensional
gel technique. Four known genes within or near this amplicon were initially
characterized. The cathepsin B (CTSB) gene was found to be amplified in 13% of
esophageal tumors. CTSB was shown previously to be overexpressed without
amplification in many other human cancers. An approach termed sequence tagged
site-amplification mapping has been implemented in the present study, allowing
the 8p22-23 amplicon to be narrowed from 12 cM to a <2-cM minimal amplified area 
located between markers D8S552 and D8S1759. The CTSB gene maps within this
region. To identify other cancer-related candidate genes in this region, a
positional candidate gene approach was subsequently applied to characterize this 
minimal critical region. An expressed sequence tag (EST), which was included in
the minimal critical region, demonstrated both amplification and overexpression. 
This EST and the extended sequence from the EST were determined to be a novel
sequence in the 3' untranslated region of the human GATA-4 gene. GATA-4, a member
of a zinc finger transcription factor family, was confirmed to be amplified and
overexpressed in esophageal adenocarcinomas and was localized within <0.5 kb from
CTSB. Furthermore, amplification of 8p22-23 was detected in one of eight gastric 
cardia adenocarcinomas but was not observed in either human lung adenocarcinomas 
(n = 39) or in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (n = 24). The relatively high 
frequency of the 8p22-23 amplification in esophageal (13.6%) and gastric cardia
(12.5%) adenocarcinomas may indicate a specificity of this amplicon for tumors of
gastroesophageal origin.

PMID: 10728696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Biol. 2000 Mar 1;219(1):59-70.

Anterior endoderm is sufficient to rescue foregut apoptosis and heart tube
morphogenesis in an embryo lacking retinoic acid.

Ghatpande S(1), Ghatpande A, Zile M, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

The vitamin A deficient (VAD) quail embryo lacks active retinoids, fails to
express normally GATA-4, and develops a nonlooping heart tube morphogenetic
defect that is a model for congenital cardiomyopathy. VAD quail embryos, or chick
embryos depleted specifically for GATA factors, show in addition abnormal foregut
development, characterized by apoptosis of the endoderm cells associated with
presumptive myocardium during the process of heart tube formation. Exogenous
retinoic acid or transplantation of normal chick embryo anterior endoderm is
sufficient to rescue apoptosis as well as GATA-4 expression and results in normal
development and heart tube morphogenesis. Normal posterior endoderm also contains
retinoids but is unable to rescue the VAD defect. Our results indicate that a
retinoid-dependent transcriptional program, mediated at least in part by GATA
factors, is critical in presumptive foregut endoderm for normal heart tube
morphogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10677255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):259-70.

BMP2 is required for early heart development during a distinct time period.

Schlange T(1), Andrée B, Arnold HH, Brand T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106,
Braunschweig, Germany.

BMP2, like its Drosophila homologue dpp, is an important signaling molecule for
specification of cardiogenic mesoderm in vertebrates. Here, we analyzed the
time-course of BMP2-requirement for early heart formation in whole chick embryos 
and in explants of antero-lateral plate mesoderm. Addition of Noggin to explants 
isolated at stage 4 and cultured for 24 h resulted in loss of NKX2.5, GATA4,
eHAND, Mef2A and vMHC expression. At stages 5-8 the individual genes showed
differential sensitivity to Noggin addition. While expression of eHAND, NKX2.5
and Mef2A was clearly reduced by Noggin vMHC was only marginally affected. In
contrast, GATA4 expression was enhanced after Noggin treatment. The developmental
period during which cardiac mesoderm required the presence of BMP signaling in
vivo was assessed by implantation of Noggin expressing cells into stage 4-8
embryos which were then cultured until stage 10-11. Complete loss of NKX2.5 and
eHAND expression was observed in embryos implanted at stages 4-6, and expression 
was still suppressed in stages 7 and 8 implanted embryos. GATA4 expression was
also blocked by Noggin at stage 4, however increased at stages 5, 6 and 7.
Explants of central mesendoderm, that normally do not form heart tissue were
employed to study the time-course of BMP2-induced cardiac gene expression. The
induction of cardiac lineage markers in central mesendoderm of stage 5 embryos
was distinct for different genes. While GATA4, -5, -6 and MEF2A were induced to
maximal levels within 6 h after BMP2 addition, eHAND and dHAND required 12 h to
reach maximum levels of expression. NKX2.5 was induced by 6 h and accumulated
over 48 h. vMHC and titin were induced at significant levels only after 48 h of
BMP2 addition. These results indicate that cardiac marker genes display distinct 
expression kinetics after BMP2 addition and differential response to Noggin
treatment suggesting complex regulation of myocardial gene expression in the
early tubular heart.

PMID: 10704850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1624-9.

Endogenous expression of Müllerian inhibiting substance in early postnatal rat
sertoli cells requires multiple steroidogenic factor-1 and GATA-4-binding sites.

Watanabe K(1), Clarke TR, Lane AH, Wang X, Donahoe PK.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgical Research Laboratories and Gene Therapy Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS) is a key element required to complete
mammalian male sex differentiation. The expression pattern of MIS is tightly
regulated in fetal, neonatal, and prepubertal testes and adult ovaries and is
well conserved among mammalian species. Although several factors have been shown 
to be essential to MIS expression, its regulatory mechanisms are not fully
understood. We have examined MIS promoter activity in 2-day postnatal primary
cultures of rat Sertoli cells that continue to express endogenous MIS mRNA. Using
this system, we found that the region between human MIS-269 and -192 is necessary
for full MIS promoter activity. We identified by DNase I footprint and
electrophoretic mobility-shift analyses a distal steroidogenic factor-1
(SF-1)-binding site that is essential for full promoter activity. Mutational
analysis of this new distal SF-1 site and the previously identified proximal SF-1
site showed that both are necessary for transcriptional activation. Moreover, the
proximal promoter also contains multiple GATA-4-binding sites that are essential 
for functional promoter activity. Thus multiple SF-1- and GATA-4-binding sites in
the MIS promoter are required for normal tissue-specific and developmental
expression of MIS.

PMCID: PMC26485
PMID: 10677509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. FEBS Lett. 2000 Feb 11;467(2-3):341-7.

A GATA binding site is involved in the regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression
in human colorectal carcinoma cell line, caco-2.

Kamitani H(1), Kameda H, Kelavkar UP, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, PO Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

The data presented implicate a GATA binding site in the transcriptional
regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1) gene expression in human colorectal
carcinoma Caco-2 cells. High expression of GATA-6 mRNA and protein was observed, 
while GATA-4 mRNA was expressed at a very low level in Caco-2 cells. The
expression of GATA-6 was down-regulated, while 15-LO-1 expression was
dramatically up-regulated after treatment with sodium butyrate (NaBT). A study
using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that a GATA binding site 
of the 15-LO-1 promoter region binds to GATA proteins present in both
undifferentiated and, to a lesser extent, NaBT-treated (differentiated) Caco-2
cells. Moreover, that DNA binding shift band was disrupted after the addition of 
GATA-6 antibody in a supershift assay in the absence of NaBT, suggesting that
GATA-6 is bound to the GATA binding site of the 15-LO-1 promoter in
undifferentiated cells. In contrast, the addition of GATA-6 antibody did not
affect the DNA binding ability in NaBT-induced differentiated cells. On the other
hand, mutation of the GATA site of the 15-LO-1 promoter decreased the
transactivation of the 15-LO-1 promoter as measured by luciferase activity in
both FBS and NaBT cultured cells, indicating an unknown GATA binding protein to
up-regulate 15-LO-1 expression. These implicate the GATA site at -240 of the
proximal region of the 15-LO-1 promoter in the basic transcription of 15-LO-1
gene expression in Caco-2 cells, with GATA-6 acting to repress 15-LO-1
expression.

PMID: 10675566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Dev Biol. 2000 Feb 15;218(2):235-47.

A conserved role for H15-related T-box transcription factors in zebrafish and
Drosophila heart formation.

Griffin KJ(1), Stoller J, Gibson M, Chen S, Yelon D, Stainier DY, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7350, USA. kgriffin@u.washington.edu

T-box transcription factors are critical regulators of early embryonic
development. We have characterized a novel zebrafish T-box transcription factor, 
hrT (H15-related T box) that is a close relative of Drosophila H15 and a recently
identified human gene. We show that Drosophila H15 and zebrafish hrT are both
expressed early during heart formation, in strong support of previous work
postulating that vertebrate and arthropod hearts are homologous structures with
conserved regulatory mechanisms. The timing and regulation of zebrafish hrT
expression in anterior lateral plate mesoderm suggest a very early role for hrT
in the differentiation of the cardiac precursors. hrT is coexpressed with gata4
and nkx2.5 not only in anterior lateral plate mesoderm but also in noncardiac
mesoderm adjacent to the tail bud, suggesting that a conserved regulatory pathway
links expression of these three genes in cardiac and noncardiac tissues. Finally,
we analyzed hrT expression in pandora mutant embryos, since these have defects in
many of the tissues that express hrT, including the heart. hrT expression is much
reduced in the early heart fields of pandora mutants, whereas it is ectopically
expressed subsequently. Using hrT expression as a marker, we describe a midline
patterning defect in pandora affecting the anterior hindbrain and associated
midline mesendodermal derivatives. We discuss the possibility that the cardiac
ventricular defect previously described in pandora and the midline defects
described here are related.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10656766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1855-63.

Electrical stimulation of neonatal cardiac myocytes activates the NFAT3 and GATA4
pathways and up-regulates the adenylosuccinate synthetase 1 gene.

Xia Y(1), McMillin JB, Lewis A, Moore M, Zhu WG, Williams RS, Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Electrically stimulated pacing of cultured cardiomyocytes serves as an
experimentally convenient and physiologically relevant in vitro model of cardiac 
hypertrophy. Electrical pacing triggers a signaling cascade that results in the
activation of the muscle-specific Adss1 gene and the repression of the nonmuscle 
Adss2 isoform. Activation of the Adss1 gene involves the calcineurin-mediated
dephosphorylation of NFAT3, allowing its translocation to the nucleus, where it
can directly participate in Adss1 gene activation. Mutational studies show that
an NFAT binding site located in the Adss1 5'-flanking region is essential for
this activation. Electrical pacing also results in the increased synthesis of
GATA4, another critical cardiac transcription factor required for Adss1 gene
expression. MEF2C also produces transactivation of the Adss1 gene reporter in
control and paced cardiac myocytes. Using the Adss1 gene as a model, these
studies are the first to demonstrate that electrical pacing activates the
calcineurin/NFAT3 and GATA4 pathways as a means of regulating cardiac gene
expression.

PMID: 10636885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell. 1999 Dec;4(6):961-9.

An early developmental transcription factor complex that is more stable on
nucleosome core particles than on free DNA.

Cirillo LA(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

In vivo footprinting studies have shown that transcription factor binding sites
for HNF3 and GATA-4 are occupied on the albumin gene enhancer in embryonic
endoderm, prior to the developmental activation of liver gene transcription. We
have investigated how these factors can stably occupy silent chromatin.
Remarkably, we find that HNF3, but not GATA-4 or a GAL4 control protein, binds
far more stably to nucleosome core particles than to free DNA. In the presence of
HNF3, GATA-4 binds stably to an HNF3-positioned nucleosome. Histone acetylation
does not affect HNF3 binding. This is evidence for stable nucleosome binding by a
transcription factor and shows that a winged helix protein is sufficient to
initiate the assembly of an enhancer complex on nonacetylated nucleosomes.

PMID: 10635321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 15;217(2):301-9.

Direct activation of a GATA6 cardiac enhancer by Nkx2.5: evidence for a
reinforcing regulatory network of Nkx2.5 and GATA transcription factors in the
developing heart.

Molkentin JD(1), Antos C, Mercer B, Taigen T, Miano JM, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio, 45229-3039, USA. molkj0@chmcc.org

The zinc finger transcription factors GATA4, -5, and -6 and the homeodomain
protein Nkx2.5 are expressed in the developing heart and have been shown to
activate a variety of cardiac-specific genes. To begin to define the regulatory
relationships between these cardiac transcription factors and to understand the
mechanisms that control their expression during cardiogenesis, we analyzed the
mouse GATA6 gene for regulatory elements sufficient to direct cardiac expression 
during embryogenesis. Using beta-galactosidase fusion constructs in transgenic
mice, a 4.3-kb 5' regulatory region that directed transcription specifically in
the cardiac lineage, beginning at the cardiac crescent stage, was identified.
Thereafter, transgene expression became compartmentalized to the outflow tract, a
portion of the right ventricle, and a limited region of the common atrial chamber
of the embryonic heart. Further dissection of this regulatory region identified a
1.8-kb cardiac-specific enhancer that recapitulated the expression pattern of the
larger region when fused to a heterologous promoter and a smaller 500-bp
subregion that retained cardiac expression, but was quantitatively weaker. The
GATA6 cardiac enhancer contained a binding site for Nkx2.5 that was essential for
cardiac-specific expression in transgenic mice. These studies demonstrate that
GATA6 is a direct target gene for Nkx2.5 in the developing heart and reveal a
mutually reinforcing regulatory network of Nkx2.5 and GATA transcription factors 
during cardiogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):225-35.

Induction and differentiation of the zebrafish heart requires fibroblast growth
factor 8 (fgf8/acerebellar).

Reifers F(1), Walsh EC, Léger S, Stainier DY, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 364,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Vertebrate heart development is initiated from bilateral lateral plate mesoderm
that expresses the Nkx2.5 and GATA4 transcription factors, but the extracellular 
signals specifying heart precursor gene expression are not known. We describe
here that the secreted signaling factor Fgf8 is expressed in and required for
development of the zebrafish heart precursors, particularly during initiation of 
cardiac gene expression. fgf8 is mutated in acerebellar (ace) mutants, and
homozygous mutant embryos do not establish normal circulation, although vessel
formation is only mildly affected. In contrast, heart development, in particular 
of the ventricle, is severely abnormal in acerebellar mutants. Several findings
argue that Fgf8 has a direct function in development of cardiac precursor cells: 
fgf8 is expressed in cardiac precursors and later in the heart ventricle. Fgf8 is
required for the earliest stages of nkx2.5 and gata4, but not gata6, expression
in cardiac precursors. Cardiac gene expression is restored in acerebellar mutant 
embryos by injecting fgf8 RNA, or by implanting a Fgf8-coated bead into the heart
primordium. Pharmacological inhibition of Fgf signalling during formation of the 
heart primordium phenocopies the acerebellar heart phenotype, confirming that Fgf
signaling is required independently of earlier functions during gastrulation.
These findings show that fgf8/acerebellar is required for induction and
patterning of myocardial precursors.

PMID: 10603341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am J Pathol. 1999 Dec;155(6):1823-9.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is expressed in pediatric yolk sac tumors.

Siltanen S(1), Anttonen M, Heikkilä P, Narita N, Laitinen M, Ritvos O, Wilson DB,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, The Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

Yolk sac tumors (YSTs) are malignant tumors that occur in the gonads of children 
and young adults, and at extragonadal sites in young children. The histological
features of YSTs are variable and can be superimposed on other germ cell tumor
histologies. Malignant endodermal cells within YSTs express alpha-fetoprotein,
which can be detected in tumor tissue or serum. However, additional markers of
endoderm differentiation would be beneficial for the classification of these
tumors. Transcription factor GATA-4 regulates the differentiation and function of
murine yolk sac endoderm, and its expression correlates with proliferation and
cell survival in certain tissues. To see whether GATA-4 plays a role in human
YSTs, we surveyed its expression in human germ cell tumors and cell lines.
Northern analysis demonstrated expression of GATA-4 mRNA in four human germ cell 
tumor lines exhibiting yolk sac endoderm differentiation. GATA-4 protein was
detected in eight of nine pediatric YSTs by immunohistochemistry. Three of five
immature teratomas exhibited GATA-4 in neural blastematous cells and in
cylindrical epithelium, whereas all 16 mature teratomas were devoid of GATA-4. We
conclude that GATA-4 is a clinically useful marker of human YSTs and speculate
that it may play a role in the maintenance of the malignant phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1866939
PMID: 10595911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 1;216(1):57-71.

A role for GATA-4/5/6 in the regulation of Nkx2.5 expression with implications
for patterning of the precardiac field.

Jiang Y(1), Drysdale TA, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

Interactions between the key regulatory genes of the cardiogenic pathway,
including those from the GATA and Nkx2 transcription factor families, are not
well defined. Treating neurula-stage Xenopus embryos with retinoic acid (RA)
causes a specific block in cardiomyocyte development that correlates with a
progressive reduction in the region of the presumptive heart-forming region
expressing Nkx2.5. In contrast, RA does not block expression of the GATA-4/5/6
genes, which are transcribed normally in an overlapping pattern with Nkx2.5
throughout cardiogenesis. Instead, GATA-4/5/6 transcription levels are increased,
including an expansion of the expression domain corresponding to lateral plate
mesoderm that is part of the early heart field, but that normally is
progressively restricted in its ability to contribute to the myocardium.
GATA-dependent regulatory sequences of the Nkx2.5 gene that implicate GATA-4/5/6 
as upstream positive regulators were described recently. However, our experiments
also indicate that GATA factors might normally antagonize transcription of
Nkx2.5. To test this hypothesis we generated a dominant negative isoform of
GATA-4 (SRG4) capable of inhibiting transcription of GATA-dependent target genes.
Ectopic expression of SRG4 results in a transient expansion of the Nkx2.5
transcript pattern, indicating that a normal function of GATA factors is to limit
the boundary of the Nkx2.5 expression domain to the most anterior ventral region 
of the heart field. Regulatory mechanisms altered by excess RA must function
normally to limit GATA-4/5/6 expression levels, to define the region of Nkx2.5
expression and regulate myocardial differentiation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10588863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Calcium. 1999 Jun;25(6):401-7.

Regulation of GATA-4 and AP-1 in transgenic mice overexpressing cardiac
calsequestrin.

Suzuki YJ(1), Ikeda T, Shi SS, Kitta K, Kobayashi YM, Morad M, Jones LR, Blumberg
JB.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University,
Boston, MA 02111, USA. suzuki_lp@hnrc.tufts.edu

Transgenic mouse hearts overexpressing the Ca(2+)-binding protein calsequestrin
(CSQ) have an accompanying 10-fold increase in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
Ca2+ load, however, exhibits slow and small Ca(2+)-induced Ca2+ release. Such
slow kinetics of Ca2+ release may have activated excitation-transcription
coupling as CSQ overexpressing hearts have induced levels of NFAT and GATA-4
activities and higher levels of c-fos mRNA and cFos protein compared to those of 
non-transgenic littermates. Adaptive responses, however, appear to downregulate
transcriptional regulators controlling c-fos gene including serum response factor
and Ca2+/cAMP response element-binding protein. CSQ-overexpressing hearts also
had decreased levels of cJun protein, resulting in downregulated AP-1 activity.
The mRNA levels of angiotensin II type1a receptor which requires AP-1 and GATA-4 
for gene transcription was suppressed in CSQ overexpressing hearts. These results
demonstrate that CSQ can regulate GATA-4- and AP-1-dependent transcriptional
events, indicating the existence of SR-nuclear circuits of signal transduction in
adult cardiac muscle.

PMID: 10579051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 1999 Dec;126(24):5679-88.

The zinc finger proteins Pannier and GATA4 function as cardiogenic factors in
Drosophila.

Gajewski K(1), Fossett N, Molkentin JD, Schulz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The regulation of cardiac gene expression by GATA zinc finger transcription
factors is well documented in vertebrates. However, genetic studies in mice have 
failed to demonstrate a function for these proteins in cardiomyocyte
specification. In Drosophila, the existence of a cardiogenic GATA factor has been
implicated through the analysis of a cardial cell enhancer of the muscle
differentiation gene D-mef2. We show that the GATA gene pannier is expressed in
the dorsal mesoderm and required for cardial cell formation while repressing a
pericardial cell fate. Ectopic expression of Pannier results in cardial cell
overproduction, while co-expression of Pannier and the homeodomain protein Tinman
synergistically activate cardiac gene expression and induce cardial cells. The
related GATA4 protein of mice likewise functions as a cardiogenic factor in
Drosophila, demonstrating an evolutionarily conserved function between Pannier
and GATA4 in heart development.

PMID: 10572044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Prenat Diagn. 1999 Sep;19(9):863-7.

Prenatal detection and mapping of a distal 8p deletion associated with congenital
heart disease.

Bhatia SN(1), Suri V, Bundy A, Krauss CM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

We report the prenatal diagnosis, at 18 weeks' gestational age of a
del(8)(p23.1-->pter) in a fetus with an atrio-ventricular canal, persistent left 
superior vena cava and hypoplastic right ventricle detected by sonographic
imaging. We further refine the breakpoints associated with this defect using
fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis (FISH). Our findings correlate with
recent reports of the localization and importance of GATA4 (a zinc finger
transcription factor) in cardiac development. Though microcephaly, mental
retardation and typical behavioural features are well described in various
deletions in 8p, the absence of notable microcephaly in this case raises the
possibility for a separate genetic aetiology for some of these features. Indeed, 
primary autosomal recessive microcephaly (MCPH1) was recently mapped to a nearby 
region and may be the cause for this frequent observation in some cases of 8p
deletions. These observations illustrate the role of FISH in prenatal diagnosis
and refinement of chromosomal breakpoints. In addition, mappings of loci
significant for cardiac development are presented. Our findings suggest that some
features of the 8p deletion syndrome may ultimately be uncoupled from one
another, and underscore the need for further study of this region of chromosome
8, in order to achieve adequate information for genetic counselling.

PMID: 10521847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):7096-105.

Bone morphogenetic proteins induce cardiomyocyte differentiation through the
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase TAK1 and cardiac transcription
factors Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4.

Monzen K(1), Shiojima I, Hiroi Y, Kudoh S, Oka T, Takimoto E, Hayashi D, Hosoda
T, Habara-Ohkubo A, Nakaoka T, Fujita T, Yazaki Y, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have been shown to induce ectopic expression
of cardiac transcription factors and beating cardiomyocytes in nonprecardiac
mesodermal cells in chicks, suggesting that BMPs are inductive signaling
molecules that participate in the development of the heart. However, the precise 
molecular mechanisms by which BMPs regulate cardiac development are largely
unknown. In the present study, we examined the molecular mechanisms by which BMPs
induce cardiac differentiation by using the P19CL6 in vitro cardiomyocyte
differentiation system, a clonal derivative of P19 embryonic teratocarcinoma
cells. We established a permanent P19CL6 cell line, P19CL6noggin, which
constitutively overexpresses the BMP antagonist noggin. Although almost all
parental P19CL6 cells differentiate into beating cardiomyocytes when treated with
1% dimethyl sulfoxide, P19CL6noggin cells did not differentiate into beating
cardiomyocytes nor did they express cardiac transcription factors or contractile 
protein genes. The failure of differentiation was rescued by overexpression of
BMP-2 or addition of BMP protein to the culture media, indicating that BMPs were 
indispensable for cardiomyocyte differentiation in this system. Overexpression of
TAK1, a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase superfamily 
which transduces BMP signaling, restored the ability of P19CL6noggin cells to
differentiate into cardiomyocytes and concomitantly express cardiac genes,
whereas overexpression of the dominant negative form of TAK1 in parental P19CL6
cells inhibited cardiomyocyte differentiation. Overexpression of both cardiac
transcription factors Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 but not of Csx/Nkx-2.5 or GATA-4
alone also induced differentiation of P19CL6noggin cells into cardiomyocytes.
These results suggest that TAK1, Csx/Nkx-2.5, and GATA-4 play a pivotal role in
the cardiogenic BMP signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC84704
PMID: 10490646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4223-34.

Control of segmental expression of the cardiac-restricted ankyrin repeat protein 
gene by distinct regulatory pathways in murine cardiogenesis.

Kuo H(1), Chen J, Ruiz-Lozano P, Zou Y, Nemer M, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD-Salk Program in Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0613, USA.

Although accumulating evidence suggests that the heart develops in a segmental
fashion, the molecular mechanisms that control regional specification of
cardiomyocytes in the developing heart remain largely unknown. In this study, we 
have used the mouse cardiac-restricted ankyrin repeat protein (CARP) gene as a
model system to study these mechanisms. The CARP gene encodes a nuclear
co-regulator for cardiac gene expression, which lies downstream of the cardiac
homeobox gene, Nkx 2.5, and is an early marker of the cardiac muscle cell
lineage. We have demonstrated that the expression of the gene is developmentally 
down regulated and dramatically induced as part of the embryonic gene program
during cardiac hypertrophy. Using a lacZ/knock-in mouse and three lines of
transgenic mouse harboring various CARP promoter/lacZ reporters, we have
identified distinct 5' cis regulatory elements of the gene that can direct heart 
segment-specific transgene expression, such as atrial versus ventricular and left
versus right. Most interestingly, a 213 base pair sequence element of the gene
was found to confer conotruncal segment-specific transgene expression. Using the 
transgene as a conotruncal segment-specific marker, we were able to document the 
developmental fate of a subset of cardiomyocytes in the conotruncus during
cardiogenesis. In addition, we have identified an essential GATA-4 binding site
in the proximal upstream regulatory region of the gene and cooperative
transcriptional regulation mediated by Nkx2.5 and GATA-4. We have shown that this
cooperative regulation is dependent on binding of GATA-4 to its cognate DNA
sequence in the promoter, which suggests that Nkx2.5 controls CARP expression, at
least in part, through GATA-4.

PMID: 10477291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Curr Biol. 1999 Aug 26;9(16):869-79.

A two-step model for the fate determination of presumptive endodermal blastomeres
in Xenopus embryos.

Yasuo H(1), Lemaire P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Institut de Biologie
du Développement de Marseille, CNRS-INSERM-Université de la Méditerannée-AP de
Marseille, Campus de Luminy, Case 907, F-13288, Marseille, Cedex 9, France.

BACKGROUND: In Xenopus, the endoderm germ layer is derived from the vegetal
blastomeres of cleavage-stage embryos. Cell transplantation experiments have
revealed that the endodermal fate becomes gradually fixed during the late
blastula stages. Sox17alpha, Mix.1, Mixer and GATA-4 encode vegetal zygotic
transcription factors with endoderm-inducing activity. The accumulation of their 
transcripts during the late blastula stages may cause determination of the
endodermal fate. VegT, a T-box transcription factor, the maternal transcripts of 
which are vegetally localised, is also required for endoderm formation.
RESULTS: We analysed the events leading to the progressive accumulation of the
transcripts for Sox17alpha, Mix.1, Mixer and GATA-4. Two phases could be
distinguished in the endodermal programme. In phase 1, Sox17alpha, Mix.1, and the
genes encoding transforming growth factor beta-related signalling molecules Xnr1,
Xnr2 and Derrière were activated cell-autonomously at around the mid-blastula
transition (MBT) by maternal determinants. In phase 2, TGFbeta signalling,
possibly involving Xnr1, Xnr2 and Derrière, led to the activation of Mixer and
GATA-4 in late blastula stages and to the reinforcement of the expression of
Sox17alpha and Mix.1. Overexpression of VegT in animal caps triggered a
developmental programme qualitatively similar to that observed in vegetal
blastomeres, except that Xnr1 and GATA-4 were not activated by the early gastrula
stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a two-step model for endoderm determination
between fertilisation and the onset of gastrulation. The initial cell-autonomous 
activation of early endodermal genes by maternal determinants including, but not 
limited to, VegT is relayed by the action of zygotic TGFbetas such as Xnr1, Xnr2 
and Derrière.

PMID: 10469589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Yale J Biol Med. 1998 May-Aug;71(3-4):195-205.

Control of histidine decarboxylase gene expression in enterochromaffin-like
cells.

Dimaline R(1), Baxendale AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom.
r.dimaline@liv.ac.uk

PMCID: PMC2578993
PMID: 10461352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Br J Pharmacol. 1999 Jul;127(5):1165-76.

Expression of immediate early genes, GATA-4, and Nkx-2.5 in adrenergic-induced
cardiac hypertrophy and during regression in adult mice.

Saadane N(1), Alpert L, Chalifour LE.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish
General Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Adrenoreceptor agonists induce a hypertrophic phenotype in vitro and in vivo. To 
investigate the molecular remodeling in chronic cardiac hypertrophy we infused
adult male mice with vehicle. isoproterenol, phenylephrine or both agonists for
3, 7 or 14 days. All drugs increased cardiac mass. After minipump removal cardiac
mass regressed to control levels within 7 days after PE and ISO treatment whereas
ISO + PE treated hearts were incompletely regressed. ANF and beta-MHC, but not
alpha-MHC, expression were increased by agonists at all time points. GATA-4,
Nkx-2.5, Egr-1, c-jun and c-fos expression were increased after 3, 7 and 14 days 
of treatment. Expression was greatest after ISO+PE> >ISO>PE>vehicle infusion
suggesting a synergistic effect of adrenoreceptor stimulation and indicating a
greater effect of beta- than alpha-adrenergic action in vivo. After PE or ISO
drug withdrawal the HW/BW was normal and Egr-1, c-jun, c-fos and GATA-4, but not 
Nkx2.5, expression dropped to control levels. HW/BW regression was incomplete
after ISO+PE and elevated levels of Egr-1, c-jun and Nkx2.5 expression remained. 
A hydralazine-mediated reduction in blood pressure had no effect on the
agonist-induced cardiac hypertrophy or gene expression. In conclusion, we found
that continued agonist stimulation, and not blood pressure. is responsible for
the maintained increase in gene expression. Further, we found the decrease in
gene expression in the regression after drug withdrawal was gene specific.

PMCID: PMC1566134
PMID: 10455263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Med. 1999 Jul;5(7):490-501.

Reciprocal changes in the expression of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6
accompany adrenocortical tumorigenesis in mice and humans.

Kiiveri S(1), Siltanen S, Rahman N, Bielinska M, Lehto VP, Huhtaniemi IT, Muglia 
LJ, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

While certain genetic changes are frequently found in adrenocortical carcinoma
cells, the molecular basis of adrenocortical tumorigenesis remains poorly
understood. Given that the transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 have been
implicated in gene expression and cellular differentiation in a variety of
tissues, including endocrine organs such as testis, we have now examined their
expression in the developing adrenal gland, as well as in adrenocortical cell
lines and tumors from mice and humans. Northern blot analysis and in situ
hybridization revealed abundant GATA-6 mRNA in the fetal and postnatal adrenal
cortex of the mouse. In contrast, little or no GATA-4 expression was detected in 
adrenal tissue during normal development. In vivo stimulation with ACTH or
suppression with dexamethasone did not affect the expression of GATA-4 or GATA-6 
in the murine adrenal gland. To assess whether changes in the expression of
GATA-4 or GATA-6 accompany adrenocortical tumorigenesis, we employed an
established mouse model. When gonadectomized, inhibin alpha/SV40 T-antigen
transgenic mice develop adrenocortical tumors in a gonadotropin-dependent
fashion. In striking contrast to the normal adrenal glands, GATA-6 mRNA was
absent from adrenocortical tumors or tumor-derived cell lines, while GATA-4 mRNA 
and protein were abundantly expressed in the tumors and tumor cell lines.
Analogous results were obtained with human tissue samples; GATA-4 expression was 
detected in human adrenocortical carcinomas but not in normal tissue, adenomas,
or pheochromocytomas. Taken together these results suggest different roles for
GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the adrenal gland, and implicate GATA-4 in adrenal
tumorigenesis. Immunohistochemical detection of GATA-4 may serve as a useful
marker in the differential diagnosis of human adrenal tumors.

PMCID: PMC2230442
PMID: 10449810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Aug;13(8):1388-401.

Transcription factor GATA-4 enhances Müllerian inhibiting substance gene
transcription through a direct interaction with the nuclear receptor SF-1.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Ontogénie et Reproduction Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Pavillon Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval,
Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada.

Secretion of Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) by Sertoli cells of the fetal
testis and subsequent regression of the Müllerian ducts in the male embryo is a
crucial event that contributes to proper sex differentiation. The zinc finger
transcription factor GATA-4 and nuclear receptor SF-1 are early markers of
Sertoli cells that have been shown to regulate MIS transcription. The fact that
the GATA and SF-1 binding sites are adjacent to one another in the MIS promoter
raised the possibility that both factors might transcriptionally cooperate to
regulate MIS expression. Indeed, coexpression of both factors resulted in a
strong synergistic activation of the MIS promoter. GATA-4/SF-1 synergism was the 
result of a direct protein-protein interaction mediated through the zinc finger
region of GATA-4. Remarkably, synergy between GATA-4 and SF-1 on a variety of
different SF-1 targets did not absolutely require GATA binding to DNA. Moreover, 
synergy with SF-1 was also observed with other GATA family members. Thus, these
data not only provide a clearer understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
control the sex-specific expression of the MIS gene but also reveal a potentially
novel mechanism for the regulation of SF-1-dependent genes in tissues where SF-1 
and GATA factors are coexpressed.

PMID: 10446911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Z Gastroenterol. 1999 May;37(5):463-5.

[Different functions of transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 in regulation of 
intestinal epithelial differentiation].

[Article in German]

Mühlhöfer A(1), Gross M, Zoller WG.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Klinikum Innenstadt der LMU München.

PMID: 10413848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Physiol. 1999 Jul;277(1 Pt 2):H324-30.

Cardiac expression of the Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger NCX1 is GATA factor dependent.

Nicholas SB(1), Philipson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Medicine and the Cardiovascular Research
Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1760, USA. snichola@med1.medsch.ucla.edu

The cardiac sarcolemmal Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger plays a primary role in Ca(2+)
efflux and is important in regulating intracellular Ca(2+) and beat-to-beat
contractility. Of the three Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger genes cloned (NCX1, NCX2, and 
NCX3), only NCX1 is expressed in cardiac myocytes. NCX1 has alternative promoters
for heart, kidney, and brain tissue-specific transcripts. Analysis of the cardiac
NCX1 promoter (at -336 bp) identified a cardiac-specific minimum promoter (at
-137) and two GATA sites (at -75 and -145). In this study, gel shift and
supershift analyses identified GATA-4 in primary neonatal cardiac myocytes.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the GATA-4 site at -75 abolishes binding and reduces
activity of the minimum and full-length promoters by >90 and approximately 60%,
respectively. Mutation of the GATA site at -145 reduces activity of the
full-length promoter by approximately 30%. Mutation of an E-box at -175 does not 
alter promoter activity.

PMID: 10409212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17987-96.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta and GATA-4 binding regions within the
promoter of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene are required
for transcription in rat ovarian cells.

Silverman E(1), Eimerl S, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Alexander Silberman Institute of Life
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) is a vital accessory protein
required for biosynthesis of steroid hormones from cholesterol. The present study
shows that in primary granulosa cells from prepubertal rat ovary, StAR transcript
and protein are acutely induced by gonadotropin (FSH). To determine the sequence 
elements required for hormone inducibility of the StAR promoter, truncated
regions of the -1002/+6 sequence of the mouse gene were ligated to pCAT-Basic
plasmid and transfected by electroporation to freshly prepared cells. FSH
inducibility determined over a 6-h incubation was 10-40-fold above basal levels
of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity. These functional studies,
supported by electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that two sites were 
sufficient for transcription of the StAR promoter constructs: a non-consensus
binding sequence (-81/-72) for CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
and a consensus motif for GATA-4 binding (-61/-66). Western analyses showed that 
GATA-4 is constitutively expressed in the granulosa cells, while all isoforms of 
C/EBPbeta were markedly inducible by FSH. Site-directed mutations of both binding
sequences practically ablated both basal and hormone-driven chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activities to less than 5% of the parental -96/+6 construct.
Unlike earlier notions, elimination of potential binding sites for steroidogenic 
factor-1, a well known tissue-specific transcription factor, did not impair StAR 
transcription. Consequently, we propose that C/EBPbeta and GATA-4 represent a
novel combination of transcription factors capable of conferring an acute
response to hormones upon their concomitant binding to the StAR promoter.

PMID: 10364248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):17242-8.

Retinoic acid-regulated expression of fibroblast growth factor 3 requires the
interaction between a novel transcription factor and GATA-4.

Murakami A(1), Thurlow J, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

fgf-3 shows a complex spatial-temporal pattern of transcription during mouse
development, and the gene product appears to be an important intercellular
signaling molecule. Here we show that the major enhancer, which is obligatory for
transcription, is composed of three elements with different properties. Both
functional analyses in undifferentiated and differentiated F9 cells and
characterization of DNA-protein complexes in vitro have identified the sequence
motifs GTGACT(C), ATTGT, and GATA as the key transcription factor binding sites. 
The GTGACT(C) motif, while not essential, is required for full enhancer activity.
However, binding at ATTGT is crucial for transcriptional activity and is required
for cooperative binding at the proximal GATA site. The GATA binding site mediates
the retinoic acid/dibutyryl cyclic AMP stimulation of transcription and
correlates with the binding of Gata-4 which is induced by retinoic acid in
differentiating F9 cells. The ATTGT and GATA motifs are inactive when placed
separately on a minimal thymidine kinase (TK) promoter, but together they act as 
a strong retinoic acid-regulated enhancer. In undifferentiated F9 cells, gata-4
expression stimulates the fgf-3 promoter, whereas in differentiated F9 cells
already expressing gata-4, no further increase in promoter activity was observed.

PMID: 10358083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):85-91.

GATA transcription factors and cardiac development.

Charron F(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Laboratoire de développement et 
différenciation cardiaques, Québec, Canada.

Three members of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-4, -5, and -6,
are expressed in the developing heart. One family member, GATA-5, is restricted
to the endocardium while the other two, GATA-4 and -6, are present in the
myocardium where they apparently fulfil distinct functions. The mechanisms
underlying GATA factor specificity are not fully understood but may involve
interaction with other tissue-restricted or ubiquitous co-factors. Thus,
combinatorial interaction among GATA factors or between GATA factors and other
co-factors may differentially control various stages of cardiogenesis.

PMID: 10355032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4495-502.

FOG-2, a heart- and brain-enriched cofactor for GATA transcription factors.

Lu JR(1), McKinsey TA, Xu H, Wang DZ, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235-9148, USA.

Members of the GATA family of zinc finger transcription factors have been shown
to play important roles in the control of gene expression in a variety of cell
types. GATA-1, -2, and -3 are expressed primarily in hematopoietic cell lineages 
and are required for proliferation and differentiation of multiple hematopoietic 
cell types, whereas GATA-4, -5, and -6 are expressed in the heart, where they
activate cardiac muscle structural genes. Friend of GATA-1 (FOG) is a multitype
zinc finger protein that interacts with GATA-1 and serves as a cofactor for
GATA-1-mediated transcription. FOG is coexpressed with GATA-1 in developing
erythroid and megakaryocyte cell lineages and cooperates with GATA-1 to control
erythropoiesis. We describe a novel FOG-related factor, FOG-2, that is expressed 
predominantly in the developing and adult heart, brain, and testis. FOG-2
interacts with GATA factors, and interaction of GATA-4 and FOG-2 results in
either synergistic activation or repression of GATA-dependent cardiac promoters, 
depending on the specific promoter and the cell type in which they are tested.
The properties of FOG-2 suggest its involvement in the control of cardiac and
neural gene expression by GATA transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC104407
PMID: 10330188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4355-65.

Cooperative interaction between GATA-4 and GATA-6 regulates myocardial gene
expression.

Charron F(1), Paradis P, Bronchain O, Nemer G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Two members of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-4 and GATA-6, are
expressed in the developing and postnatal myocardium and are equally potent
transactivators of several cardiac promoters. However, several in vitro and in
vivo lines of evidence suggest distinct roles for the two factors in the heart.
Since identification of the endogenous downstream targets of GATA factors would
greatly help to elucidate their exact functions, we have developed an
adenovirus-mediated antisense strategy to specifically inhibit GATA-4 and GATA-6 
protein production in postnatal cardiomyocytes. Expression of several endogenous 
cardiac genes was significantly down-regulated in cells lacking GATA-4 or GATA-6,
indicating that these factors are required for the maintenance of the cardiac
genetic program. Interestingly, transcription of some genes like the alpha- and
beta-myosin heavy-chain (alpha- and beta-MHC) genes was preferentially regulated 
by GATA-4 due, in part, to higher affinity of GATA-4 for their promoter GATA
element. However, transcription of several other genes, including the atrial
natriuretic factor and B-type natriuretic peptide (ANF and BNP) genes, was
similarly down-regulated in cardiomyocytes lacking one or both GATA factors,
suggesting that GATA-4 and GATA-6 could act through the same transcriptional
pathway. Consistent with this, GATA-4 and GATA-6 were found to colocalize in
postnatal cardiomyocytes and to interact functionally and physically to provide
cooperative activation of the ANF and BNP promoters. The results identify for the
first time bona fide in vivo targets for GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the myocardium. The
data also show that GATA factors act in concert to regulate distinct subsets of
genes, suggesting that combinatorial interactions among GATA factors may
differentially control various cellular processes.

PMCID: PMC104395
PMID: 10330176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14204-9.

Characterization of the murine A1 adenosine receptor promoter, potent regulation 
by GATA-4 and Nkx2.5.

Rivkees SA(1), Chen M, Kulkarni J, Browne J, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. Scott.Rivkees@Yale.edu

Adenosine acts via A1 adenosine receptors (A1ARs) in the heart and brain to
potently influence mammalian physiology. A1ARs are expressed very early in
embryonic development, and A1ARs are among the earliest expressed G protein
coupled receptors in the heart and brain. To understand the biologic basis of
A1AR expression, a genomic fragment containing the murine A1AR promoter was
cloned. Reporter assay studies using DDT1 MF2 cells that express A1ARs revealed
that 500 base pairs of the proximal A1AR promoter contained essential elements
for A1AR gene expression. Transgenic mice with A1AR proximal promoter coupled
with the beta-galactosidase reporter gene had heavy labeling of the brain and
atria, consistent with normal patterns of A1AR expression. Within the proximal
A1AR promoter, putative binding sites for cardiac transcription factors GATA and 
Nkx2.5 were identified. Co-expression studies revealed that GATA-4 and Nkx2.5
could individually drive A1AR promoter activity and act synergistically to
activate A1AR expression. These observations suggest that embryonic A1AR
expression involves activation of the A1AR promoter by GATA-4 and Nkx2.5.

PMID: 10318839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Differentiation. 1999 Mar;64(3):173-84.

Expression of the alpha 6A integrin splice variant in developing mouse embryonic 
stem cell aggregates and correlation with cardiac muscle differentiation.

Thorsteinsdóttir S(1), Roelen BA, Goumans MJ, Ward-van Oostwaard D, Gaspar AC,
Mummery CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Portugal.
solveig@fc.ul.pt

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells grown in aggregates give rise to several
different cell types, including cardiac muscle. Given the lack of cardiac muscle 
cell lines, ES cells can be a useful tool in the study of cardiac muscle
differentiation. The laminin-binding integrin alpha 6 beta 1 exists in two
different splice variant forms of the alpha chain (alpha 6A and alpha 6B), the
alpha 6A form having been implicated as possibly playing a role in cardiac muscle
development, based on its distribution pattern [4, 53]. In this study we
characterise the ES cell model system in terms of the expression of the two
different alpha 6 splice variants. We correlate their expression with that of
muscle markers and the transcription factor GATA-4, using the reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We confirm that alpha 6B is
constitutively expressed by ES cells. In contrast, alpha 6A expression appears
later and overlaps in time with a period when the muscle marker myosin light
chain-2V (MLC-2V) is expressed, but no MyoD is present, which indicates the
presence of cardiac muscle cells in the aggregates. We further show that GATA-4
is present at the same time. Culturing the aggregates under conditions that
stimulate (transforming growth factor beta 1 supplement) or inhibit (TGF beta 1
plus 10(-9) M retinoic acid supplement) cardiac muscle differentiation does not
lead to any qualitative differences in the timing of expression of these genes,
but quantitative changes cannot be excluded. The TGF beta 1 supplement does,
however, lead to a relatively greater expression of alpha 6A compared to alpha 6B
than the TGF beta 1 plus 10(-9) M RA supplement after 6 days in culture,
suggesting that alpha 6A expression is favoured under conditions that stimulate
cardiac muscle differentiation. The switch towards alpha 6A expression in ES cell
aggregates is paralleled by expression of the binding receptor for TGF beta (T
beta RII). Stable expression of a mutated (dominant negative) T beta RII in ES
cells, however, still resulted in (TGF beta-independent) upregulation of alpha
6A, demonstrating that these events were not causally related and that parallel
or alternative regulatory pathways exist. The initial characterisation of
differentiating ES cell aggregates in terms of alpha 6A integrin subunit
expression suggests that this model system could be a valuable tool in the study 
of the role of the alpha 6A beta 1 integrin in cardiac muscle differentiation.

PMID: 10234814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Development. 1999 May;126(10):2053-62.

A role for serum response factor in coronary smooth muscle differentiation from
proepicardial cells.

Landerholm TE(1), Dong XR, Lu J, Belaguli NS, Schwartz RJ, Majesky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Cell Biology and The Graduate Program in
Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Coronary artery smooth muscle (SM) cells originate from proepicardial cells that 
migrate over the surface of the heart, undergo epithelial to mesenchymal
transformation and invade the subepicardial and cardiac matrix. Prior to contact 
with the heart, proepicardial cells exhibit no expression of smooth muscle
markers including SMalphaactin, SM22alpha, calponin, SMgammaactin or SM-myosin
heavy chain detectable by RT-PCR or by immunostaining. To identify factors
required for coronary smooth muscle differentiation, we excised proepicardial
cells from Hamburger-Hamilton stage-17 quail embryos and examined them ex vivo.
Proepicardial cells initially formed an epithelial colony that was uniformly
positive for cytokeratin, an epicardial marker. Transcripts for flk-1, Nkx 2.5,
GATA4 or smooth muscle markers were undetectable, indicating an absence of
endothelial, myocardial or preformed smooth muscle cells. By 24 hours,
cytokeratin-positive cells became SMalphaactin-positive. Moreover, serum response
factor, undetectable in freshly isolated proepicardial cells, became strongly
expressed in virtually all epicardial cells. By 72 hours, a subset of epicardial 
cells exhibited a rearrangement of cytoskeletal actin, focal adhesion formation
and acquisition of a motile phenotype. Coordinately with mesenchymal
transformation, calponin, SM22alpha and SMgammaactin became expressed. By 5-10
days, SM-myosin heavy chain mRNA was found, by which time nearly all cells had
become mesenchymal. RT-PCR showed that large increases in serum response factor
expression coincide with smooth muscle differentiation in vitro. Two different
dominant-negative serum response factor constructs prevented the appearance of
calponin-, SM22alpha- and SMgammaactin-positive cells. By contrast,
dominant-negative serum response factor did not block mesenchymal transformation 
nor significantly reduce the number of cytokeratin-positive cells. These results 
indicate that the stepwise differentiation of coronary smooth muscle cells from
proepicardial cells requires transcriptionally active serum response factor.

PMID: 10207131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Mar 19;83(3):201-6.

GATA4 haploinsufficiency in patients with interstitial deletion of chromosome
region 8p23.1 and congenital heart disease.

Pehlivan T(1), Pober BR, Brueckner M, Garrett S, Slaugh R, Van Rheeden R, Wilson 
DB, Watson MS, Hing AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Previous studies have shown that patients with deletion of distal human
chromosome arm 8p may have congenital heart disease and other physical anomalies.
The gene encoding GATA-4, a zinc finger transcription factor implicated in
cardiac gene expression and development, localizes to chromosome region 8p23.1.
To examine whether GATA-4 deficiency is present in patients with monosomy of
8p23.1 with congenital heart disease, we performed fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with a GATA4 probe on cells from a series of patients with
interstitial deletion of 8p23.1. Four individuals with del(8)(p23.1) and
congenital heart disease were found to be haploinsufficient at the GATA4 locus by
FISH. The GATA4 gene was not deleted in a fifth patient with del(8)(p23.1) who
lacked cardiac anomalies. FISH analysis on cells from 48 individuals with
congenital heart disease and normal karyotypes failed to detect any
submicroscopic deletions at the GATA4 locus. We conclude that haploinsufficiency 
at the GATA4 locus is often seen in patients with del(8)(p23.1) and congenital
heart disease. Based on these findings and recent studies showing that
haploinsufficiency for other cardiac transcription factor genes (e.g., TBX5,
NKX2-5) causes congenital heart disease, we postulate that GATA-4 deficiency may 
contribute to the phenotype of patients with monosomy of 8p23.1.

PMID: 10096597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):8231-9.

Context-dependent transcriptional cooperation mediated by cardiac transcription
factors Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4.

Shiojima I(1), Komuro I, Oka T, Hiroi Y, Mizuno T, Takimoto E, Monzen K, Aikawa
R, Akazawa H, Yamazaki T, Kudoh S, Yazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Although the cardiac homeobox gene Csx/Nkx-2.5 is essential for normal heart
development, little is known about its regulatory mechanisms. In a search for the
downstream target genes of Csx/Nkx-2. 5, we found that the atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) gene promoter was strongly transactivated by Csx/Nkx-2.5. Deletion 
and mutational analyses of the ANP promoter revealed that the Csx/Nkx-2.5-binding
element (NKE2) located at -240 was required for high level transactivation by
Csx/Nkx-2.5. We also found that Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 displayed synergistic
transcriptional activation of the ANP promoter, and in contrast to previous
reports (Durocher, D., Charron, F., Warren, R., Schwartz, R. J., and Nemer, M.
(1997) EMBO J. 16, 5687-5696; Lee, Y., Shioi, T., Kasahara, H., Jobe, S. M.,
Wiese, R. J., Markham, B., and Izumo, S (1998) Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 3120-3129),
this synergism was dependent on binding of Csx/Nkx-2.5 to NKE2, but not on
GATA-4-DNA interactions. Although GATA-4 also potentiated the Csx/Nkx-2.5-induced
transactivation of the artificial promoter that contains multimerized
Csx/Nkx-2.5-binding sites, Csx/Nkx-2.5 reduced the GATA-4-induced transactivation
of the GATA-4-dependent promoters. These findings indicate that the cooperative
transcriptional regulation mediated by Csx/Nkx-2.5 and GATA-4 is promoter
context-dependent and suggest that the complex cis-trans interactions may
fine-tune gene expression in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 10075728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Clin Invest. 1999 Mar;103(5):697-705.

Cardiomyocytes can be generated from marrow stromal cells in vitro.

Makino S(1), Fukuda K, Miyoshi S, Konishi F, Kodama H, Pan J, Sano M, Takahashi
T, Hori S, Abe H, Hata J, Umezawa A, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiopulmonary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

We have isolated a cardiomyogenic cell line (CMG) from murine bone marrow stromal
cells. Stromal cells were immortalized, treated with 5-azacytidine, and
spontaneously beating cells were repeatedly screened. The cells showed a
fibroblast-like morphology, but the morphology changed after 5-azacytidine
treatment in approximately 30% of the cells; they connected with adjoining cells 
after one week, formed myotube-like structures, began spontaneously beating after
two weeks, and beat synchronously after three weeks. They expressed atrial
natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide and were stained with
anti-myosin, anti-desmin, and anti-actinin antibodies. Electron microscopy
revealed a cardiomyocyte-like ultrastructure, including typical sarcomeres, a
centrally positioned nucleus, and atrial granules. These cells had several types 
of action potentials, such as sinus node-like and ventricular cell-like action
potentials. All cells had a long action potential duration or plateau, a
relatively shallow resting membrane potential, and a pacemaker-like late
diastolic slow depolarization. Analysis of the isoform of contractile protein
genes, such as myosin heavy chain, myosin light chain, and alpha-actin, indicated
that their muscle phenotype was similar to that of fetal ventricular
cardiomyocytes. These cells expressed Nkx2.5/Csx, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF-2C mRNA
before 5-azacytidine treatment and expressed MEF-2A and MEF-2D after treatment.
This new cell line provides a powerful model for the study of cardiomyocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC408125
PMID: 10074487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Endocrinology. 1999 Mar;140(3):1470-80.

Expression and regulation of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in
developing mouse testis.

Ketola I(1), Rahman N, Toppari J, Bielinska M, Porter-Tinge SB, Tapanainen JS,
Huhtaniemi IT, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Previous studies have shown that transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are
expressed in granulosa and thecal cells of the mouse ovary and that GATA-4
expression in ovarian tissue is regulated by gonadotropins. Given the emerging
role of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in gonadal cells, we have now studied the expression
and regulation of these factors in the mouse testis and testicular cell lines. In
situ hybridization demonstrated GATA-4 messenger RNA (mRNA) in the fetal testis
at 13.5 days postcoitum. Both GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts were observed in late
fetal, neonatal, juvenile, and adult Sertoli cells. In addition, GATA-4 mRNA was 
detected in interstitial cells throughout development. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrated GATA-4 protein in both Sertoli and Leydig cells in postnatal
animals. The regulation of GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression was explored using
established testicular cell lines. Treatment of Leydig tumor cell lines with hCG 
resulted in a modest, but statistically significant, increase in the steady state
level of GATA-4 mRNA, comparable to the previously described effect of FSH on
GATA-4 expression in Sertoli cell lines. Gonadotropin or androgen action was not,
however, a prerequisite for the basal expression of GATA-4 or GATA-6 in the
testis, as their presence in Sertoli and Leydig cells was demonstrated in
genetically hypogonadal hpg mice, in rats treated with GnRH receptor antagonist, 
and in Sertoli cells after chemical abolition of Leydig cells. Cotransfection
studies using a GATA-4 expression plasmid and an inhibin alpha promoter/reporter 
gene construct in Leydig and granulosa tumor cell lines revealed that the inhibin
alpha promoter harboring essential GATA-binding sites can be trans-activated by
GATA-4. In light of these results, we propose that transcription factors GATA-4
and GATA-6 play differing roles in the maturation and function of testicular
somatic cells.

PMID: 10067876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Biol. 1999 Feb 15;206(2):206-18.

Retinoid signaling required for normal heart development regulates GATA-4 in a
pathway distinct from cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Kostetskii I(1), Jiang Y, Kostetskaia E, Yuan S, Evans T, Zile M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, 48824, USA.

Vitamin A is essential for normal embryonic cardiogenesis. The vitamin
A-deficient phenotype in the avian embryo includes an abnormal heart tube closed 
at the sinus venosus and the absence of large vessels that normally connect the
embryonic heart to the developing circulatory system. In vitamin A-deficient
embryos the expression of cardiomyocyte differentiation genes, including
atrial-specific myosin heavy chain, ventricular-specific myosin, and sarcomeric
myosins as well as the putative cardiomyocyte specification gene Nkx-2.5, is not 
altered. However, the expression of transcription factor GATA-4 is severely
decreased in the heart-forming regions of vitamin A-deficient stage 7-10 embryos.
Significantly, GATA-4 transcripts are completely lacking in the lateral mesoderm 
posterior to the heart, in the area of the developing cardiac inflow tract that
later displays prominent morphological defects, including a closed nonseptated
heart lacking a sinus venosus. The administration of retinol to the vitamin
A-deficient embryo restores GATA-4 expression and completely rescues the vitamin 
A-deficient phenotype. Our results indicate that GATA-4 is a component of the
retinoid-mediated cardiogenic pathway unlinked to cardiomyocyte differentiation, 
but involved in the morphogenesis of the posterior heart tube and the development
of the cardiac inflow tract.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9986733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 2;96(3):956-61.

Molecular cloning of FOG-2: a modulator of transcription factor GATA-4 in
cardiomyocytes.

Svensson EC(1), Tufts RL, Polk CE, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

GATA transcription factors are important regulators of both hematopoiesis
(GATA-1/2/3) and cardiogenesis (GATA-4) in mammals. The transcriptional
activities of the GATA proteins are modulated by their interactions with other
transcription factors and with transcriptional coactivators and repressors.
Recently, two related zinc finger proteins, U-shaped (USH) and Friend of GATA-1
(FOG) have been reported to interact with the GATA proteins Pannier and GATA-1,
respectively, and to modulate their transcriptional activities in vitro and in
vivo. In this report, we describe the molecular cloning and characterization of a
third FOG-related protein, FOG-2. FOG-2 is an 1,151 amino acid nuclear protein
that contains eight zinc finger motifs that are structurally related to those of 
both FOG and USH. FOG-2 is first expressed in the mouse embryonic heart and
septum transversum at embryonic day 8.5 and is subsequently expressed in the
developing neuroepithelium and urogenital ridge. In the adult, FOG-2 is expressed
predominately in the heart, brain, and testis. FOG-2 associates physically with
the N-terminal zinc finger of GATA-4 both in vitro and in vivo. This interaction 
appears to modulate specifically the transcriptional activity of GATA-4 because
overexpression of FOG-2 in both NIH 3T3 cells and primary rat cardiomyocytes
represses GATA-4-dependent transcription from multiple cardiac-restricted
promoters. Taken together, these results implicate FOG-2 as a novel modulator of 
GATA-4 function during cardiac development and suggest a paradigm in which
tissue-specific interactions between different FOG and GATA proteins regulate the
differentiation of distinct mesodermal cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC15332
PMID: 9927675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):839-49.

Identification of upstream regulatory regions in the heart-expressed homeobox
gene Nkx2-5.

Reecy JM(1), Li X, Yamada M, DeMayo FJ, Newman CS, Harvey RP, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. schwartz@bcm.tmc.edu

Nkx2-5 marks the earliest recognizable cardiac progenitor cells, and is activated
in response to inductive signals involved in lineage specification. Nkx2-5 is
also expressed in the developing foregut, thyroid, spleen, stomach and tongue.
One approach to elucidate the signals involved in cardiogenesis was to examine
the transcriptional regulation of early lineage markers such as Nkx2-5. We
generated F0 transgenic mice, which carry Nkx2-5 flanking sequences linked to a
lacZ reporter gene. We identified multiple regulatory regions located within the 
proximal 10.7 kb of the Nkx2-5 gene. In addition to a proximal promoter, we
identified a second promoter and a novel upstream exon that could participate in 
the regulation of Nkx2-5 transcription. Although used rarely in normal
development, this novel exon could be spliced into the Nkx2-5 coding region in
several ways, thereby potentially creating novel Nkx2-5 protein isoforms, whose
transcriptional activity is greatly diminished as compared to wild-type Nkx2-5.
An enhancer that directs expression in pharynx, spleen, thyroid and stomach was
identified within 3.5 kb of exon 1 between the coding exon 1 and the novel
upstream exon 1a. Two or more enhancers upstream of exon 1a were capable of
driving expression in the cardiac crescent, throughout the myocardium of the
early heart tube, then in the outflow tract and right ventricle of the looped
heart tube. A negative element was also located upstream of exon1a, which
interacted in complex ways with enhancers to direct correct spatial expression.
In addition, potential autoregulatory elements can be cooperatively stimulated by
Nkx2-5 and GATA-4. Our results demonstrate that a complex suite of interacting
regulatory domains regulate Nkx2-5 transcription. Dissection of these elements
should reveal essential features of cardiac induction and positive and negative
signaling within the cardiac field.

PMID: 9895330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):526-36.

Identification of the in vivo casein kinase II phosphorylation site within the
homeodomain of the cardiac tisue-specifying homeobox gene product Csx/Nkx2.5.

Kasahara H(1), Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Department
of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Csx/Nkx2.5, a member of the homeodomain-containing transcription factors, serves 
critical developmental functions in heart formation in vertebrates and
nonvertebrates. In this study the putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) of
Csx/Nkx2.5 was identified by site-directed mutagenesis to the amino terminus of
the homeodomain, which is conserved in almost all homeodomain proteins. When the 
putative NLS of Csx/Nkx2.5 was mutated a significant amount of the
cytoplasmically localized Csx/Nkx2.5 was unphosphorylated, in contrast to the
nuclearly localized Csx/Nkx2.5, which is serine- and threonine-phosphorylated,
suggesting that Csx/Nkx2.5 phosphorylation is regulated, at least in part, by
intracellular localization. Tryptic phosphopeptide mapping indicated that
Csx/Nkx2.5 has at least five phosphorylation sites. Using in-gel kinase assays,
we detected a Csx/Nkx2.5 kinase whose molecular mass is approximately 40 kDa in
both cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. Mutational analysis and in vitro kinase
assays suggested that this 40-kDa Csx/Nkx2.5 kinase is a catalytic subunit of
casein kinase II (CKII) that phosphorylates the serine residue between the first 
and second helix of the homeodomain. This CKII site is phosphorylated in vivo.
CKII-dependent phosphorylation of the homeodomain increased Csx/Nkx2. 5 DNA
binding. Serine-to-alanine mutation at the CKII phosphorylation site reduced
transcriptional activity when the carboxyl-terminal repressor domain was deleted.
Although the precise biological function of Csx/Nkx2.5 phosphorylation by CKII
remains to be determined, it may play an important role, as this CKII
phosphorylation site within the homeodomain is fully conserved in all known
members of the NK2 family of the homeobox genes.

PMCID: PMC83910
PMID: 9858576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 25;273(52):34904-10.

Myocyte enhancer factor 2C and Nkx2-5 up-regulate each other's expression and
initiate cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

Skerjanc IS(1), Petropoulos H, Ridgeway AG, Wilton S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada. skerjanc@julian.uwo.ca

The Nkx2-5 homeodomain protein plays a key role in cardiomyogenesis. Ectopic
expression in frog and zebrafish embryos results in an enlarged myocardium;
however, expression of Nkx2-5 in fibroblasts was not able to trigger the
development of beating cardiac muscle. In order to examine the ability of Nkx2-5 
to modulate endogenous cardiac specific gene expression in cells undergoing early
stages of differentiation, P19 cell lines overexpressing Nkx2-5 were
differentiated in the absence of Me2SO. Nkx2-5 expression induced
cardiomyogenesis in these cultures aggregated without Me2SO. During
differentiation into cardiac muscle, Nkx2-5 expression resulted in the activation
of myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C), but not MEF2A, -B, or -D. In order to
compare the abilities of Nkx2-5 and MEF2C to induce cellular differentiation, P19
cells overexpressing MEF2C were aggregated in the absence of Me2SO. Similar to
Nkx2-5, MEF2C expression initiated cardiomyogenesis, resulting in the
up-regulation of Brachyury T, bone morphogenetic protein-4, Nkx2-5, GATA-4,
cardiac alpha-actin, and myosin heavy chain expression. These findings indicate
the presence of a positive regulatory network between Nkx2-5 and MEF2C and show
that both factors can direct early stages of cell differentiation into a
cardiomyogenic pathway.

PMID: 9857019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):75-84.

Control of early cardiac-specific transcription of Nkx2-5 by a GATA-dependent
enhancer.

Lien CL(1), Wu C, Mercer B, Webb R, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Oncology and Pathology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75235-9148, USA.

The homeobox gene Nkx2-5 is the earliest known marker of the cardiac lineage in
vertebrate embryos. Nkx2-5 expression is first detected in mesodermal cells
specified to form heart at embryonic day 7.5 in the mouse and expression is
maintained throughout the developing and adult heart. In addition to the heart,
Nkx2-5 is transiently expressed in the developing pharynx, thyroid and stomach.
To investigate the mechanisms that initiate cardiac transcription during
embryogenesis, we analyzed the Nkx2-5 upstream region for regulatory elements
sufficient to direct expression of a lacZ transgene in the developing heart of
transgenic mice. We describe a cardiac enhancer, located about 9 kilobases
upstream of the Nkx2-5 gene, that fully recapitulates the expression pattern of
the endogenous gene in cardiogenic precursor cells from the onset of cardiac
lineage specification and throughout the linear and looping heart tube.
Thereafter, as the atrial and ventricular chambers become demarcated, enhancer
activity becomes restricted to the developing right ventricle. Transcription of
Nkx2-5 in pharynx, thyroid and stomach is controlled by regulatory elements
separable from the cardiac enhancer. This distal cardiac enhancer contains a
high-affinity binding site for the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription
factor GATA4 that is essential for transcriptional activity. These results reveal
a novel GATA-dependent mechanism for activation of Nkx2-5 transcription in the
developing heart and indicate that regulation of Nkx2-5 is controlled in a
modular manner, with multiple regulatory regions responding to distinct
transcriptional networks in different compartments of the developing heart.

PMID: 9834187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 15;12(22):3579-90.

GATA6 regulates HNF4 and is required for differentiation of visceral endoderm in 
the mouse embryo.

Morrisey EE(1), Tang Z, Sigrist K, Lu MM, Jiang F, Ip HS, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637 USA.

GATA6 belongs to a family of zinc finger transcription factors that play
important roles in transducing nuclear events that regulate cellular
differentiation and embryonic morphogenesis in vertebrate species. To examine the
function of GATA6 during embryonic development, gene targeting was used to
generate GATA6-deficient (GATA6(-/-)) ES cells and mice harboring a null mutation
in GATA6. Differentiated embryoid bodies derived from GATA6(-/-) ES cells lack a 
covering layer of visceral endoderm and severely attenuate, or fail to express,
genes encoding early and late endodermal markers, including HNF4, GATA4,
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and HNF3beta. Homozygous GATA6(-/-) mice died between
embryonic day (E) 6.5 and E7. 5 and exhibited a specific defect in endoderm
differentiation including severely down-regulated expression of GATA4 and absence
of HNF4 gene expression. Moreover, widespread programmed cell death was observed 
within the embryonic ectoderm of GATA6-deficient embryos, a finding also observed
in HNF4-deficient embryos. Consistent with these data, forced expression of GATA6
activated the HNF4 promoter in nonendodermal cells. Finally, to examine the
function of GATA6 during later embryonic development, GATA6(-/-)-C57BL/6 chimeric
mice were generated. lacZ-tagged GATA6(-/-) ES cells contributed to all embryonic
tissues with the exception of the endodermally derived bronchial epithelium.
Taken together, these data suggest a model in which GATA6 lies upstream of HNF4
in a transcriptional cascade that regulates differentiation of the visceral
endoderm. In addition, these data demonstrate that GATA6 is required for
establishment of the endodermally derived bronchial epithelium.

PMCID: PMC317242
PMID: 9832509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Development. 1998 Dec;125(24):4909-17.

GATA transcription factors as potentiators of gut endoderm differentiation.

Bossard P(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

Gene inactivation studies have shown that members of the GATA family of
transcription factors are critical for endoderm differentiation in mice, flies
and worms, yet how these proteins function in such a conserved developmental
context has not been understood. We use in vivo footprinting of mouse embryonic
endoderm cells to show that a DNA-binding site for GATA factors is occupied on a 
liver-specific, transcriptional enhancer of the serum albumin gene. GATA site
occupancy occurs in gut endoderm cells at their pluripotent stage: the cells have
the potential to initiate tissue development but they have not yet been committed
to express albumin or other tissue-specific genes. The GATA-4 isoform accounts
for about half of the nuclear GATA-factor-binding activity in the endoderm. GATA 
site occupancy persists during hepatic development and is necessary for the
activity of albumin gene enhancer. Thus, GATA factors in the endoderm are among
the first to bind essential regulatory sites in chromatin. Binding occurs prior
to activation of gene expression, changes in cell morphology or functional
commitment that would indicate differentiation. We suggest that GATA factors at
target sites in chromatin may generally help potentiate gene expression and
tissue specification in metazoan endoderm development.

PMID: 9811575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 1998 Dec;125(24):4863-76.

Failure of ventral closure and axial rotation in embryos lacking the proprotein
convertase Furin.

Roebroek AJ(1), Umans L, Pauli IG, Robertson EJ, van Leuven F, Van de Ven WJ,
Constam DB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, Experimental Genetics Group, Center for
Human Genetics, University of Leuven and Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology (VIB), Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven,
Belgium.anton.roebroek@med.kuleuven.ac.be

We have examined the role of Furin in postimplantation-stage mouse embryos by
analyzing both the expression pattern of fur mRNA and the developmental
consequences of a loss-of-function mutation at the fur locus. At early stages
(day 7.5), fur mRNA is abundant in extraembryonic endoderm and mesoderm, anterior
visceral endoderm, and in precardiac mesoderm. 1 day later fur is expressed
throughout the heart tube and in the lateral plate mesoderm, notochordal plate
and definitive gut endoderm. Embryos lacking Furin die between days 10.5 and
11.5, presumably due to hemodynamic insufficiency associated with severe ventral 
closure defects and the failure of the heart tube to fuse and undergo looping
morphogenesis. Morphogenesis of the yolk sac vasculature is also abnormal,
although blood islands and endothelial precursors form. Analysis of cardiac and
endodermal marker genes shows that while both myocardial precursors and
definitive endoderm cells are specified, their numbers and migratory properties
are compromised. Notably, mutant embryos fail to undergo axial rotation, even
though Nodal and eHand, two molecular markers of left-right asymmetry, are
appropriately expressed. Overall, the present data identify Furin as an important
activator of signals responsible for ventral closure and embryonic turning.

PMID: 9811571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):6023-34.

A positive GATA element and a negative vitamin D receptor-like element control
atrial chamber-specific expression of a slow myosin heavy-chain gene during
cardiac morphogenesis.

Wang GF(1), Nikovits W Jr, Schleinitz M, Stockdale FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5115, USA.

We have used the slow myosin heavy chain (MyHC) 3 gene to study the molecular
mechanisms that control atrial chamber-specific gene expression. Initially, slow 
MyHC 3 is uniformly expressed throughout the tubular heart of the quail embryo.
As cardiac development proceeds, an anterior-posterior gradient of slow MyHC 3
expression develops, culminating in atrial chamber-restricted expression of this 
gene following chamberization. Two cis elements within the slow MyHC 3 gene
promoter, a GATA-binding motif and a vitamin D receptor (VDR)-like binding motif,
control chamber-specific expression. The GATA element of the slow MyHC 3 is
sufficient for expression of a heterologous reporter gene in both atrial and
ventricular cardiomyocytes, and expression of GATA-4, but not Nkx2-5 or myocyte
enhancer factor 2C, activates reporter gene expression in fibroblasts. Equivalent
levels of GATA-binding activity were found in extracts of atrial and ventricular 
cardiomyocytes from embryonic chamberized hearts. These observations suggest that
GATA factors positively regulate slow MyHC 3 gene expression throughout the
tubular heart and subsequently in the atria. In contrast, an inhibitory activity,
operating through the VDR-like element, increased in ventricular cardiomyocytes
during the transition of the heart from a tubular to a chambered structure.
Overexpression of the VDR, acting via the VDR-like element, duplicates the
inhibitory activity in ventricular but not in atrial cardiomyocytes. These data
suggest that atrial chamber-specific expression of the slow MyHC 3 gene is
achieved through the VDR-like inhibitory element in ventricular cardiomyocytes at
the time distinct atrial and ventricular chambers form.

PMCID: PMC109188
PMID: 9742119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Biol. 1998 Sep 15;201(2):247-52.

Notochord regulates cardiac lineage in zebrafish embryos.

Goldstein AM(1), Fishman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

We focus here upon regulation by the notochord of myocardial cell fate in
zebrafish. Myocardial precursors, defined by lineage tracing in the living
embryo, are in the lateral plate mesoderm adjacent to the notochord-prechordal
plate junction. Interestingly, the anterior end of the notochord corresponds to
the posterior extent of the heart progenitor field, defined by this lineage
analysis. This suggested that the notochord might suppress, or the prechordal
plate might enhance, the cardiogenic fate. Nkx2.5 expression is, in the zebrafish
embryo, closely correlated with the position of myocardial precursors, which
reside adjacent to the notochord-prechordal plate junction. This expression,
however, is extinguished in the region posterior to this junction, a region
normally not contributing cells to the heart. Laser ablation of the notochord tip
between the 4-somite and 12-somite stage causes posterior expansion of the Nkx2. 
5-expressing region. The ntl mutation of the notochord is associated with
posterior extension of Nkx2.5 expression. Lineage tracking, by laser activation
of caged fluoresceinated dextran, confirms that, normally, lateral plate cells
next to the notochord do not contribute progeny to the heart. After anterior
notochord ablation, these cells are redirected to a heart cell fate. These data
suggest that the anterior notochord delimits the posterior extent of the heart
field by suppressing the heart cell fate.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9740662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1998 May 25;140(1-2):157-61.

Expression of GATA-4 in migrating gonadotropin-releasing neurons of the
developing mouse.

Lawson MA(1), Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, The Center for Molecular Medicine
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0674, USA. mlawson@ucsd.edu

The hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons are important
regulators of reproductive function. During development, these cells arise in the
olfactory placode and migrate to the central nervous system, where they form a
diffuse population of neurosecretory cells that mediate central nervous system
control of reproduction. Little is known of the mechanisms regulating the
differentiation of these cells. Studies of the transcriptional regulation of the 
GnRH gene have demonstrated the importance of the GATA family of zinc-finger
transcription factors in gene expression. Although GATA factors are not highly
expressed in mature GnRH-secreting neurons, we report that GATA-4 is highly
expressed in migrating GnRH neurons in the developing mouse. We also report that 
a second DNA binding activity regulating GnRH gene expression at the site of
GATA-factor action persists in mature hypothalamus and may also play a role in
gene expression in the differentiated GnRH neuron.

PMID: 9722184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2665-75.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is expressed in a sexually dimorphic pattern during
mouse gonadal development and is a potent activator of the Müllerian inhibiting
substance promoter.

Viger RS(1), Mertineit C, Trasler JM, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal and Département de pharmacologie, Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Mammalian gonadal development and sexual differentiation are complex processes
that require the coordinated expression of a specific set of genes in a strict
spatiotemporal manner. Although some of these genes have been identified, the
molecular pathways, including transcription factors, that are critical for the
early events of lineage commitment and sexual dimorphism, remain poorly
understood. GATA-4, a member of the GATA family of transcription factors, is
present in the gonads and may be a regulator of gonadal gene expression. We have 
analyzed the ontogeny of gonadal GATA-4 expression by immunohistochemistry.
GATA-4 protein was detected as early as embryonic day 11.5 in the primitive
gonads of both XX and XY mouse embryos. In both sexes, GATA-4 specifically marked
the developing somatic cell lineages (Sertoli in testis and granulosa in ovary)
but not primordial germ cells. Interestingly, abundant GATA-4 expression was
maintained in Sertoli cells throughout embryonic development but was markedly
down-regulated shortly after the histological differentiation of the ovary on
embryonic day 13.5. This pattern of expression suggested that GATA-4 might be
involved in early gonadal development and possibly sexual dimorphism. Consistent 
with this hypothesis, we found that the Müllerian inhibiting substance promoter
which harbors a conserved GATA element is a downstream target for GATA-4. Thus,
transcription factor GATA-4 may be a new factor in the cascade of regulators that
control gonadal development and sex differentiation in mammals.

PMID: 9636081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3405-15.

GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5 coactivate Nkx-2 DNA binding targets: role for regulating
early cardiac gene expression.

Sepulveda JL(1), Belaguli N, Nigam V, Chen CY, Nemer M, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

The cardiogenic homeodomain factor Nkx-2.5 and serum response factor (SRF)
provide strong transcriptional coactivation of the cardiac alpha-actin (alphaCA) 
promoter in fibroblasts (C. Y. Chen and R. J. Schwartz, Mol. Cell. Biol.
16:6372-6384, 1996). We demonstrate here that Nkx-2.5 also cooperates with
GATA-4, a dual C-4 zinc finger transcription factor expressed in early cardiac
progenitor cells, to activate the alphaCA promoter and a minimal promoter,
containing only multimerized Nkx-2.5 DNA binding sites (NKEs), in heterologous
CV-1 fibroblasts. Transcriptional activity requires the N-terminal activation
domain of Nkx-2.5 and Nkx-2.5 binding activity through its homeodomain but does
not require GATA-4's activation domain. The minimal interactive regions were
mapped to the homeodomain of Nkx-2.5 and the second zinc finger of GATA-4.
Removal of Nkx-2.5's C-terminal inhibitory domain stimulated robust
transcriptional activity, comparable to the effects of GATA-4 on wild-type
Nkx-2.5, which in part facilitated Nkx-2.5 DNA binding activity. We postulate the
following simple model: GATA-4 induces a conformational change in Nkx-2.5 that
displaces the C-terminal inhibitory domain, thus eliciting transcriptional
activation of promoters containing Nkx-2.5 DNA binding targets. Therefore,
alphaCa promoter activity appears to be regulated through the combinatorial
interactions of at least three cardiac tissue-enriched transcription factors,
Nkx-2.5, GATA-4, and SRF.

PMCID: PMC108922
PMID: 9584181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3120-9.

The cardiac tissue-restricted homeobox protein Csx/Nkx2.5 physically associates
with the zinc finger protein GATA4 and cooperatively activates atrial natriuretic
factor gene expression.

Lee Y(1), Shioi T, Kasahara H, Jobe SM, Wiese RJ, Markham BE, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Wisconsin Medical School,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Specification and differentiation of the cardiac muscle lineage appear to require
a combinatorial network of many factors. The cardiac muscle-restricted homeobox
protein Csx/Nkx2.5 (Csx) is expressed in the precardiac mesoderm as well as the
embryonic and adult heart. Targeted disruption of Csx causes embryonic lethality 
due to abnormal heart morphogenesis. The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4
is also expressed in the heart and has been shown to be essential for heart tube 
formation. GATA4 is known to activate many cardiac tissue-restricted genes. In
this study, we tested whether Csx and GATA4 physically associate and
cooperatively activate transcription of a target gene. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrate that Csx and GATA4 associate intracellularly.
Interestingly, in vitro protein-protein interaction studies indicate that helix
III of the homeodomain of Csx is required to interact with GATA4 and that the
carboxy-terminal zinc finger of GATA4 is necessary to associate with Csx. Both
regions are known to directly contact the cognate DNA sequences. The
promoter-enhancer region of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) contains several 
putative Csx binding sites and consensus GATA4 binding sites.
Transient-transfection assays indicate that Csx can activate ANF reporter gene
expression to the same extent that GATA4 does in a DNA binding site-dependent
manner. Coexpression of Csx and GATA4 synergistically activates ANF reporter gene
expression. Mutational analyses suggest that this synergy requires both factors
to fully retain their transcriptional activities, including the cofactor binding 
activity. These results demonstrate the first example of homeoprotein and zinc
finger protein interaction in vertebrates to cooperatively regulate target gene
expression. Such synergistic interaction among tissue-restricted transcription
factors may be an important mechanism to reinforce tissue-specific developmental 
pathways.

PMCID: PMC108894
PMID: 9584153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Development. 1998 Apr;125(8):1457-68.

Isolation and characterization of endothelial progenitor cells from mouse
embryos.

Hatzopoulos AK(1), Folkman J, Vasile E, Eiselen GK, Rosenberg RD.

Author information: 
(1)MIT, Department of Biology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The cardiovascular system develops early in embryogenesis from cells of
mesodermal origin. To study the molecular and cellular processes underlying this 
transition, we have isolated mesodermal cells from murine embryos at E7.5 with
characteristic properties of endothelial progenitors by using a combination of
stromal cell layers and growth conditions. The isolated embryonic cells displayed
unlimited stem-cell-like growth potential and a stable phenotype in culture. RNA 
analysis revealed that the embryonic cells express the endothelial-specific genes
tie-2 and thrombomodulin (TM) as well as the early mesodermal marker fgf-3. The
GSL I-B4 isolectin, a marker of early endothelial cells, specifically binds to
the isolated cells. The in vitro differentiation with retinoic acid and cAMP led 
to a 5- to 10-fold induction of flk-1, von Willebrand Factor (vWF), TM, GATA-4
and GATA-6. Electron microscopy revealed that in vitro differentiation is
associated with increased amounts of rER and Golgi, and a dramatic increase in
secretory vesicles packed with vWF. When cultured in Matrigel, the embryonic
cells assume the characteristic endothelial cobblestone morphology and form
tubes. Injection into chicken embryos showed incorporation of the embryonic cells
in the endocardium and the brain vasculature. The expression of TM, tie-2, GATA-4
and GATA-6 suggests that the isolated embryonic endothelial cell progenitors are 
derived from the proximal lateral mesoderm where the pre-endocardial tubes form. 
The properties of the endothelial cell progenitors described here provide a novel
approach to analyze mediators, signaling pathways and transcriptional control in 
early vascular development.

PMID: 9502726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Genet. 1998;22(3):263-77.

Common role for each of the cGATA-4/5/6 genes in the regulation of cardiac
morphogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Tarzami S, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

The GATA-4/5/6 genes encode transcription factors implicated previously in the
regulation of cardiac-specific differentiation programs. However, recent analyses
of mouse GATA-4 null mutations found evidence for function in endoderm
development (in vitro) and embryonic morphogenesis (in vivo). Whether each of the
three cardiac-associated GATA factors function within distinct or common
developmental programs was previously untested; past studies defined specific and
distinct roles for each of the GATA-1/2/3 genes in embryonic hematopoiesis. In
this study, we compare the transcript patterns of cGATA-4/5/6 during chick
embryogenesis. Each of the three GATA factors is expressed in a similar pattern
within gastrulating cells of the primitive streak, prior to determination of the 
cardiomyocyte progenitors, and later within the lateral plate mesoderm and
associated endoderm layer. The patterns overlap but extend beyond the presumptive
cardiomyocyte population expressing cNkx-2.5. Later in development, cGATA-4/5/6
are all transcribed throughout the differentiating heart, in similar but not
identical patterns, within the endocardium, myocardium, and great vessels. In
order to test the function of GATA factors during chick cardiogenesis, embryos
were cultured in vitro in the presence of antisense oligomers designed to deplete
specifically transcripts encoding cGATA-4/5/6, beginning around stage 7. When
oligomers are used to target transcripts for all three genes, a high percentage
of the embryos develop abnormal hearts related to the failure to form a normal
primitive heart tube. In the most severe phenotype, cardiac bifida results in two
bilateral beating hearts. In some embryos, the paired heart primordia undergo
partial fusion but fail to form a single looping heart tube. In all cases,
cellular differentiation is not obviously affected, as the abnormal hearts form
beating tissue. Depletion of transcripts encoding any single GATA factor, or any 
combination of two GATA factors, does not affect development. The partial
depletion of all three genes in chick results in a remarkably similar phenotype
compared to the null GATA-4 mutation in mouse. Therefore, in the chick, each of
the GATA-4/5/6 genes functions in a common pathway, at the time of cardiac
crescent formation, for regulating early embryonic cardiac morphogenesis,
apparently associated with embryonic folding or the migration of primordia to
form a primitive tube.

PMID: 9621433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dev Genet. 1998;22(3):250-62.

Combinatorial interactions regulating cardiac transcription.

Durocher D(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

In vertebrates, heart development is a multistep process that starts with
formation and patterning of the primitive heart tube and is followed by complex
morphological events to give rise to the mature four-chambered heart. These
various stages are characterized by distinct patterns of gene expression.
Although chamber specificity and developmental regulation can be demonstrated in 
transgenic mice using short promoter fragments, the mechanism underlying spatial 
and temporal specificity within the heart remains largely unclear. Combinatorial 
interaction between a limited number of cardiac-specific and ubiquitous
transcription factors may account for the diverse genetic inputs required to
generate the complex transcriptional patterns that characterize the developing
myocardium. We have used the cardiac atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) promoter to
test this hypothesis. The ANP gene is transcribed in a spatial- and
temporal-specific manner in the heart, and a 500 bp promoter fragment is
sufficient to recapitulate both chamber and developmental specificity. This
promoter is composed of three modules, a "basal" cardiac promoter that is
essential for transcription in embryonic and postnatal atrial and ventricular
myocytes and two other independent modules that behave as chamber-specific
enhancers. The basal cardiac promoter is the target of two cardiac-specific
transcription factors, the zinc finger GATA-4 protein and the Nkx2-5 homeodomain,
which bind to contiguous elements within this region. At low concentrations--a
situation that likely occurs during the very first stages of cardiac cell fate
determination--the two proteins synergistically activate transcription from the
ANP promoter. This functional synergy requires physical interaction between the
GATA-4 protein and an extended C-terminal homeodomain on Nkx2-5. This
interaction, which unmasks an activation domain present just N-terminal of the
homeodomain, is specific for GATA-4 and-5, but is not observed with the other
cardiac GATA factor, GATA-6. Optimal synergy requires binding of both proteins to
their cognate sites, although modest synergy also could be observed on
heterologous promoters containing only multimerized Nkx binding sites, suggesting
that Nkx2-5 is able to recruit GATA-4 into a transcriptionally active complex.
The GATA/Nkx interaction, which appears to have been evolutionary conserved in
nematode, fly, and mammals, provides a paradigm for analyzing transcription
factor interaction during organogenesis. The data are also discussed in the
context of our present knowledge of the roles of GATA and NK2 proteins in cardiac
development.

PMID: 9621432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Jul;176(1):50-6.

Adenylyl cyclase activity and gene expression during mesodermal differentiation
of the P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Lipskaia L(1), Grépin C, Defer N, Hanoune J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U-99, Hôpital Henri 
Mondor, Créteil, France.

DMSO-primed P19 pluripotent cells, which recapitulate the first stages of
mammalian cardiogenesis and endodermal formation, were used as an in vitro model 
to analyze the variations in activity and expression of the different adenylyl
cyclase (AC) isoforms during the early events of embryonic cell differentiation. 
Here, we show that the total AC activity, which increases up to 10-fold after
differentiation of P19 cells, is mainly associated with increases in AC2, AC5,
and AC6 mRNA levels. Particularly, the marked increase in AC5 mRNA correlates
with the appearance of beating cardiomyocytes and with the transcription of the
atrial myosin light chain (MLC1A) gene which encodes a protein specifically
involved in the cardiac muscle cell contractile phenotype. Together, the results 
strongly suggest that 1) a rise in cyclic AMP (cAMP) may be associated with
cardiomyocyte and endodermal cell differentiation during mammalian embryogenesis;
and 2) AC5 gene expression starts very early during normal mouse cardiogenesis
and correlates with the differentiation of cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 9618144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Science. 1998 Apr 17;280(5362):383.

Signaling path may lead to better heart-failure therapies.

Barinaga M.

PMID: 9575084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1095-101.

Regulation in the heart field of zebrafish.

Serbedzija GN(1), Chen JN, Fishman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
MA 02129-2060, USA.

In many vertebrates, removal of early embryonic heart precursors can be repaired,
leaving the heart and embryo without visible deficit. One possibility is that
this 'regulation' involves a cell fate switch whereby cells, perhaps in regions
surrounding normal progenitors, are redirected to the heart cell fate. However,
the lineage and spatial relationships between cells that are normal heart
progenitors and those that can assume that role after injury are not known, nor
are their molecular distinctions. We have adapted a laser-activated technique to 
label single or small patches of cells in the lateral plate mesoderm of the
zebrafish and to track their subsequent lineage. We find that the heart precursor
cells are clustered in a region adjacent to the prechordal plate, just anterior
to the notochord tip. Complete unilateral ablation of all heart precursors with a
laser does not disrupt heart development, if performed before the 18-somite
stage. By combining extirpation of the heart precursors with cell labeling, we
find that cells anterior to the normal cardiogenic compartments constitute the
source of regulatory cells that compensate for the loss of the progenitors. One
of the earliest embryonic markers of the premyocardial cells is the divergent
homeodomain gene, Nkx2.5. Interestingly, normal cardiogenic progenitors derive
from only the anterior half of the Nkx2.5-expressing region in the lateral plate 
mesoderm. The posterior half, adjacent to the notochord, does not include cardiac
progenitors and the posterior Nkx2.5-expressing cells do not contribute to the
heart, even after ablation of the normal cardiogenic region. The cells that can
acquire a cardiac cell fate after injury to the normal progenitors also reside
near the prechordal plate, but anterior to the Nkx2.5-expressing domain. Normally
they give rise to head mesenchyme. They share with cardiac progenitors early
expression of GATA 4. The location of the different elements of the cardiac
field, and their response to injury, suggests that the prechordal plate supports 
and/or the notochord suppresses the cardiac fate.

PMID: 9463356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell. 1998 Apr 17;93(2):215-28.

A calcineurin-dependent transcriptional pathway for cardiac hypertrophy.

Molkentin JD(1), Lu JR, Antos CL, Markham B, Richardson J, Robbins J, Grant SR,
Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75225-9148, USA.

In response to numerous pathologic stimuli, the myocardium undergoes a
hypertrophic response characterized by increased myocardial cell size and
activation of fetal cardiac genes. We show that cardiac hypertrophy is induced by
the calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin, which dephosphorylates the
transcription factor NF-AT3, enabling it to translocate to the nucleus. NF-AT3
interacts with the cardiac zinc finger transcription factor GATA4, resulting in
synergistic activation of cardiac transcription. Transgenic mice that express
activated forms of calcineurin or NF-AT3 in the heart develop cardiac hypertrophy
and heart failure that mimic human heart disease. Pharmacologic inhibition of
calcineurin activity blocks hypertrophy in vivo and in vitro. These results
define a novel hypertrophic signaling pathway and suggest pharmacologic
approaches to prevent cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure.

PMCID: PMC4459646
PMID: 9568714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2901-11.

Distinct functions are implicated for the GATA-4, -5, and -6 transcription
factors in the regulation of intestine epithelial cell differentiation.

Gao X(1), Sedgwick T, Shi YB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Based on conserved expression patterns, three members of the GATA family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins, GATA-4, -5, and -6, are thought to be
involved in the regulation of cardiogenesis and gut development. Functions for
these factors are known in the heart, but relatively little is understood
regarding their possible roles in the regulation of gut-specific gene expression.
In this study, we analyze the expression and function of GATA-4, -5, and -6 using
three separate but complementary vertebrate systems, and the results support a
function for these proteins in regulating the terminal-differentiation program of
intestinal epithelial cells. We show that xGATA-4, -5, and -6 can stimulate
directly activity of the promoter for the intestinal fatty acid-binding protein
(xIFABP) gene, which is a marker for differentiated enterocytes. This is the
first direct demonstration of a target for GATA factors in the vertebrate
intestinal epithelium. Transactivation by xGATA-4, -5, and -6 is mediated at
least in part by a defined proximal IFABP promoter element. The expression
patterns for cGATA-4, -5, and -6 are markedly distinct along the proximal-distal 
villus axis. Transcript levels for cGATA-4 increase along the axis toward the
villus tip; likewise, cGATA-5 transcripts are largely restricted to the distal
tip containing differentiated cells. In contrast, the pattern of cGATA-6
transcripts is complementary to cGATA-5, with highest levels detected in the
region of proliferating progenitor cells. Undifferentiated and proliferating
human HT-29 cells express hGATA-6 but not hGATA-4 or hGATA-5. Upon stimulation to
differentiate, the transcript levels for hGATA-5 increase, and this occurs prior 
to increased transcription of the terminal differentiation marker intestinal
alkaline phosphatase. At the same time, hGATA-6 steady-state transcript levels
decline appreciably. All of the data are consistent with evolutionarily conserved
but distinct roles for these factors in regulating the differentiation program of
intestinal epithelium. Based on this data, we suggest that GATA-6 might function 
primarily within the proliferating progenitor population, while GATA-4 and GATA-5
function during differentiation to activate terminal-differentiation genes
including IFABP.

PMCID: PMC110669
PMID: 9566909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Prenat Diagn. 1998 Mar;18(3):267-71.

Cardiac gene expression of GATA-4 transcription factor in human trisomy 21
fetuses with increased nuchal translucency.

Von Kaisenberg CS(1), Huggon I, Hyett JA, Farzaneh F, Nicolaides KH.

Author information: 
(1)Harris Birthright Research Centre for Fetal Medicine and Department of
Molecular Medicine, Kings College Hospital Medical School, London, UK.

This study examines GATA-4 gene expression in cardiac tissue from fetuses with
trisomy 21 presenting with increased nuchal translucency thickness at 10-14 weeks
of gestation. mRNA was extracted from cardiac tissue after termination of
pregnancy at 10-18 weeks of gestation in ten trisomy 21 fetuses and 29 normal
controls. Northern and slot blots were performed and densitometric analysis of
slot blots was used to determine the steady-state levels of expression of GATA-4.
GATA-4 transcript levels were also compared with ANP and BNP, which have
previously been measured in the same panel of samples. GATA-4 expression
increased significantly with gestation but there was no significant difference
between fetuses with trisomy 21 and controls. There was no significant
association between GATA-4 expression and the steady-state level of transcripts
for the natriuretic peptides.

PMID: 9556043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Electrophoresis. 1998 Feb;19(2):158-63.

Oligonucleotide DNA fingerprinting optimized to determine parentage in three
beetle species.

Benken T(1), Müller JK, Peschke K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie I (Zoologie), Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg,
Germany. benken@sun2.ruf.uni-freiburg.de

Oligonucleotide fingerprinting was performed on three beetle species from
different families (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae: Aleochara curtula; Silphidae:
Nicrophorus vespilloides; Tenebrionidae: Blaps lethifera) to obtain detailed
information on parentage in mating systems. We report variations in the number of
hybridizing fragments for the different species depending on the combinations of 
probes and restriction enzymes used. In addition to conventional multilocus
fingerprint patterns, we established a single locus system for A. curtula (GTG5; 
HinfI) and described an oligolocus system in N. vespilloides (GATA4; HaeIII).

PMID: 9548274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;12(3):378-90.

Testicular GATA-1 factor up-regulates the promoter activity of rat inhibin
alpha-subunit gene in MA-10 Leydig tumor cells.

Feng ZM(1), Wu AZ, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the basal transcription of rat inhibin
alpha-subunit gene in a mouse testicular Leydig tumor cell line, MA-10, depends
upon a 67-bp DNA fragment at the position of -163 to -97. Within this promoter
region two GATA motifs were observed. In this study, we investigated the possible
role of GATA-binding proteins in the regulation of inhibin alpha-subunit gene
transcription in testicular cells. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses showed that 
mRNAs encoding GATA-binding proteins, GATA-1 and GATA-4, were detected in mouse
and rat testis and in MA-10 and rat Sertoli cells. Testis-specific GATA-1 mRNA,
which is transcribed from a promoter 8 kb upstream to the erythroid exon I of
mouse GATA-1 gene, was also identified in MA-10 cells. Mutations of GATA
sequences in alpha-subunit promoter markedly decreased the transcriptional
activity of alpha-subunit gene when measured by their ability of transient
expression of a bacterial reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT),
in MA-10 cells. Cotransfection of alphaCAT chimeric construct with cDNA
expression plasmid coding for mouse GATA-1 or GATA-4 protein revealed that GATA-1
but not GATA-4 can transactivate alpha-subunit promoter in a dose-dependent
manner. The transactivation by GATA-1 was inhibited if GATA sequences in
alpha-subunit promoter were mutated. Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay demonstrated that GATA-binding proteins present in nuclear extracts of
MA-10 cells and rat testis interacted with the GATA motifs in alpha-subunit
promoter, and the GATA-1 in these nuclear extracts formed a supershifted
immunocomplex with antibody raised against mouse GATA-1 protein. We therefore
concluded that the basal transcription of inhibin alpha-subunit gene in
testicular MA-10 cells is up-regulated by testicular GATA-1 but not GATA-4
through its interaction with the GATA motifs in alpha-subunit promoter. In
summary, we have provided the first evidence of the functional role of a
GATA-binding protein in the regulation of testicular gene expression.

PMID: 9514155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;12(3):364-77.

Multiple factors interacting at the GATA sites of the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone neuron-specific enhancer regulate gene expression.

Lawson MA(1), Buhain AR, Jovenal JC, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Molecular Genetics, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0674, USA. mlawson@ucsd.edu

Neuron-specific expression of the GnRH gene is dependent on an upstream
multicomponent enhancer. This enhancer is functional in a small population of
GnRH-producing hypothalamic neurons which, through the secretion of GnRH,
mediates central nervous system control of reproductive function. GnRH enhancer
function requires activation by the GATA family of transcription factors that act
through tandem consensus GATA-binding motifs, GATA-A and GATA-B. Here we show
that two newly identified DNA-binding factors, termed GBF-A1/A2 and GBF-B1, bind 
the GnRH enhancer at sites overlapping the GATA factor-binding motifs. In vitro
bindings of GATA, GBF-A1/A2, and GBF-B1 to the GnRH enhancer sequences are
independent. Specific mutation of either the consensus GATA motif or the GBF-B1
site of GATA-B does not alter binding of the overlapping factor in vitro.
Utilizing a GnRH-expressing neuronal cell line as a model system, we show by
transient transfection that GBF-B1 is necessary for enhancer activity and
independently activates the GnRH promoter. Transactivation of the GnRH enhancer
in GT1 cells and in NIH 3T3 cells by GATA-4 is modulated by GBF-B1 binding,
suggesting GBF-B1 interferes with GATA factor binding through a steric mechanism.

PMID: 9514154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Circulation. 1997 Dec 2;96(11):3943-53.

cis-Acting sequences that mediate induction of beta-myosin heavy chain gene
expression during left ventricular hypertrophy due to aortic constriction.

Hasegawa K(1), Lee SJ, Jobe SM, Markham BE, Kitsis RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA.

Comment in
    Circulation. 1997 Dec 2;96(11):3833-5.

BACKGROUND: Marked alterations in the expression of specific genes occur during
the development of cardiac hypertrophy in vivo. Little is known, however, about
the cis-acting elements that mediate these changes in response to clinically
relevant hypertrophic stimuli, such as hemodynamic overload, in intact adult
animals.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The left ventricular expression of a directly injected
reporter gene driven by 3542 bp of rat beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC)
promoter was increased 3.0-fold by aortic constriction (P<.005), an increment
similar to the 3.2-fold increase in the level of the endogenous beta-MHC mRNA in 
the same left ventricles. Subsequent analysis identified a 107-bp beta-MHC
promoter sequence (-303/-197) sufficient to convert a heterologous neutral
promoter to one that is activated by aortic constriction. These sequences contain
two M-CAT elements, which have previously been demonstrated to mediate inducible 
expression during alpha1-adrenergic-stimulated hypertrophy in cultured neonatal
cardiac myocytes, and a GATA element. Although simultaneous mutation of both
M-CAT elements markedly decreased the basal transcriptional activity of an
injected 333-bp beta-MHC promoter, it had no effect on aortic
constriction-stimulated transcription (3.5-fold increase, P<.005 for both wild
type and mutant). In contrast, mutation of the GATA motif markedly attenuated
aortic constriction-stimulated transcription (1.6-fold, P=NS) without affecting
the basal transcriptional activity. This GATA site can interact with in vitro
translated GATA-4 and compete with an established GATA site for GATA-4 binding
activity in nuclear extracts from aortic constricted hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Basal and aortic constriction-stimulated transcription of the
beta-MHC gene is mediated, at least in part, through different mechanisms. A GATA
element within beta-MHC sequences -303/-197 plays a role in the transcriptional
activation of this gene by aortic constriction.

PMID: 9403619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Circulation. 1997 Dec 2;96(11):3833-5.

GATA4: a novel transcriptional regulator of cardiac hypertrophy?

Molkentin JD, Olson EN.

Comment on
    Circulation. 1997 Dec 2;96(11):3943-53.

PMID: 9403603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Development. 1997 Oct;124(19):3755-64.

Cardiomyocyte differentiation by GATA-4-deficient embryonic stem cells.

Narita N(1), Bielinska M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, MO 63110, USA.

In situ hybridization studies, promoter analyses and antisense RNA experiments
have implicated transcription factor GATA-4 in the regulation of cardiomyocyte
differentiation. In this study, we utilized Gata4-/- embryonic stem (ES) cells to
determine whether this transcription factor is essential for cardiomyocyte
lineage commitment. First, we assessed the ability of Gata4-/- ES cells form
cardiomyocytes during in vitro differentiation of embryoid bodies. Contracting
cardiomyocytes were seen in both wild-type and Gata4-/- embryoid bodies, although
cardiomyocytes were observed more often in wild type than in mutant embryoid
bodies. Electron microscopy of cardiomyocytes in the Gata4-/- embryoid bodies
revealed the presence of sarcomeres and junctional complexes, while
immunofluorescence confirmed the presence of cardiac myosin. To assess the
capacity of Gata4-/- ES cells to differentiate into cardiomyocytes in vivo, we
prepared and analyzed chimeric mice. Gata4-/- ES cells were injected into
8-cell-stage embryos derived from ROSA26 mice, a transgenic line that expresses
beta-galactosidase in all cell types. Chimeric embryos were stained with X-gal to
discriminate ES cell- and host-derived tissue. Gata4-/- ES cells contributed to
endocardium, myocardium and epicardium. In situ hybridization showed that
myocardium derived from Gata4-/- ES cells expressed several cardiac-specific
transcripts, including cardiac alpha-myosin heavy chain, troponin C, myosin light
chain-2v, Nkx-2.5/Csx, dHAND, eHAND and GATA-6. Taken together these results
indicate that GATA-4 is not essential for terminal differentiation of
cardiomyocytes and suggest that additional GATA-binding proteins known to be in
cardiac tissue, such as GATA-5 or GATA-6, may compensate for a lack of GATA-4.

PMID: 9367431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO J. 1997 Sep 15;16(18):5687-96.

The cardiac transcription factors Nkx2-5 and GATA-4 are mutual cofactors.

Durocher D(1), Charron F, Warren R, Schwartz RJ, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 des Pins Ouest, Montréal Qu-ebec, Canada
H2W 1R7.

The tissue-restricted GATA-4 transcription factor and Nkx2-5 homeodomain protein 
are two early markers of precardiac cells. Both are essential for heart
formation, but neither can initiate cardiogenesis. Overexpression of GATA-4 or
Nkx2-5 enhances cardiac development in committed precursors, suggesting each
interacts with a cardiac cofactor. We tested whether GATA-4 and Nkx2-5 are
cofactors for each other by using transcription and binding assays with the
cardiac atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) promoter_the only known target for
Nkx2-5. Co-expression of GATA-4 and Nkx2-5 resulted in synergistic activation of 
the ANF promoter in heterologous cells. The synergy involves physical
Nkx2-5-GATA-4 interaction, seen in vitro and in vivo, which maps to the
C-terminal zinc finger of GATA-4 and a C-terminus extension; similarly, a
C-terminally extended homeodomain of Nkx2-5 is required for GATA-4 binding.
Structure/function studies suggest that binding of GATA-4 to the C-terminus
autorepressive domain of Nkx2-5 may induce a conformational change that unmasks
Nkx2-5 activation domains. GATA-6 cannot substitute for GATA-4 for interaction
with Nkx2-5. This interaction may impart functional specificity to GATA factors
and provide cooperative crosstalk between two pathways critical for early
cardiogenesis. Given the co-expression of GATA proteins and NK2 class members in 
other tissues, the GATA/Nkx partnership may represent a paradigm for
transcription factor interaction during organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1170200
PMID: 9312027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Dev Biol. 1997 Sep 15;189(2):270-4.

Wild-type endoderm abrogates the ventral developmental defects associated with
GATA-4 deficiency in the mouse.

Narita N(1), Bielinska M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

GATA-4 knockout mice die by 9.5 days postcoitum and exhibit profound defects in
ventral morphogenesis, including abnormal foregut formation and a failure of
fusion of the bilateral myocardial primordia. During early mouse development,
GATA-4 is expressed in cardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm and associated endoderm,
suggesting that the presence of this transcription factor in one or both of these
tissue types is essential for ventral development. To distinguish whether GATA-4 
expression in mesoderm or endoderm accounts for the phenotype of the knockout
mouse, we prepared chimeric mice by injecting Gata4-/- ES cells into 8-cell stage
ROSA26(Gata4+/+) embryos. We identified a series of high percentage null chimeras
(8-10 days postcoitum) in which Gata4+/+ cells were restricted to visceral yolk
sac endoderm and small portions of the foregut/hindgut endoderm. Despite an
absence of GATA-4 in all other cells of these embryos, there was normal
development of the heart, foregut, and surrounding tissues. We conclude that
expression of GATA-4 in endoderm rather than cardiogenic mesoderm is required for
ventral morphogenesis.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9299119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;17(8):4272-81.

Triple synergism of human T-lymphotropic virus type 1-encoded tax, GATA-binding
protein, and AP-1 is required for constitutive expression of the interleukin-5
gene in adult T-cell leukemia cells.

Yamagata T(1), Mitani K, Ueno H, Kanda Y, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo University, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.

Accumulated evidence demonstrates that adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is frequently 
associated with eosinophilia, and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1)-infected cells frequently express interleukin-5 (IL-5). However, the
molecular mechanism of constitutive IL-5 expression in HTLV-1-infected cells
remains unclear. To clarify the mechanism of aberrant IL-5 expression in
HTLV-1-infected cells, we investigated the response of the human IL-5 promoter to
the HTLV-1-encoded protein Tax. Cotransfection experiments using Jurkat cells
revealed that Tax is incapable of activating the IL-5 promoter by itself but that
it synergistically transactivates the promoter with GATA-binding protein (GATA-4)
and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) stimulation. By introducing a
series of mutations within the IL-5 promoter, we found that conserved lymphokine 
element 0 (CLE0) is responsible for mediating the signal induced by Tax-TPA. A
deletion construct of the promoter indicated that the -75 GATA element and CLE0
are sufficient to mediate synergistic activation of the IL-5 promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using Jurkat cell nuclear extracts
demonstrated that TPA induces a transcription factor to bind CLE0, and an
experiment using JPX-9 cell nuclear extracts showed that Tax enhances this
binding activity. An antibody supershift experiment revealed that this band
consists of c-Jun and JunD. However, among the Jun family members, only c-Jun is 
able to cooperate with Tax and GATA-4 to activate the IL-5 promoter. We have
determined the minimum factors required for IL-5 gene activation by
reconstituting the IL-5 promoter activity in F9 cells. This is the first report
to demonstrate the functional involvement of Tax protein in IL-5 gene regulation 
and to suggest the functional triple synergism among Tax, GATA-4, and AP-1, which
disrupts regulated control of the gene and leads to constitutive expression of
the IL-5 gene.

PMCID: PMC232280
PMID: 9234684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3505-14.

Expression and hormonal regulation of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in 
the mouse ovary.

Heikinheimo M(1), Ermolaeva M, Bielinska M, Rahman NA, Narita N, Huhtaniemi IT,
Tapanainen JS, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Two members of the GATA-binding family of transcription factors, GATA-4 and
GATA-6, are expressed in the vertebrate ovary. To gain insight into the role of
these factors in ovarian cell differentiation and function, we used in situ
hybridization to determine the patterns of expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in
mouse ovary during development and in response to hormonal stimulation. GATA-4
messenger RNA (mRNA) was first evident in the ovary around the time of birth. In 
the adult ovary, abundant GATA-4 mRNA was detected in granulosa cells of primary 
and antral follicles, with lesser amounts of GATA-4 message detected in theca
cells, germinal epithelium, and interstitial cells. Little or no GATA-4 mRNA was 
found in corpus luteum. GATA-6 message exhibited a different distribution in the 
ovary, with abundant expression evident in both granulosa cells and corpora
lutea. Stimulation of 3-week-old females with PMSG or estrogen enhanced
follicular expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts. Subsequent induction of
ovulation with human CG resulted in a decrease in GATA-4 mRNA expression in
granulosa cells, whereas GATA-6 mRNA expression persisted in granulosa cells
after ovulation and in corpora lutea. Moreover, follicular apoptosis was
associated with a decrease in the expression of GATA-4 but not GATA-6 message.
Stimulation of cultured gonadal cell lines with FSH resulted in increased
expression of GATA-4 message, whereas GATA-6 mRNA expression was not affected. In
light of these findings, the established role of other GATA-binding proteins in
hematopoetic cell differentiation and apoptosis, and the presence of conserved
GATA motifs in the promoters of genes expressed selectively in ovary, we propose 
that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play distinct roles in follicular development and
luteinization.

PMID: 9231805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):43-54.

Induction of yolk sac endoderm in GATA-4-deficient embryoid bodies by retinoic
acid.

Bielinska M(1), Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

GATA-4, a transcription factor implicated in lineage determination, is expressed 
in both parietal and visceral endoderm of the early mouse embryo. In embryonic
stem cell-derived embryoid bodies, GATA-4 mRNA is first detectable at 4-5 days of
differentiation and is confined to visceral endoderm cells on the surface of the 
bodies. Previously we reported that targeted mutagenesis of the Gata4 gene in
embryonic stem cells results in a block in visceral endoderm differentiation in
vitro. In an attempt to elucidate the role of GATA-4 in the formation of visceral
endoderm, we have now differentiated Gata4 -/- and wild type embryoid bodies in
the presence of retinoic acid +/- dbcAMP, known inducers of endoderm formation.
We show that differentiation of Gata4 -/- embryoid bodies in the presence of
retinoic acid results in formation of visceral endoderm, while differentiation of
Gata4 -/- embryoid bodies in the presence of retinoic acid plus dbcAMP causes
parietal endoderm formation. The presence of these yolk sac endoderm layers was
confirmed by light microscopy and analysis of biochemical markers including
alpha-fetoprotein, type IV collagen, laminin, and binding sites for Dolichos
biflorus agglutinin. Treatment of Gata4 -/- embryoid bodies with retinoic acid
induces expression of another GATA-binding protein, GATA-6, in both visceral and 
parietal endoderm cells. That another GATA-binding protein is induced in the
absence of GATA-4 suggests that this family of transcription factors plays an
important role in yolk sac differentiation.

PMID: 9256344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 1997 Jun;124(12):2387-95.

Enhanced cardiogenesis in embryonic stem cells overexpressing the GATA-4
transcription factor.

Grépin C(1), Nemer G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

GATA-4 is a cardiac-specific member of the GATA family of zinc finger
transcription factors. During embryogenesis, GATA-4 expression is detected very
early in the cardiogenic area and persists later in the developing heart. Studies
have shown that GATA-4 is a potent transcriptional activator of several cardiac
muscle-specific genes and a key regulator of the cardiomyocyte gene program.
Consistent with a role for GATA-4 in cardiomyocyte formation, inhibition of
GATA-4 expression by antisense transcripts interferes with expression of cardiac 
muscle genes and blocks development of beating cardiomyocytes in P19 embryonic
stem cells. In order to better define the function of GATA-4 in cardiogenesis, we
have carried out molecular analysis of early stages of cardiomyocyte
differentiation in GATA-4-deficient P19 cell lines and in P19 cells stably
overexpressing GATA-4. The results indicate that GATA-4 is not required for
either endodermal or mesodermal commitment or for initiation of the cardiac
pathway. However, in the absence of GATA-4, differentiation is blocked at the
precardiac (cardioblasts) stage and cells are lost through extensive apoptosis.
In contrast, ectopic expression of GATA-4 in P19 cells accelerates cardiogenesis 
and markedly increases (over 10-fold) the number of terminally differentiated
beating cardiomyocytes following cell aggregation. Together, these findings
suggest that, in addition to its role in activation of the cardiac genetic
program, GATA-4 may be the nuclear target of inductive and/or survival factors
for precardiac cells.

PMID: 9199365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biochem. 1997 May;121(5):922-9.

Transcriptional activation of H+/K+-ATPase genes by gastric GATA binding
proteins.

Nishi T(1), Kubo K, Hasebe M, Maeda M, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki.

H+/K+-ATPase (composed of alpha and beta subunits) and histamine H2 receptor are 
specifically expressed in gastric parietal cells. The GATA binding proteins
(GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2, also called GATA-6 and GATA-4, respectively) originally
found in the gastric mucosa recognized a sequence motif [gastric motif,
(G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy] in the upstream regions of the ATPase genes [Tamura,
S., Wang, X.-H., Maeda, M., and Futai, M. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90,
10876-10880]. These proteins activated the transcription of the reporter gene
ligated downstream of the control region of the rat ATPase alpha or beta subunit 
gene but had no effect on the same reporter ligated downstream of the H2 receptor
gene. Deletion analyses suggested that the upstream 249 (alpha gene) and 323
(beta gene) base pair sequences from the first letter of the initiation codon are
sufficient for activation by the GATA proteins. Interestingly, two and three
gastric motifs are located near the TATA-boxes of the alpha and beta genes,
respectively. Mutagenesis studies demonstrated that the two motifs proximal to
the TATA-box sequences of the ATPase alpha and beta subunit genes were essential 
for the activation. These results suggest that both the alpha and beta subunit
genes are regulated similarly by the GATA binding proteins. The expression system
established in this study is a useful system for analyzing the roles of GATA
proteins in transcriptional regulation of the H+/K+-ATPase gene.

PMID: 9192734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 15;11(8):1061-72.

Requirement of the transcription factor GATA4 for heart tube formation and
ventral morphogenesis.

Molkentin JD(1), Lin Q, Duncan SA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 has been implicated in heart
development based on its early expression in precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm
and its ability to activate the expression of a number of cardiac-specific genes.
To determine the role of GATA4 in embryogenesis, we generated mice homozygous for
a GATA4 null allele. Homozygous GATA4 null mice arrested in development between
E7.0 and E9.5 because of severe developmental abnormalities. Mutant embryos most 
notably lacked a primitive heart tube and foregut and developed partially outside
the yolk sac. In the mutants, the two bilaterally symmetric promyocardial
primordia failed to migrate ventrally but instead remained lateral and generated 
two independent heart tubes that contained differentiated cardiomyocytes. We show
that these deformities resulted from a general loss in lateral to ventral folding
throughout the embryo. GATA4 is most highly expressed within the precardiogenic
splanchnic mesoderm at the posterior lip of the anterior intestinal portal,
corresponding to the region of the embryo that undergoes ventral fusion. We
propose that GATA4 is required for the migration or folding morphogenesis of the 
precardiogenic splanchnic mesodermal cells at the level of the AIP.

PMID: 9136933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 15;11(8):1048-60.

GATA4 transcription factor is required for ventral morphogenesis and heart tube
formation.

Kuo CT(1), Morrisey EE, Anandappa R, Sigrist K, Lu MM, Parmacek MS, Soudais C,
Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Previous studies have suggested that the GATA4 transcription factor plays an
important role in regulating mammalian cardiac development. In the studies
described in this report we have used gene targeting to produce GATA4-deficient
mice. Homozygous GATA4-deficient (GATA4-/-) mice died between 8.5 and 10.5 days
post coitum (dpc). GATA4-/- embryos displayed severe defects in both
rostral-to-caudal and lateral-to-ventral folding, which were reflected in a
generalized disruption of the ventral body pattern. This resulted in the
defective formation of an organized foregut and anterior intestinal pore, the
failure to close both the amniotic cavity and yolk sac, and the uniform lack of a
ventral pericardial cavity and heart tube. Analysis of cardiac development in the
GATA4-/- mice demonstrated that these embryos developed splanchnic mesoderm,
which differentiated into primitive cardiac myocytes that expressed contractile
proteins. However, consistent with the observed defect in ventral morphogenesis, 
these GATA4-/- procardiomyocytes failed to migrate to the ventral midline to form
a linear heart tube and instead formed aberrant cardiac structures in the
anterior and dorsolateral regions of the embryo. The defect in ventral migration 
of the GATA4-/- procardiomyocytes was not cell intrinsic because GATA4-/- cardiac
myocytes and endocardial cells populated the hearts of GATA4-/- -C57BL/6 chimeric
mice. Taken together, these results demonstrated that GATA4 is not essential for 
the specification of the cardiac cell lineages. However, they define a critical
role for GATA4 in regulating the rostral-to-caudal and lateral-to-ventral folding
of the embryo that is needed for normal cardiac morphogenesis.

PMID: 9136932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:501-2.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human IL-5
gene promoter in IL-5 producing cells which express multiple GATA-binding
proteins.

Yamagata T, Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region, within the human IL-5
gene promoter, that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of these family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
PMA/A23187 stimulation are necessary for the IL-5 promoter activation. The
requirement of another regulatory element called CLE0, which lies downstream of
the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells express mRNA of three
GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3 and hGATA-4, and each of them has a
potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/ A) motif. However, using ATL-16T 
nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only GATA-binding protein
that forms specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA site. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells expressing
GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding affinity to the 
-70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the transactivation
ability was compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the highest activity. These
results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the transcriptional
regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple members of the
GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMID: 9209438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8515-24.

GATA-4 activates transcription via two novel domains that are conserved within
the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily.

Morrisey EE(1), Ip HS, Tang Z, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

GATA-4 is one of the earliest developmental markers of the precardiac mesoderm,
heart, and gut and has been shown to activate regulatory elements controlling
transcription of genes encoding cardiac-specific proteins. To elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the transcriptional activity of the GATA-4
protein, structure-function analyses were performed. These analyses revealed that
the C-terminal zinc finger and adjacent basic domain of GATA-4 is bifunctional,
modulating both DNA-binding and nuclear localization activities. The N terminus
of the protein encodes two independent transcriptional Activation Domains (amino 
acids 1-74 and amino acids 130-177). Amino acid residues were identified within
each domain that are required for transcriptional activation. Finally, we have
shown that regions of Xenopus GATA-5 and -6 corresponding to Activation Domains I
and II, respectively, function as potent transcriptional activators. The
identification and functional characterization of two evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional Activation Domains within the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily suggests that 
each of these domains modulates critical functions in the transcriptional
regulatory program(s) encoded by GATA-4, -5, and -6 during vertebrate
development. As such these data provide novel insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control development of the heart.

PMID: 9079680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Gene. 1997 Mar 18;187(2):159-64.

The cardiac-muscle specific enhancer-promoter of slow/cardiac troponin C binds
HMG-2.

Montgomery MO(1), Litvin J.

Author information: 
(1)Temple University Medical School, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. mike@sgi1.fels.temple.edu

The cardiac muscle-specific enhancer-promoter of the slow/cardiac troponin C
(cTnC) gene contains five protein binding regions, four of which bind
cardiac-myocyte specific proteins. We screened a stage 11 chick embryo expression
library with a double-stranded oligonucleotide probe consisting of one of these
regions, CEF-1. One of the clones obtained was the chicken high mobility group
protein, HMG-2. An electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed a
specific binding interaction between the HMG-2 protein and the dsDNA CEF-1 probe.
The cardiac-specific enhancer region of cTnC contains at least one possible HMG
binding region and it is in the CEF-1 sequence overlapping a known GATA-4 binding
site. Mutation of the nucleotide sequence of this HMG binding region diminishes
its protein binding ability and markedly decreases its cardiac specific
transcriptional activity. HMG-2 is a DNA bending protein that is predominantly
found in the nucleus in proliferating cells and in the cytoplasm of terminally
differentiated cells. It is an integral and stabilizing factor in the
transcription activation nucleoprotein complex and is often described as an
'architectural transcription factor'. It markedly stimulates the transcription of
many genes, often in association with tissue-specific transcription factors. We
believe that the presence of HMG-2 in the enhancer-promoter binding protein
complex of cTnC augments DNA bending and facilitates the DNA binding and
interaction of other tissue-specific factors (e.g. GATA-4, which also binds to
this region). This would result in increased transcription of the cTnC gene
during the proliferation phase of embryonic cardiac myocyte development.

PMID: 9099875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Mar;23(6):1157-68.

Gzf3p, a fourth GATA factor involved in nitrogen-regulated transcription in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Soussi-Boudekou S(1), Vissers S, Urrestarazu A, Jauniaux JC, André B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et de Génétique des Levures, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, two positive transcription factors of the GATA
family, Gln3p and Nil1p/Gat1p, upregulate the expression of multiple nitrogen
pathway genes via upstream 5'-GATA-3' sequences. Another GATA factor,
Uga43p/Dal80p, downregulates to varying degrees the expression of some
nitrogen-regulated genes. Here, we report the functional analysis of a fourth
GATA factor, Gzf3p/Nil2p, whose gene was discovered by systematic sequencing of
chromosome X. The Gzf3 protein most closely resembles Uga43p. Similar to Uga43p, 
Gzf3p has the properties of a negative GATA factor. While Uga43p is active
specifically under nitrogen-depression conditions, Gzf3p exerts its negative
regulatory function specifically on preferred nitrogen sources: It is involved in
nitrogen repression of Nil1p-dependent transcription. At least one positive GATA 
factor is required for the UGA43 and GZF3 genes to be expressed. The Uga43p
factor negatively regulates GZF3 expression and vice versa. In addition, both
Uga43p and Gzf3p moderately regulate expression of their own genes. These two
proteins seem to be parts of a complex network of GATA factors which probably
play a determining role in nitrogen-regulated transcription.

PMID: 9106207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem J. 1997 Mar 1;322 ( Pt 2):393-401.

Regulation of the rat cardiac troponin I gene by the transcription factor GATA-4.

Murphy AM(1), Thompson WR, Peng LF, Jones L 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, U.S.A.

Troponin I is a thin-filament contractile protein expressed in striated muscle.
There are three known troponin I genes which are expressed in a
muscle-fibre-type-specific manner in mature animals. Although the slow skeletal
troponin I isoform is expressed in fetal and neonatal heart, the cardiac isoform 
is restricted in its expression to the myocardium at all developmental stages. To
study the regulation of this cardiac-specific and developmentally regulated gene 
in vitro, the rat cardiac troponin I gene was cloned. Transient transfection
assays were performed with troponin I-luciferase fusion plasmids to characterize 
the regulatory regions of the gene. Proximal regions of the upstream sequence
were sufficient to support high levels of expression of the reporter gene in
cardiocytes and relatively low levels in other cell types. The highest luciferase
activity in the cardiocytes was noted with a plasmid that included the region
spanning -896 to +45 of the troponin I genomic sequence. Co-transfection of
GATA-4, a recently identified cardiac transcription factor, with troponin
I-luciferase constructs permitted high levels of luciferase expression in
non-cardiac cells. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrated specific
binding of GATA-4 to oligonucleotides representative of multiple sites of the
troponin I sequence. Mutation of a proximal GATA-4 DNA-binding site decreased
transcriptional activation in transfected cardiocytes. These results indicate
that the proximal cardiac troponin I sequence is sufficient to support high
levels of cardiac-specific gene expression and that the GATA-4 transcription
factor regulates troponin I-luciferase expression in vitro.

PMCID: PMC1218204
PMID: 9065755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Blood. 1996 Nov 15;88(10):3720-30.

Erythropoiesis and vasculogenesis in embryoid bodies lacking visceral yolk sac
endoderm.

Bielinska M(1), Narita N, Heikinheimo M, Porter SB, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.

During mouse embryogenesis the first hematopoietic and endothelial cells form in 
blood islands located between layers of visceral endoderm and mesoderm in the
yolk sac. The role of visceral endoderm in primitive hematopoiesis and
vasculogenesis is not well understood. We have assessed the consequences of a
lack of visceral endoderm on blood cell and vessel formation using embryoid
bodies derived from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells deficient in GATA-4, a
transcription factor expressed in yolk sac endoderm. When differentiated in
vitro, these mutant embryoid bodies do not develop an external visceral endoderm 
layer. We found that Gata4-/- embryoid bodies, grown either in suspension culture
or attached to a substratum, are defective in primitive hematopoiesis and
vasculogenesis as evidenced by a lack of recognizable blood islands and vascular 
channels and a reduction in the expression of the primitive erythrocyte marker
epsilon y-globin. Expression of the endothelial cell transcripts FIk-1, FIt-1,
and platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM) was not affected in the
mutant embryoid bodies. Gata4-/- ES cells retained the capacity to differentiate 
into primitive erythroblasts and endothelial cells when cultured in
methylcellulose or matrigel. Analysis of chimeric mice, generated by injecting
Gata4-/- ES cells into 8-cell stage embryos of ROSA26 transgenic animals, showed 
that Gata4-/- ES cells can form blood islands and vessels when juxtaposed to
visceral endoderm in vivo. We conclude that the visceral endoderm is not
essential for the differentiation of primitive erythrocytes or endothelial cells,
but this cell layer plays an important role in the formation and organization of 
yolk sac blood islands and vessels.

PMID: 8916936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):345-8.

The gene for transcription factor GATA-6 resides on mouse chromosome 18 and is
expressed in myocardium and vascular smooth muscle.

Narita N(1), Heikinheimo M, Bielinska M, White RA, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63110, USA.

We report the mapping and developmental expression pattern of the gene encoding
mouse GATA-6, a member of a family of transcription factors involved in
tissue-specific gene expression. Using backcross analysis, the Gata6 gene was
localized to mouse chromosome 18, linked to the gene encoding transthyretin.
RNase protection analysis showed that Gata6 is abundantly expressed in the heart,
stomach, intestine, and ovaries of the adult mouse. The developmental expression 
patterns of Gata6 and the closely related gene Gata4 were directly compared using
in situ hybridization. Both genes were found to be highly expressed in the
myocardium, stomach epithelium, and small intestinal epithelium throughout mouse 
development. Of the two genes, however, only Gata6 was expressed in vascular
smooth muscle. The overlapping distributions of GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts in 
the heart support the possibility of functional redundancy or interplay between
these two transcription factors in this tissue. The presence of GATA-6 mRNA in
vascular smooth muscle suggests that this transcription factor may play a
distinctive role in gene expression in this cell type.

PMID: 8812463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4524-34.

Distinct gene expression patterns in skeletal and cardiac muscle are dependent on
common regulatory sequences in the MLC1/3 locus.

McGrew MJ(1), Bogdanova N, Hasegawa K, Hughes SH, Kitsis RN, Rosenthal N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The myosin light-chain 1/3 locus (MLC1/3) is regulated by two promoters and a
downstream enhancer element which produce two protein isoforms in fast skeletal
muscle at distinct stages of mouse embryogenesis. We have analyzed the expression
of transcripts from the internal MLC3 promoter and determined that it is also
expressed in the atria of the heart. Expression from the MLC3 promoter in these
striated muscle lineages is differentially regulated during development. In
transgenic mice, the MLC3 promoter is responsible for cardiac-specific reporter
gene expression while the downstream enhancer augments expression in skeletal
muscle. Examination of the methylation status of endogenous and transgenic
promoter and enhancer elements indicates that the internal promoter is not
regulated in a manner similar to that of the MLC1 promoter or the downstream
enhancer. A GATA protein consensus sequence in the proximal MLC3 promoter but not
the MLC1 promoter binds with high affinity to GATA-4, a cardiac muscle- and
gut-specific transcription factor. Mutation of either the MEF2 or GATA motifs in 
the MLC3 promoter attenuates its activity in both heart and skeletal muscles,
demonstrating that MLC3 expression in these two diverse muscle types is dependent
on common regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC231451
PMID: 8754853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3596-605.

GATA factors are essential for activity of the neuron-specific enhancer of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene.

Lawson MA(1), Whyte DB, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

The multicomponent neuron-specific enhancer of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) gene specifically targets expression to the GnRH-secreting neurons of the 
hypothalamus, a small population of specialized cells which play a central role
in regulating reproductive function. Utilizing the GnRH-secreting hypothalamic
neuronal cell line, GT1, as a model system, we show that members of the GATA
family of transcription factors regulate GnRH transcription through two GATA
factor-binding motifs that occur in a tandem repeat within the GnRH
neuron-specific enhancer. Although GT1 cells contain GATA-2 and GATA-4 mRNAs,
only GATA-4 was detected in a GnRH enhancer GATA site-specific complex.
Cotransfection experiments with wild-type and mutant GnRH enhancer reporter
plasmids with wild-type and dominant negative GATA factor expression vectors
demonstrated that both GATA-binding elements are functional in the context of the
enhancer. We conclude that GATA-binding proteins are important factors in
regulating the neuron-specific expression of the GnRH gene in hypothalamic cells.
Although the presence of GATA-2 in a neuronal cell type is not unusual, the
presence of GATA-4 in GT1 cells is novel for a neuronal cell type. However, the
presence of GATA-4 is consistent with the unique developmental origin of GnRH
neurons and may provide insight into the transcriptional mechanisms mediating the
differentiation of this limited population of GnRH-secreting neurons.

PMCID: PMC231355
PMID: 8668176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Biol. 1996 Mar 15;174(2):258-70.

The Xenopus GATA-4/5/6 genes are associated with cardiac specification and can
regulate cardiac-specific transcription during embryogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. tevans@aecom.yu.edu

The GATA family of nuclear factors has been implicated in the regulation of cell 
type-specific transcription. We report the isolation of the Xenopus GATA-4 and
GATA-6 cDNA clones and characterize the expression patterns of the xGATA-4/5/6
genes. By comparing the sequence of the cDNAs with those previously reported from
chick and mammalian sources, we conclude that each is conserved across vertebrate
evolution as a distinct gene product. Each gene is expressed in differentiated
adult heart and gut, but maintains distinct transcript patterns in various other 
adult tissues. During embryogenesis, each gene displays a similar overlapping
distribution of transcripts localized throughout the developing cardiogenic
region. The xGATA-4 gene can be detected in dorsal cardiac progenitor rudiments
prior to migration. Axis disruption experiments were used to demonstrate that
transcription of these genes is intimately associated with the specification of
cardiac progenitors. Ectopic expression of each gene is specifically capable of
activating during embryogenesis the transcription of the cardiac genes encoding
actin and myosin heavy chain alpha. The data are consistent with a primary role
for the GATA-4/5/6 genes in regulating heart development.

PMID: 8631498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Exp Biol. 1996 Mar;199(Pt 3):513-20.

Roles of gastric GATA DNA-binding proteins.

Maeda M(1), Kubo K, Nishi T, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Osaka University, Japan.

The gastric H+/K(+)-ATPase is a P-type ATPase that is specifically expressed in
gastric parietal cells and is responsible for acid secretion into the stomach. We
have found one or more gastric mucosal nuclear proteins that recognize a sequence
motif in the 5'-upstream regions of the H+/K(+)-ATPase alpha- and beta-subunit
genes. This gastric motif, (G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy, may be a binding site for
a positive transcriptional regulator that functions specifically in parietal
cells. We further demonstrated using cDNA cloning and in situ hybridization that 
novel zinc-finger proteins (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2) are present in the gastric
parietal cells and bind to this motif. The proteins activate the transcription of
the reporter gene with the 5'-upstream region of the H+/K(+)-ATPase beta-subunit 
gene. These results suggest that gastric GATA DNA-binding proteins have important
roles in transcriptional activation of H+/K(+)-ATPase genes in the parietal
cells.

PMID: 8867276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):712-23.

Cell-type-specific expression of the platelet-derived growth factor alpha
receptor: a role for GATA-binding protein.

Wang C(1), Song B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago 60612, USA.

Platelet-derived growth factor alpha receptor (PDGF alpha R) is a transmembrane
tyrosine kinase receptor for all three existing PDGF isoforms, AA, AB, and BB.
Transcripts of PDGF alpha R are detected as early as in fertilized mouse eggs and
throughout adulthood in a time- and space-specific manner, thereby suggesting an 
important role of PDGFs in mammalian development. In this study, we have
investigated the mechanism involved in cell-type-specific PDGF alpha R gene
expression during early embryonic development. Using F9 embryonic carcinoma cells
as an in vitro study model, we identified a differentiation-dependent enhancer
element within the PDGF alpha R promoter that controlled receptor expression
during parietal endoderm cell differentiation induced by retinoic acid and
dibutyryl cyclic AMP treatment. The differentiation-dependent enhancer element
sequence bore no resemblance to consensus DNA-binding sites of either the
retinoic acid receptor family or the cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding
protein family. It was composed of two identical 12-bp direct repeats separated
by a 17-bp insert sequence enriched in C and A nucleotides. Although only a
single repeat was needed to form specific DNA-protein complexes with factors
present in F9 parietal endoderm cell extracts, both repeats together were
necessary to display cell-type-specific enhancing activity. Mutational analysis
revealed that the protein-binding sites within the repeat sequences were
identical to GATA-binding sites. In this study, we provided evidence to suggest
that a member of the GATA transcription factor family (GATA-4) is responsible for
parietal endoderm-specific PDGF alpha R expression.

PMCID: PMC231051
PMID: 8552100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;72(2-3):217-8.

Assignment of the human GATA4 gene to 8p23.1-->p22 using fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis.

Huang WY(1), Heng HH, Liew CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Toronto Hospital, University of Toronto, 
Ont., Canada.

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, the human GATA4 gene, a member of the
zinc-finger protein family recognizing the consensus GATA motif, was mapped to
8p23.1-->p22. This result, in conjunction with gene mapping data on other
GATA-DNA binding proteins, suggests that genes encoding GATA-DNA binding proteins
are dispersed throughout the genome, rather than clustered within a single locus.

PMID: 8978781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Development. 1995 Nov;121(11):3877-88.

Targeted mutagenesis of the transcription factor GATA-4 gene in mouse embryonic
stem cells disrupts visceral endoderm differentiation in vitro.

Soudais C(1), Bielinska M, Heikinheimo M, MacArthur CA, Narita N, Saffitz JE,
Simon MC, Leiden JM, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago
School of Medicine, IL, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-4 belongs to a family of zinc finger proteins involved 
in lineage determination. GATA-4 is first expressed in yolk sac endoderm of the
developing mouse and later in cardiac tissue, gut epithelium and gonads. To
delineate the role of this transcription factor in differentiation and early
development, we studied embryoid bodies derived from mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells in which both copies of the Gata-4 gene were disrupted. Light and electron 
microscopy demonstrated that embryoid bodies formed from wild-type and
heterozygous deficient ES cells were covered with a layer of visceral yolk sac
endoderm, whereas no yolk sac endoderm was evident on the surface of the
homozygous deficient embryoid bodies. Independently selected homozygous deficient
cell lines displayed this distinctive phenotype, suggesting that it was not an
artifact of clonal variation. Biochemical markers of visceral endoderm formation,
such as alpha-feto-protein, hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 and binding sites for
Dolichos biflorus agglutinin, were absent from the homozygous deficient embryoid 
bodies. Examination of other differentiation markers in the mutant embryoid
bodies, studies of ES cell-derived teratocarcinomas and chimeric mouse analysis
demonstrated that GATA-4-deficient ES cells have the capacity to differentiate
along other lineages. We conclude that, under in vitro conditions, disruption of 
the Gata-4 gene results in a specific block in visceral endoderm formation. These
homozygous deficient cells should yield insights into the regulation of yolk sac 
endoderm development and the factors expressed by visceral endoderm that
influence differentiation of adjoining ectoderm/mesoderm.

PMID: 8582296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 13;270(41):24548-55.

Activation of the interleukin-5 promoter by cAMP in murine EL-4 cells requires
the GATA-3 and CLE0 elements.

Siegel MD(1), Zhang DH, Ray P, Ray A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) plays a central role in the growth and differentiation of
eosinophils and contributes to several disease states including asthma.
Accumulating evidence suggests a role for cAMP as an immunomodulator; agents that
increase intracellular cAMP levels have been shown to inhibit production of
cytokines predominantly produced by T helper (Th) 1 cells such as IL-2 and
interferon gamma (IFN-gamma). In contrast, the production of IL-5, predominantly 
produced by Th2 cells, is actually enhanced by these agents. In this report, we
have performed transient transfection experiments with IL-5 promoter-reporter
gene constructs, DNase I footprinting assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays to investigate the key regulatory regions necessary for activation of the 
IL-5 promoter by dibutyryl cAMP and phorbol esters in the mouse thymoma line
EL-4. Taken together, our data demonstrate the critical importance of two
sequences within the IL-5 5'-flanking region for activation by these agents in
EL-4 cells: one, a highly conserved 15-base pair element present in genes
expressed by Th2 cells, called the conserved lymphokine element 0 (CLE0; located 
between -53 and -39 in the IL-5 promoter), and the other, two overlapping binding
sites for the transcription factor GATA-3 (but not GATA-4) between -70 and -59.
Taken together, our data suggest that activation via the unique sequence
combination GATA/CLE0 results in selective expression of the IL-5 gene in
response to elevated levels of intracellular cAMP.

PMID: 7592673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

Gotta have GATA.

Simon MC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

PMID: 7550322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4095-102.

Inhibition of transcription factor GATA-4 expression blocks in vitro cardiac
muscle differentiation.

Grépin C(1), Robitaille L, Antakly T, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Université de
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Commitment of mesodermal cells to the cardiac lineage is a very early event that 
occurs during gastrulation, and differentiation of cardiac muscle cells begins in
the presomite stage prior to formation of the beating heart tube. However, the
molecular events, including gene products that are required for differentiation
of cardiac muscle cells, remain essentially unknown. GATA-4 is a recently
characterized cardiac muscle-restricted transcription factor whose properties
suggest an important regulatory role in heart development. We tested the role of 
GATA-4 in cardiac differentiation, using the pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma 
cells, which can be differentiated into beating cardiac muscle cells. In this
system, GATA-4 transcripts and protein are restricted to cells committed to the
cardiac lineage, and induction of GATA-4 precedes expression of cardiac marker
genes and appearance of beating cells. Inhibition of GATA-4 expression by
antisense transcripts blocks development of beating cardiac muscle cells and
interferes with expression of cardiac muscle markers. These data indicate that
GATA-4 is necessary for development of cardiac muscle cells and identify for the 
first time a tissue-specific transcription factor that may be crucial for early
steps of mammalian cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC230648
PMID: 7623805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3830-9.

Of the GATA-binding proteins, only GATA-4 selectively regulates the human
interleukin-5 gene promoter in interleukin-5-producing cells which express
multiple GATA-binding proteins.

Yamagata T(1), Nishida J, Sakai R, Tanaka T, Honda H, Hirano N, Mano H, Yazaki Y,
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo University, Japan.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) is produced by T lymphocytes and known to support B-cell
growth and eosinophilic differentiation of the progenitor cells. Using ATL-16T
cells which express IL-5 mRNA, we have identified a region within the human IL-5 
gene promoter that regulates IL-5 gene transcription. This cis-acting sequence
contains the core binding motif, (A/T)GATA(A/G), for GATA-binding family proteins
and thus suggests the involvement of this family members. In this report, we
describe the cloning of human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) and show that hGATA-4 selectively 
interacts with the -70 GATA site within the IL-5 proximal promoter region. By
promoter deletion and mutation analyses, we established this region as a positive
regulatory element. Cotransfection experiments revealed that both hGATA-4 and
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-A23187 stimulation are necessary for IL-5
promoter activation. The requirement for another regulatory element called CLE0, 
which lies downstream of the -70 GATA site, was also demonstrated. ATL-16T cells 
express mRNAs of three GATA-binding proteins, hGATA-2, hGATA-3, and hGATA-4, and 
each of them has a potential to bind to the consensus (A/T)GATA(G/A) motif.
However, using ATL-16T nuclear extract, we demonstrated that GATA-4 is the only
GATA-binding protein that forms a specific DNA-protein complex with the -70 GATA 
site. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay with extracts of COS cells
expressing GATA-binding proteins showed that GATA-4 has the highest binding
affinity for the -70 GATA site among the three GATA-binding proteins. When the
transactivation abilities were compared among the three, GATA-4 showed the
highest activity. These results demonstrate the selective role of GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of the IL-5 gene in a circumstance where multiple
members of the GATA-binding proteins are expressed.

PMCID: PMC230622
PMID: 7791790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mamm Genome. 1995 Jun;6(6):442-3.

The mouse Gata4 transcription factor maps to chromosome 14.

Sebastiani G(1), Grépin C, Nemer M, Malo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

PMID: 7647471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Genomics. 1995 May 1;27(1):20-6.

Assignment of the transcription factor GATA4 gene to human chromosome 8 and mouse
chromosome 14: Gata4 is a candidate gene for Ds (disorganization).

White RA(1), Dowler LL, Pasztor LM, Gatson LL, Adkison LR, Angeloni SV, Wilson
DB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genetics, Children's Mercy Hospital, UMKC School of Medicine,
Kansas City, Missouri 64108, USA.

We report the mapping of the human and mouse genes for transcription factor
GATA-4, a newly identified member of DNA-binding proteins involved in lineage
determination. The human GATA4 gene was assigned to the short arm of human
chromosome 8 using genomic DNAs from human-rodent somatic cell hybrid lines.
Southern blot analyses indicated the presence of a human-specific 7.6-kb fragment
that was observed only in DNA from the hybrid cells containing human chromosome 8
or the proximal region of its short arm. The mouse Gata4 gene was mapped to
chromosome 14, closely linked to Clu (clusterin), using genomic DNAs from a
(C57BL/6J x Mus spretus)F1 x M. spretus backcross. This mapping assignment places
the Gata4 gene in the vicinity of the mouse Ds (disorganization) locus, a
dominant gain-of-function mutation affecting embryonic development. We speculate 
that Ds is caused by a mutation in the Gata4 gene, ectopic expression of GATA-4, 
or a mutation in another lineage determination gene closely linked to Gata4.

PMID: 7665171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Gene. 1995 Apr 3;155(2):219-23.

Identification of a GATA motif in the cardiac alpha-myosin heavy-chain-encoding
gene and isolation of a human GATA-4 cDNA.

Huang WY(1), Cukerman E, Liew CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Toronto Hospital, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

In an attempt to identify the cardiac-specific genes regulated by the
transcription factor GATA-4, we have identified a putative GATA-binding site
located within the 5' flanking sequence of the human cardiac alpha-myosin
heavy-chain-encoding gene. The 23-bp sequence surrounding the core GATA-binding
site is conserved across species. The core motif and flanking sequences of this
GATA-binding site are almost identical to that of a well-established GATA-binding
site located within the 3' enhancer of the human beta-globin gene. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis, two distinct nuclear factors were found 
to bind specifically to this element. We have isolated a full-length cDNA clone
for human GATA-4 (hGATA-4) by screening a human heart cDNA library. The hGATA-4
cDNA sequence shows 85% identity with murine GATA-4 in the protein coding region.
The deduced amino-acid sequence within the two zinc-finger DNA-binding domains of
human GATA-4 is 100% identical with murine GATA-4. Northern blot analysis reveals
that this 4.4-kb transcript has higher expression in adult heart than in fetal
heart. Our results suggest that GATA-4 may regulate a set of cardiac-specific
genes and play a crucial role in cardiogenesis.

PMID: 7721094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem J. 1995 Apr 1;307 ( Pt 1):183-9.

Regulation of J6 gene expression by transcription factor GATA-4.

Bielinska M(1), Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallincrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma cells into 
primitive endoderm is accompanied by increased transcription of the gene for J6, 
a heat shock protein implicated in collagen biosynthesis. In this paper we
present evidence that transcription factor GATA-4, a retinoic acid-inducible
GATA-binding protein, is involved in the regulation of J6 gene expression in F9
cells. Northern-blot analysis indicates that transcripts encoding GATA-4 and J6
increase in parallel during retinoic acid-induced differentiation of F9 cells.
Gel-shift experiments and antibody binding studies demonstrate that: (1) GATA-4
is the major GATA-binding protein activity in differentiated F9 cells, and (2)
GATA-4 binds to consensus GATA motifs in the retinoic acid-responsive portion of 
the J6 promoter. Co-transfection studies using NIH 3T3 cells show that GATA-4 is 
a potent trans-activator of the J6 promoter. These lines of evidence suggest that
expression of J6 in F9 cells is regulated by GATA-4. We speculate that
transcription factor GATA-4 may also control other genes involved in
extracellular matrix formation in the yolk sac.

PMCID: PMC1136761
PMID: 7717974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):626-33.

Rescue of GATA-1-deficient embryonic stem cells by heterologous GATA-binding
proteins.

Blobel GA(1), Simon MC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Totipotent murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro to
form embryoid bodies (EBs) containing hematopoietic cells of multiple lineages,
including erythroid cells. In vitro erythroid development parallels that which is
observed in vivo. ES cells in which the gene for the erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1 has been disrupted fail to produce mature erythroid cells either in
vivo or in vitro. With the EB in vitro differentiation assay, constructs
expressing heterologous GATA-binding proteins were tested for their abilities to 
correct the developmental defect of GATA-1-deficient ES cells. The results
presented here show that the highly divergent chicken GATA-1 can rescue GATA-1
deficiency to an extent similar to that of murine GATA-1 (mGATA-1), as determined
by size and morphology of EBs, presence of red cells, and globin gene expression.
Furthermore, GATA-3 and GATA-4, which are normally expressed in different
tissues, and a protein consisting of the zinc fingers of GATA-1 fused to the
herpes simplex virus VP16 transcription activation domain were able to compensate
for the GATA-1 defect. Chimeric molecules in which both zinc fingers of mGATA-1
were replaced with the zinc fingers of human GATA-3 or with the single finger of 
the fungal GATA factor areA, as well as a construct bearing the zinc finger
region alone, displayed rescue activity. These results suggest that neither the
transcription activation domains of mGATA-1 nor its zinc fingers impart erythroid
cell specificity for its action in vivo. Rather, it appears that specificity is
mediated through the cis-acting control regions which determine spatial and
temporal expression of the GATA-1 gene. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that
the zinc finger region may have a biological function in addition to mediating
DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC231919
PMID: 7823931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1995;382:117-24.

The GATA-4 transcription factor transactivates the cardiac-specific troponin C
promoter-enhancer in non-muscle cells.

Ip HS(1), Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, Leiden JM, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

The unique contractile phenotype of cardiac myocytes is determined by the
expression of a set of cardiac-specific genes. By analogy to other mammalian
developmental systems, it is likely that the coordinate expression of cardiac
genes is controlled by lineage-specific transcription factors that interact with 
promoter and enhancer elements in the transcriptional regulatory regions of these
genes. Here, we demonstrate that the slow/cardiac-specific troponin C (cTnC)
enhancer contains a specific binding site for the lineage-restricted, zinc finger
transcription factor, GATA-4 and that GATA-4 mRNA and protein is expressed in
cardiac myocytes. In addition, GATA-4 binding sites were identified in several
previously characterized cardiac-specific transcriptional regulatory elements.
The cTnC GATA-4 binding site is required for transcriptional enhancer activity in
primary cardiac myocytes. Moreover, the cTnC enhancer can be transactivated by
over-expression of GATA-4 in non-cardiac muscle cells such as NIH 3T3 cells.
Taken together, these results are consistent with a model in which GATA-4
functions to direct tissue-specific gene expression during mammalian cardiac
development.

PMID: 8540389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7517-26.

The GATA-4 transcription factor transactivates the cardiac muscle-specific
troponin C promoter-enhancer in nonmuscle cells.

Ip HS(1), Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, Tang Z, Ting CN, Simon MC, Leiden JM,
Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

The unique contractile phenotype of cardiac myocytes is determined by the
expression of a set of cardiac muscle-specific genes. By analogy to other
mammalian developmental systems, it is likely that the coordinate expression of
cardiac genes is controlled by lineage-specific transcription factors that
interact with promoter and enhancer elements in the transcriptional regulatory
regions of these genes. Although previous reports have identified several cardiac
muscle-specific transcriptional elements, relatively little is known about the
lineage-specific transcription factors that regulate these elements. In this
report, we demonstrate that the slow/cardiac muscle-specific troponin C (cTnC)
enhancer contains a specific binding site for the lineage-restricted zinc finger 
transcription factor GATA-4. This GATA-4-binding site is required for enhancer
activity in primary cardiac myocytes. Moreover, the cTnC enhancer can be
transactivated by overexpression of GATA-4 in non-cardiac muscle cells such as
NIH 3T3 cells. In situ hybridization studies demonstrate that GATA-4 and cTnC
have overlapping patterns of expression in the hearts of postimplantation mouse
embryos and that GATA-4 gene expression precedes cTnC expression. Indirect
immunofluorescence reveals GATA-4 expression in cultured cardiac myocytes from
neonatal rats. Taken together, these results are consistent with a model in which
GATA-4 functions to direct tissue-specific gene expression during mammalian
cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC359288
PMID: 7935467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. FEBS Lett. 1994 Oct 24;353(3):269-72.

Expression of GATA-binding transcription factors in rat hepatocytes.

Matsuda K(1), Kobune Y, Noda C, Ichihara A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Tokushima, Japan.

Recently, we demonstrated that a DNA-binding protein(s) is involved in
transcriptional repression of the rat serine dehydratase gene in fetal liver.
Here, we report that a GAT(A/T) motif is the target sequence for the DNA-binding 
protein. By screening a fetal liver cDNA library, we isolated a rat homolog of
GATA-1. Rat GATA-1 expressed as a GST-fusion protein in E. coli bound to the
GAT(A/T) motif in the serine dehydratase gene. Northern analysis show that GATA-1
and GATA-4 mRNAs are expressed in fetal hepatocytes.

PMID: 7957872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23177-84.

GATA-4/5/6, a subfamily of three transcription factors transcribed in developing 
heart and gut.

Laverriere AC(1), MacNeill C, Mueller C, Poelmann RE, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

We describe experiments which show that: 1) two previously identified members of 
the GATA family of transcription factors (both of which were originally called
GATA-4) correspond to chicken cDNAs for two distinct factors (which we now refer 
to as cGATA-4 and cGATA-5); 2) another new member of this family corresponds to a
third factor designated cGATA-6; 3) each of these mRNAs displays a differential
expression pattern. The cGATA-5 gene is initially transcribed in the cardiac
crescent prior to formation of the primordial heart tube. Following formation of 
the primitive heart, cGATA-5 transcripts are evident in both endocardium and
myocardium as well as in other lateral plate derivatives. The cGATA-5 gene is
also transcribed in the primitive embryonic gut and in late stage embryos is
sequentially up-regulated in distinct segments of gastrointestinal epithelia as
they undergo terminal differentiation. These studies thus provide novel insights 
into tissue-specific regulation by GATA-5, as well as into possibly overlapping
regulatory functions for these three family members.

PMID: 8083222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Biol. 1994 Aug;164(2):361-73.

Localization of transcription factor GATA-4 to regions of the mouse embryo
involved in cardiac development.

Heikinheimo M(1), Scandrett JM, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

To clarify the role of transcription factor GATA-4 in mammalian development, we
have determined the pattern of expression of GATA-4 in early postimplantation
mouse embryos. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, we find that
GATA-4 RNA and protein are expressed in cells associated with heart development. 
Intraembryonic expression of GATA-4 RNA is first apparent in coelomic epithelial 
cells of the primitive streak embryo (approximately 7.0-7.5 days postcoitum).
During formation and bending of the heart tube (approximately 8 days postcoitum),
GATA-4 RNA and protein are expressed in endocardium, myocardium, and embryonic
structures containing precardiac mesoderm such as the septum transversum and
intraembryonic coelomic epithelium. By the onset of cardiac septation
(approximately 9 days postcoitum), abundant GATA-4 RNA expression is evident in
endocardium, endocardial cushion tissue, and myocardium. Expression of GATA-4 by 
the myocardium continues through gestation and after birth. The temporal and
spacial patterns of GATA-4 expression support a role for this factor in the
regulation of cardiac differentiation, analogous to the established role of
transcription factor GATA-1 in the regulation of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 8045339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4947-57.

Transcription factor GATA-4 regulates cardiac muscle-specific expression of the
alpha-myosin heavy-chain gene.

Molkentin JD(1), Kalvakolanu DV, Markham BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.

The alpha-myosin heavy-chain (alpha-MHC) gene is the major structural protein in 
the adult rodent myocardium. Its expression is restricted to the heart by a
complex interplay of trans-acting factors and their cis-acting sites. However, to
date, the factors that have been shown to regulate expression of this gene have
also been found in skeletal muscle cells. Recently, transcription factor GATA-4, 
which has a tissue distribution limited to the heart and endodermally derived
tissues, was identified. We recently found two putative GATA-binding sites within
the proximal enhancer of the alpha-MHC gene, suggesting that GATA-4 might
regulate its expression. In this study, we establish that GATA-4 interacts with
the alpha-MHC GATA sites to stimulate cardiac muscle-specific expression.
Mutation of the GATA-4-binding sites either individually or together decreased
activity by 50 and 88% in the adult myocardium, respectively. GATA-4-dependent
enhancement of activity from a heterologous promoter was mediated through the
alpha-MHC GATA sites. Coinjection of an alpha-MHC promoter construct with a
GATA-4 expression vector permitted ectopic expression in skeletal muscle but not 
in fibroblasts. Thus, the lack of alpha-MHC expression in skeletal muscle
correlates with a lack of GATA-4. GATA-4 DNA binding activity was significantly
up-regulated in triiodothyronine- or retinoic acid-treated cardiomyocytes.
Putative GATA-4-binding sites are also found in the regulatory regions of other
cardiac muscle-expressed structural genes. This indicates a mechanism whereby
triiodothyronine and retinoic acid can exert coordinate control of the cardiac
phenotype through a trans-acting regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC358867
PMID: 8007990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3115-29.

A hormone-encoding gene identifies a pathway for cardiac but not skeletal muscle 
gene transcription.

Grépin C(1), Dagnino L, Robitaille L, Haberstroh L, Antakly T, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

In contrast to skeletal muscle, the mechanisms responsible for activation and
maintenance of tissue-specific transcription in cardiac muscle remain poorly
understood. A family of hormone-encoding genes is expressed in a highly specific 
manner in cardiac but not skeletal myocytes. This includes the A- and B-type
natriuretic peptide (ANP and BNP) genes, which encode peptide hormones with
crucial roles in the regulation of blood volume and pressure. Since these genes
are markers of cardiac cells, we have used them to probe the mechanisms for
cardiac muscle-specific transcription. Cloning and functional analysis of the rat
BNP upstream sequences revealed unexpected structural resemblance to erythroid
but not to muscle-specific promoters and enhancers, including a requirement for
regulatory elements containing GATA motifs. A cDNA clone corresponding to a
member of the GATA family of transcription factors was isolated from a
cardiomyocyte cDNA library. Transcription of this GATA gene is restricted mostly 
to the heart and is undetectable in skeletal muscle. Within the heart, GATA
transcripts are localized in ANP- and BNP-expressing myocytes, and forced
expression of the GATA protein in heterologous cells markedly activates
transcription from the natural cardiac muscle-specific ANP and BNP promoters.
This GATA-dependent pathway defines the first mechanism for cardiac
muscle-specific transcription. Moreover, the present findings reveal striking
similarities between the mechanisms controlling gene expression in hematopoietic 
and cardiac cells and may have important implications for studies of
cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358679
PMID: 8164667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. FEBS Lett. 1994 Feb 28;340(1-2):117-20.

Genes for members of the GATA-binding protein family (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2)
together with H+/K(+)-ATPase are specifically transcribed in gastric parietal
cells.

Mushiake S(1), Etani Y, Shimada S, Tohyama M, Hasebe M, Futai M, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

mRNAs for novel DNA-binding proteins (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2) recognizing the
(G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy sequence and H+/K(+)-ATPase (proton pump) alpha
subunit were detected in parietal cells of the rat gastric body mucosa by in situ
hybridization. These results suggest that GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2 together with
H+/K(+)-ATPase are transcribed specifically in gastric parietal cells and that
the two DNA-binding proteins may have important roles in cell specific gene
regulation. Furthermore, we could detect parietal cells in different states of
gene expression.

PMID: 8119393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 15;90(22):10876-80.

Gastric DNA-binding proteins recognize upstream sequence motifs of parietal
cell-specific genes.

Tamura S(1), Wang XH, Maeda M, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Osaka University, Japan.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 10;91(10):4609.

Polymerase chain reaction amplification of cDNA from pig gastric mucosa
demonstrated the presence of zinc-finger proteins called GATA-GT1, GATA-GT2, and 
GATA-GT3, each having zinc-finger sequences similar to previously characterized
GATA-binding proteins. Subsequently, full-length cDNAs of GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2
were obtained from rat stomach. The zinc-finger domains of GATA-GT1 and -GT2 were
66-86% identical on the amino acid level with each other and with other
GATA-binding proteins. Potential protein kinase phosphorylation sites were
present in the zinc-finger region. In contrast, regions outside the zinc fingers 
shared significantly lower similarities. GATA-GT2 was found to bind to the
upstream sequence of the H+/K(+)-ATPase beta gene and to a sequence containing
the GATA motif. GATA-GT1 and -GT2 were expressed predominantly in the gastric
mucosa and at much lower levels in the intestine (GATA-GT2, also in testis),
their tissue distributions being distinct from those of GATA-1, -2, or -3. These 
results clearly suggest that GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2 are involved in gene
regulation specifically in the gastric epithelium and represent two additional
members of the GATA-binding protein family.

PMCID: PMC47881
PMID: 8248184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Development. 1993 Jul;118(3):817-27.

GATA-4 is a novel transcription factor expressed in endocardium of the developing
heart.

Kelley C(1), Blumberg H, Zon LI, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

We have isolated and characterized Xenopus cDNA clones for a new transcription
factor that represents an early marker for the developing heart. The cDNAs encode
a protein that we have designated GATA-4; it contains the highly conserved
DNA-binding domain that characterizes this family of cell-type restricted
transcriptional activators. Whole-embryo in situ analysis of Xenopus embryos
demonstrates that the GATA-4 gene is transcribed in presumptive cardiac ventral
mesoderm at the time that bilateral progenitors fuse and form the cardiac tube.
GATA-4 is therefore the earliest molecular marker of cardiogenesis yet
characterized. By stage 30, the GATA-4 mRNA is expressed in the developing atria 
and ventricles; at stage 38, cross-sections reveal that the gene is active in the
endocardial layer, but not in myocardium. By stage 40, GATA-4 message is detected
in the great vessels. In the adult frog, the GATA-4 gene is highly transcribed in
heart and gut; lower levels of message are detected in various endoderm-derived
tissues and gonads. Expression in the stomach is largely confined to the
epithelium. The GATA-4 gene is first activated at stage 11; mRNA is initially
present throughout the marginal zone of explants and later partially localized to
the ventral marginal zone. GATA-4 mRNA is also detected at high levels in
cultured endodermal explants derived from the vegetal region of early embryos. In
mesoderm induction experiments, GATA-4 transcription is not induced in animal
caps treated with activin or bFGF. The GATA-4 gene may provide a new early marker
for studying the inductive processes that lead to the formation of the
cardiovascular system and for the specification of the endocardial lineage.

PMID: 8076520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2235-46.

Mouse GATA-4: a retinoic acid-inducible GATA-binding transcription factor
expressed in endodermally derived tissues and heart.

Arceci RJ(1), King AA, Simon MC, Orkin SH, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Massachusetts.

We report the cDNA cloning and characterization of mouse GATA-4, a new member of 
the family of zinc finger transcription factors that bind a core GATA motif.
GATA-4 cDNA was identified by screening a 6.5-day mouse embryo library with
oligonucleotide probes corresponding to a highly conserved region of the finger
domains. Like other proteins of the family, GATA-4 is approximately 50 kDa in
size and contains two zinc finger domains of the form C-X-N-C-(X17)-C-N-X-C.
Cotransfection assays in heterologous cells demonstrate that GATA-4 trans
activates reporter constructs containing GATA promoter elements. Northern (RNA)
analysis and in situ hybridization show that GATA-4 mRNA is expressed in the
heart, intestinal epithelium, primitive endoderm, and gonads. Retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9 cells into visceral or parietal endoderm
is accompanied by increased expression of GATA-4 mRNA and protein. In vitro
differentiation of embryonic stem cells into embryoid bodies is also associated
with increased GATA-4 expression. We conclude that GATA-4 is a tissue-specific,
retinoic acid-inducible, and developmentally regulated transcription factor. On
the basis of its tissue distribution, we speculate that GATA-4 plays a role in
gene expression in the heart, intestinal epithelium, primitive endoderm, and
gonads.

PMCID: PMC359544
PMID: 8455608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


